re Frank: New Tendencies in French Politics (March 1932)




P. Frank   |  Trotskyist Writers   |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
New Tendencies in French Politics
World Crisis Reveals Long Latent Contradictions Between Social Classes
(March 1932)

From The Militant, Vol. V No. 14 (Whole No. 110), 2 April 1932, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Paris, March 9, 1932
The parliamentary elections are approaching. They are especially important, as they will take place in a period in which the equilibrium established at Versailles is about to topple over, in which a decisive solution is imminent in Germany, in which French imperialism stands at a turning point of its development. When the crisis had already been raging in a good many other countries, France still appeared to be spared from it. The bourgeois press attributed this to the ancient “French virtues” of order, harmony, etc. The socialists followed in its footsteps. A disenchantment became necessary shortly afterwards. With a somewhat different rhythm and with a different amplitude, the crisis spread out over France.
But, many of the causes which made possible the great resistance to the crisis will tomorrow become the causes of a tremendous aggravation of the situation. In the first place, there is the existence of quite large intermediate classes, despite the fact that the war made France a highly industrialized nation. These intermediate classes – the peasantry in particular – formed an important domestic market. The tariff walls, rising like in England; the efforts of other nations, like Germany, to develop their own agriculture; the fall in prices have considerably diminished the resistance of the domestic market. On the other hand, the intermediate classes, their eyes turned to their prosperous past, constitute a curbing factor. French industry, which works for the export trade, having certain advantages in the period of “prosperity” through the low wages, has not pushed rationalization as far as Germany has. Thus, with the general decline, French industry is not in a very advantageous position to preserve its place in the world market. The colonial empire, though it is important, does not by far offer any resources similar to those of the British empire. Finally, the reserves of one of the greatest French industries, the tourist industry, which has declined enormously despite the existence of the Colonial Expedition, are no doubt going to diminish even more in the future, depriving French capitalism of millions of francs.
The defeat of Germany and the achievements of the Versailles Treaty gave France a political importance internationally, entirely out of proportion with its economic strength. The crisis is revealing this contradiction more and more every day, and the French bourgeoisie, so proud of its stability in the past, is uneasily expecting dark days in the future. That is, in part, the reason for its desperate struggle for the maintenance of the Versailles Treaty, which is a diplomatic instrument of its past supremacy, as well as for the preservation of its military strength. On the other hand, it is redoubling its offensive against wages and it intends, by inflation or by some other modification of its financial system, to increase its exploitation of the laboring masses and to expropriate the intermediate classes.
These are as yet only its intentions, for the elections have not taken place. Serving as a sort of barometer, they permit us to judge with more or less precision, the realignments of the classes, the general orientation of the toiling masses and of the proletariat in view of the situation. In so far as they present a factor in the class struggle, they should permit the Communist party, with a correct analysis of the existing tendencies and with correct perspectives, to employ a tactic which will hasten the development of the masses in the direction of the Communist solution. There is already, indisputably, a trend toward the Left. At present it is being exploited by the Radical and the socialist parties in a broad campaign “for peace, for disarmament” and touches those masses who are disquieted by the Laval-Tardieu policy that is “isolating” France from the rest of the world and who are anxious to cast off the heavy burden of taxes imposed upon them by the expenses of the monstrous military apparatus of French imperialism. Just to what degree this leftward trend will be transformed into ballots, depends largely upon the events of the movement. The result of the presidential elections in Germany will play its part in one sense or another. But the fact remains that in any case, the leftward trend of the .masses will clash with the imperious needs of the French bourgeoisie. This opens up perspectives for great class struggles. The “left” parties and the socialist party will be unable to keep their promises to the proletariat and the intermediate classes. But only to that degree to which the Communist party will be able to reach the hesitating masses and gain their attention, find a bridge to them, will their development take the revolutionary road when the bankruptcy of the other parties will become manifest in the eyes of all. If this does not take place, they will be derailed and used as a mass support for the maneuvers of the worst brand of reaction, of Fascism itself.
 
The Seventh Convention of the C.P.F.
Where is the party in this situation? What is its orientation? The Seventh Convention of the French party is going to take place in a few days, after a lapse of three years since the last convention. It will be devoted to the policy of the “third period”. The balance of this policy is completely negative : loss of membership, loss of influence, deep-going disorganization. Several months ago, on the occasion of a turn, the leadership admitted all this quite unambiguously in documents, of which The Militant has published important extracts. Now, at the time of the convention, nothing of the sort is allowed. This time, it is necessary to “shut their mouths”. One huge thesis is the only document presented by the leadership for pre-convention discussion. The entire activity of the past period is skimmed over in less than twenty lines. “Self-criticism” is reduced to its most barren expression. As a perspective for the future, nothing is offered that is not contained in the last general theses of the C.I. A few scanty phrases are devoted to Germany, the word “Fascism” does not even get any mention in them. Discussion has been as restricted as possible. The press has published a few resolutions of approval and several articles by leaders ... against the comrades in the sections who dared to think on their own hook. Articles have appeared in L’Humanité in which party members are denounced as enemies. In order to remain within the Stalinist line, the French party bureaucrats are shouting about the “Trotskyist” danger, accusing everyone who opposes them as a “Trotskyist”. A real campaign of terror was inaugurated in the Parisian region, where discontent is particularly great and where whole sections are hostile to the leadership, although no clearly different policy has been put forward. The leadership published the names of the more daring comrades in the press. It demanded publicly that only members approving the party policy without any reservations be elected as delegates. Expulsions are being prepared.
The convention will constitute a victory for the apparatus and a defeat for the party in which the crisis can only continue to develop. The policy that has been pursued, is that of the C.I. It has turned its back to the united front, it is opposed to trade union unity. In the question of the elections, the vanguard of the working class is divided under the cover of the formula “class against class”, by maintaining systematically the party’s candidate on the second ballot even if that is to the advantage of the candidate of the reactionary parties as against the candidate of the socialist party. This so-called tactic of “class against class” repels the socialist workers, strengthens their parliamentary illusions and serves the reformist apparatus of the bourgeoisie. The continuation of this policy – another can hardly be expected from the Convention – will only keep on accumulating defeat after defeat.
 
Progress for the Left Opposition
Nevertheless, there are some germs of regeneration in this situation. We have mentioned above the discontent in the Parisian region of the party. The criticism expressed has often been confused, narrow, but in most cases it was not a reflection of opportunist tendencies, but of healthy proletarian sentiments. For the first time in years, non-oppositionist militants have pushed their criticisms as far as the leadership of the C.I. Thus, one unit speaks against the “policy of Stalin”: other comrades speak of the “responsibility of the C.I.” Some comrades refuse to vote against the “Trotskyists” as counter-revolutionists in Sections 3 and 15 of the Parisian region: in Section 4, others declare that “it is not sufficient to tell us that they are counter-revolutionists. It must be proven first.” We only cite a few facts among many which the party press itself is publishing.
But all these are only transitory manifestations, very feeble and very unstable ones. But a great unrest is taking place in the party. Theses are voted on, but no one takes any stock in them. A great deal of attention is being paid to what is said about the party, especially to what the Opposition has to say. In the meetings that we hold in various places, in the party meetings in which we participate, we find an entirely different atmosphere from that of last year. There are still many fanatics, of course. But, the majority of those attending wants to listen: they follow our words attentively, party members take part in heated discussions with us. We have been able to extend our contacts, to establish contacts with many party members and to gain sympathizers. In the provinces, we have also made contacts and our influence has grown considerably.
The Ligue Communiste (Left Opposition) has not, unfortunately, as yet been able to transform this gain of influence in an organizational way. We are suffering first of all, from a shortcoming that the French party itself has been inflicted with: the extremely weak conceptions of organizational forms. Then, there are our internal difficulties: we have not as yet benefited from a test of great struggles, so as to be able to distinguish between the various tendencies in the organization. These are the obstacles in the way of an active crystallization of the germs of regeneration within the party. The Ligue is at work, striving to overcome these obstacles.
 

e Frank: New Developments in France (June 1960)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
New Developments in France
(June 1960)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 10, Summer 1960, pp. 38–39.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In our last issue we pointed out that de Gaulle’s Bonapartism, after about two years in power, was being stripped of its parliamentary appendages, that the state apparatus appeared to be increasingly isolated, and that de Gaulle’s authority was beginning to diminish, especially because of the inability he was showing to end the war in Algeria.
The worsening of the political climate has been rapidly reflected by a series of movements for immediate demands, especially in the Paris public transport system and on the railways. We cannot here undertake a very detailed study of the movements that have occurred; it is to some of their main characteristics and teachings that we should like to call attention.
On the whole, the workers’ discontent was so strong that the outbreak of the movements caught napping not only the government but to a quite large extent even the trade-union leaderships. A whole series of struggles were spontaneous in character. The movements were within the limits of pressure on the government and management, rather than those of a trial of strength. Most of the demonstrations were of a good-natured sort; it is only in a few special cases that, under provocation, the workers toughened up their movements and a few incidents occurred on a local scale.
In this situation, the trade-union leaderships lined up at the level of the least advanced part of the movements, fostering illusions about the possibility of obtaining substantial results by means solely of pressure, and not preparing the workers for much tougher struggles, for trials of strength. It would certainly have been a great mistake on the part of the union leaders, in the correlation of forces resulting from the May 1958 defeat, to take the weak revival that is now occurring as a starting point for proceeding immediately to launch great struggles that could only turn into that trial of strength. But the role of the leaderships should have been to lead, to foresee, to prepare, and to educate. Alas, it was a long way from that.
All French toilers know that the deterioration of their living levels is caused by the continuation of the war in Algeria. The trade unions – who nevertheless assert that they are all opposed to that war – have not stressed this point strongly enough during these movements. It is the same with the political movements. What is more, neither the French CP nor the CGT has propagandized for the prospect of a struggle against the regime. Neither the struggles for immediate demands nor the struggle against the war in Algeria have been fitted into this prospect. Under such conditions, it is understandable that it is not easy to summon up the strength, the drive, and the vigor that will be needed in the future by struggles that will inevitably run up against aggravated repression by the government. If there could be any doubt on this point, it would be enough to observe that the government – which, during the whole period when the movements were broad and tended to spread, remained practically inert – stepped right in, as soon as the wave showed signs of ebbing, with a decree militarily requisitioning the Paris transport workers. This was a deliberate provocation, to which the unions involved did not immediately find any appropriate answer.
The strength of the spontaneous movement of the masses showed itself to be sufficiently great so that, despite the break-up of the summit conference, there did not occur what would almost inevitably have happened in other times and under other governments, namely, a break-down of unity in action.
To summarize in a few words the balance-sheet of the Spring 1960 movements for immediate demands, it can be said that the workers’ morale came out strengthened, but that there was a big “lost opportunity” for causing the next movements to be involved and led under conditions corresponding to the needs of the situation.
A new phenomenon has appeared in France, as in many other regions of the world: the entry of university youth into political movement, and political demonstrations of youth organizations against the war in Algeria. The UNEF, the officially recognized students’ organization, has reestablished relations with the UGEMA, the dissolved organization of the Algerian students. A declaration has been signed by the representatives of 53 youth organizations calling for a halt to the war in Algeria.
Within a relatively short time the reaction has seen its positions in the universities dissolve, while the vanguard has been turning toward various forms of struggle, running from non-violence to aid for the Algerian revolution and refusal to serve in the army.
Thus, among the youth of France, there has been observable – with account taken of the peculiarities of the situation in the country – a phenomena of a world-wide type, a movement in university youth, not led by the traditional organizations, without previous political training, but spontaneously turning to radical solutions and methods. In France it is the colonial revolution, in the form of the fight of the Algerian people, which has stirred up the university youth, and it is likely that working-class youth also will not long delay in showing a political awakening.
The government has been sharply aware of these manifestations; confronted by the current political revival in France, it attacked the organizationally weakest point, the UNEF – whose members, in the nature of things, are constantly being replaced – by withdrawing the government subsidy that was an important contribution to its functioning. Although declarations of solidarity have not been lacking, one has the feeling that the defense of the UNEF has not been understood as a political problem of very great importance.
The nub of the question is that the official leaderships do not have toward the youth an attitude of real confidence. They are afraid of its non-conformism, it tendency to go much farther than they themselves intend to go. It was enough to observe the reactions of these leaderships and of newspapermen toward those young men who refused military service or who put themselves at the service of the Algerian revolution. That “respectful left,” to pick up the well-chosen expression of Temps Modernes (which gave it a masterly thrashing), is shouting “Whoa! whoa!” – imploring everybody to stay inside limits compatible with its reformist desires.
De Gaulle’s regime has had to put up with a kicking over of the traces by those who only yestereve were its best friends inside the world of the former French empire. In 1958 de Gaulle invented the “Communauté,” which was to keep together in association whatever remained of the French Union. Guinea left. The Mali (Senegal and the Sudan) were kept by the promise of concessions. Thus the “renovated Communauté” was arrived at, which transformed the whole business into a sort of confederation. Then when everything was just ready, those in favor of a solid federation, i.e., the so-called “entente” countries, under the leadership of Houiphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast, demanded downright independence.
These various factors – set in an international context marked by a speeded-up drive forward of the colonial revolution – led de Gaulle to make new declarations that permitted the opening of negotiations with the GPRA, before he should be outstripped by a new worsening of the situation in France itself.
We examine in an editorial note (p. 6) the question of these negotiations as they regard the relations between France and Algeria. But there is also the question of what their effects may be on the development of the situation inside France.
It is already visible that the most reformist parts of the workers’ movement and of the left bourgeoisie are ready to rely on de Gaulle to follow up events. Because of this fact and also because of the timid policy of the French CP and the Socialist left, it is probable that resistance to the war in Algeria will not have, for a period, the development which, it seems, it would have had undergone if the negotiations had not been begun. But, in our opinion, there is a good likelihood that what is being observed there is only a conjunctural fluctuation. For there seems to be becoming manifest throughout France a reversal of trends, which has its source in deep changes. Since January, the reaction has lost its impetus; it would like to mobilize against the negotiations, whose outcome it fears, but it also fears lest any mobilization would arouse on the left forces that would easily gain the upper hand. On the left, there is observable a symptomatic drive for unity, the wind from which is beginning to be felt by the old reformist weather-vanes of the Socialist Party and the Force Ouvrière labor federation. Of course the leaders are trying not to let themselves be outflanked and to assign this still not very strong movement quite timid goals (laïc schools, etc.) which are not of a sort to infuse it with enthusiasm.
Confronted by this, the Gaullist regime is obviously not ready to give way. What is to be expected is a toughening of social relationships, in which the initiative lies in the hands of the state. But however slight the political revival may still be, on the one hand it has its origin in deep movements that are occurring within the masses, and on the other, it has already produced currents among the youth, who are not ready to follow the old leaderships in their cowardly and treacherous policy. The French workers’ movement will be able to recover from its May 1958 defeat.
27 June 1960
 

e Frank: Gaullist Bonapartism Throws Off Its Camouflage (March 1960)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Gaullist Bonapartism Throws Off Its Camouflage
(March 1960)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 9, Spring 1960, pp. 20–25.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

At the moment of writing, many French politicians and journalists are discussing whether de Gaulle, by refusing to summon a special session of the parliament despite the formal request of more than half its deputies, has violated the constitution which he himself got adopted in September 1958 or whether a provision therein permitted him so to act. A wonderful subject to keep professors of constitutional law busy for years! But to understand how and why it happened, it is preferable to use Marxist analysis, and, on this occasion, what it teaches us on the subject of Bonapartism.
Even since de Gaulle arrived at power, we have made a distinction between the fascisizing forces which brought off the May 13th coup d’état in Algiers with the support of the army, and the state power that was set up in Paris, the Bonapartist power of de Gaulle, an expression of a very dynamic wing of big capital. [1] It must be added, however, that this Bonapartism at that time had characteristics that seemed to be in partial contradiction to the classical definition of Bonapartism. On the one hand, the army in Algeria constituted a force still independent, to a considerable extent, of the new power in Paris: one of de Gaulle’s essential goals was to ensure himself of the control of the army. On the other hand, de Gaulle began his reign by associating in the government Pinay and Guy Mollet, the heads of the two main parliamentary parties of the Fourth Republic. Bonapartism is above all a sabre and a philosophy. Whereas de Gaulle, at the beginning, did not have a firm grasp on the hilt of the sabre, and the philosophy of “grandeur” and of the firmness of the executive power was decked out in tawdry parliamentary finery. But in less than two years the situation has been clarified and we are coming to classic Bonapartism.
 
The Army and State Power
The army was the main force which de Gaulle had to and still has to take into account. Having undergone a series of defeats for twenty years, it has – like any beaten military man – thrown the responsibility on to the civil power. Especially when it was beaten or fought to a standstill, not by those gentlemen of the German Supreme General Staff, but by the Vietnamese, Algerians, etc. This situation helped to develop in this army currents that favored “the psychological weapon,” i.e., fascist or fascisizing currents that had themselves worked out a policy for Algeria, whose goal was to make it into a French province.
As the representative of the essential interests of French capitalism, de Gaulle is determined to reach a solution in Algeria that guarantees the predominance of French capitalist interests there; but he knows that Algeria is “Algerian” and will never be French, and that he had to get the army to give up its illusory goals. This operation required time, and various efforts, involving the elimination of certain highly placed chiefs, first by pushing them upstairs to honorific posts, and conversations with many subalterns during several “tours round the messes”; and it was completed by checking and defeating the January 1960 attempt at a fascist Putsch in Algiers. The ultras felt driven to action by the removal of General Massu; they thought that they had at their disposal, as in May 1958, the aid or the benevolent backing of the army. And indeed, in the army there were not lacking cadres who felt sympathy for their attempted Putsch. But de Gaulle, speaking over the radio on January 29th, placed them before the alternative – either obey or make a pronunciamiento – and they obeyed.
The present condition of the French army (that is, of its cadres and its special troops) deserves some explanation. It is not only reactionary, as any army of a capitalist state is. It is at present politicized in an outstandingly reactionary way and it is a political force that the state power has to take into account. But, since the January 1960 events in Algiers, it is certain that this army, even though there will still be certain grumblings or certain angry shouts here and there, will submit to de Gaulle’s authority. First of all because, as Delouvrier, highest French functionary in Algeria, said, “There’s no other de Gaulle.” And then because the army and de Gaulle are in agreement today about staying in Algeria. After the most recent Algiers events, many men of the left said that de Gaulle had made to the army the concession that it would remain in Algeria and, when the time came, have control of the referendum about self-determination. This was no concession by de Gaulle, because it had never previously been his intention to let go of Algeria as the ultras accused him of wanting to do. We shall return later to the Algerian question. For the moment the French army is involved there in guerilla warfare that has lasted more than five years, after seven years of war in Vietnam. This long and embittering contact with the colonial revolution, in the absence of anything that could possibly be called an intervention by the French proletariat, has in any case made the army a hotbed of reactionary and fascisizing cadres, and great efforts by the workers of France will be necessary to overcome it.
 
The Political Parties and the Gaullist Regime
Relations with the parliamentary world presented a less thorny problem than those with the military men, though one that in the long run has no less important consequences.
Immediately after de Gaulle’s arrival in power, with the exception of the leaders of the PCF (French Communist Party), who could not fail to fear every thing from Gaullism, only a few bourgeois-democratic or Socialist politicians – Mendés-France, Mitterand, the leaders of the PSA (Autonomous Socialist Party) and the UGS (Union of the Socialist Left) – stated that they would not stay within the framework of the regime and wait for the period that would come after the Gaullist regime. Some others, the Radicals with Gaillard, individual figures like Edgar Faure, adopted an equivocal position toward the new regime. As the months passed, various figures could be seen leaving the government, without, for all that, taking a position against the regime: first, Guy Mollet, because of the Pinay-Rueff economic policy, aimed at the laboring masses; then Radicals or Socialists of second rank, because of the anti-laïc policy in the school question; next, Pinay himself, worried by overly rough measures against small and medium-size businesses; and finally Soustelle, wanting to capitalize on the hostility of the ultras and fascists toward de Gaulle’s Algerian policy. With the refusal to summon the parliament, it was the Socialist Party of Mollet and the MRP (Popular Republican Movement) that are withdrawing. All these evolutions were carried out in the most complete ambiguity, and by invoking pretexts rather than the real reasons. None of these political leaders, none of these formations, gave a frank explanation or formulated a categoric opposition to the regime. Not one of them calls on the masses for any struggle whatsoever. It is rather Premier Debré, a simple carrier-out-of-orders, than de Gaulle himself, whom they bring into question. All have adopted a waiting, passive attitude: let the state power shift for itself, alone, as long as it can; as for us, we intervene only to get into a better position for what will come after de Gaulle.
The result has been that in these first months of 1960 the new regime has appeared in its true light. The power is in the hands of de Gaulle and a brains-trust of a few figures who are neither ministers nor deputies; the government are above all a group of top functionaries, carrying out the decisions of the country’s real leaders. The great mass of the population does not know the names of the men around de Gaulle or even those of the members of the government. The only political connection between the state power and the mass of the population lies in de Gaulle’s own person. His refusal to summon the parliament will make no difference at all; it is merely the most finished expression of the nature of the Gaullist regime, for which even an Assembly such as that elected at the end of 1958 is intolerable if it shows the slightest desire to utter an opinion of its own.
The new regime created a new political formation, the UNR (Union for the New Republic) which almost all by itself ensures a parliamentary majority. But it is difficult to describe this formation as a political party. In the absence of any public demonstrations, it is hard to estimate its real organizational strength, but that in itself is an indication that it is not rooted in the various social strata. Since its creation the UNR has shown a dual aspect of this new “political” personnel: an unconditional lining up behind de Gaulle; a considerable appetite of men hungry for the profits of power, great and small, that leaves far behind it the long-sated palates of the old politicians of parliamentary democracy.
Bonapartism shows that just the link of the “Bonapart” himself with the mass of the population is politically sufficient in and of itself: he need not set up political formations that propose to discuss the problems of all sorts that are worrying the various classes and strata of society. The country need not concern itself with politics. Foreign policy, finances, the economy, the army, etc, etc – these are questions that lie in the domain reserved to His Highness! Under such circumstances, political formations of the right and the left – which corresponded to the functioning of the parliamentary regime and which formed the links between the state; power and the social categories that they represented – have no functions in the Gaullist regime; they bring no weight to bear on the administrations, more and more under the thumbs of the technocrats who serve the interests of a very narrow stratum of big capital.
It is not only because they have no longer any power of decision that the figures who formed the political personnel of the Third and Fourth Republics are withdrawing from the Gaullist regime, tiptoeing away. Indeed, it is rather painful for them to give up the material advantages that they might obtain by remaining in government posts. The main reason for their withdrawal is the continuation of the war in Algeria.
 
A Last Quarter of an Hour ... That Will Last for Years Yet
The general secretary of the MRP recently made a statement to the effect that his party had accepted giving up democracy for a period in favor of the personal power of de Gaulle because he seemed to be the only person capable of rapidly bringing the war in Algeria to an end. And indeed de Gaulle in 1958 was at the point of convergence of currents which, while different and even antagonistic, all saw in him the man capable of quickly putting a stop to the war in Algeria. The anti-parliamentary reactionaries hoped that he would do so by pushing the war to its utmost, at the same time that he was ridding France of parliamentary democracy. The classic right hoped that he would liquidate the weight of the PCF and assign parliament a subordinate place that would not upset governmental stability. The men of the left, and especially Guy Mollet, hoped that de Gaulle might be the one man who could make the right accept a moderate solution in Algeria, and that, with peace restored, it would be easy to return to a parliamentary regime, threatened by the continuation of the war that aided the growth of reactionary and fascist forces. Even a great number of Communist voters, it will be remembered, showed their confidence in de Gaulle precisely as the man who was going rapidly to bring about peace in Algeria. As Le Canard Enchainé put it, de Gaulle had been elected President of the Republic for the duration of the Algerian war.
The most reactionary sector was quite rapidly disappointed when it saw that de Gaulle refused to use the terms “French Algeria” and “integration,” and it prepared for a trial of strength as a result of the 16 September 1959 speech, in which de Gaulle, using the term “self-determination,” let it be understood for the first time that his own preference was for a sort of association between France and Algeria.
As for the French population in general, which wants peace but has never been called on to take the slightest action for this purpose, and as for the politicians who, faced with the fascist threat, had turned the power over to de Gaulle – they were delighted by the position he took on 16 September 1959 and again in January 1960. Wasn’t this the best justification for their own apathy? Everything that de Gaulle might lose on his right, he picked up again (and more to boot) on his left.
At the beginning of February 1960, after the collapse of the Putsch in Algiers, a referendum would have given de Gaulle more than the 80% of the votes that he had obtained in 1958. He had been the first, since the beginning of the war in Algeria, to stand up to the ultras, and they had collapsed pretty pitiably. For the first time the road looked wide-open for the re-establishment of peace in Algeria. Beside the ultras, who in France was not in favor of negotiations? Was the GPRA (Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic) doing anything except asking for the most modest guarantees that must be obtained by a people used for decades to faked elections? What obstacle could remain in the way of ending up in this “peace of brave men”? Nobody showed himself to be more confident – or, it ought to be said, more credulous – than the editors of France-Observateur, about very soon reaching a halt in the hostilities; and under these conditions, for the editors of that weekly, men like Francis Jeanson, who were in favor of the victory of the Algerian people, were not acting in the interests of peace!
But de Gaulle, who knows how to double back and to tack under certain circumstances, at other times has no fear of speaking bluntly. The Algiers Putsch was scarcely over before he obtained emergency powers for the defense of state security; once this was done, he decided to have new elections in Algeria very soon (a decision which was in opposition to serious self-determination), and he once more betook himself to Algeria to visit those gentlemen, the officers of the army. And there his language knocked the breath out of all those men of the left who had seen in him a champion of peace, and who believed that that peace was very near. It was to the effect that the FLN will not give up its arms; the army must go get them. That will take years. After which, at the end of a long time, the army will have control over the operations of self-determination. We are not in a hurry, de Gaulle added – thus showing that he was determined, under present conditions, to take the time necessary for obtaining the capitulation of the Algerians. Many French petty-bourgeois and even workers had for a long time had hope in Lacoste’s “last quarter of an hour”; with de Gaulle they could believe that it was really the last quarter of an hour. And now here was de Gaulle settling into the war for years. As an old French song puts it: it surely was hardly worth the trouble of changing the government ...
*
And while we are on the subject of quotations, a better one could not be found for France after these last remarks of de Gaulle than the celebrated phrase of Richefort under the Second Empire: France has forty million subjects, without counting the subjects of discontent. In less than two years the new regime has found a way to come into collision with almost every category of the population, without distinction of age, sex, or profession. The “grandeur” of France is a more or less widespread lowering of the standard of living of the laboring masses (workers, peasants, functionaries, ex-servicemen), a strangling of the laïc school for the benefit of the self-styled free schools, extreme difficulties for the students, etc. In compensation, the French have the Reggane atomic bomb and the prospect of a war of indeterminate length in Algeria. We leave aside, naturally, the scandals of every sort which are also aiming at being “grand” ones compared with those of past regimes.
Unable to grasp what Bonapartism really is, the leaders of the left have passed through various phases since the arrival of the de Gaulle regime. First of all, they believed that fascism was coming very rapidly; then that things were settling down into a paternalistic regime capable of making peace in Algeria; now many are lulling themselves with the idea that, with the regime’s inability thus to make peace, its end is near. Illusions, all along the line. The regime has set itself up on the basis of a new correlation of forces between the classes, and it is not liable to fall just because of a shift in public opinion, however serious a shift it might be. This regime will not go away of its own free will; it will be necessary to overthrow it, and for that more than a few demonstrations are needed. Established by force, it is only by force that it will disappear.
For the moment, the parties that have withdrawn somewhat from it are counting only on its wearing itself out. And they are still addressing de Gaulle, asking him to leave his regime at least some appearance of democracy.
 
The Communist Party and the Regime
The only party that might have effectively prepared the masses for a decisive struggle against the Gaullist regime is the Communist Party, but its attitude toward that regime is, for reasons specific to that party, also full of ambiguities.
On the one hand, the leadership of the Communist Party cannot fail to denounce the regime of personal power on account of the threats implicit in it against the working class as a whole and in particular the Communist Party itself. As a political formation, the PCF is still more disdained by the political world than it has been at any time since the “cold war.” But on the other hand, the direction the PCF takes is decided, in the last resort, by the orientation of Soviet diplomacy; and for this, de Gaulle, by his personal positions in NATO and in Europe, appears as a sort of trouble-maker, a factor of tension, within the Atlantic coalition. We shall not go on at length here about the error in calculation by Soviet diplomacy, which is hoping by subtle manoevres to lead him to take the next step, advancing from his little game for obtaining a larger place within the imperialist coalition, to a total break with that coalition. This is not the first time that Soviet diplomacy has committed this sort of mistake. But the effects on the policy of the CPs is always the same. In the present case, the leadership of the PCF, brandishing the “German danger,” has several times attemped an operation of bringing pressure within the limits of the new regime, and even a flirtation with certain Gaullist fractions. One of the presidents of the France-USSR Association is Deputy Schmittlein, president of the parliamentary group of the UNR, and vice-president of the National Assembly. For the PCF leadership, the main question in French politics is not basically the question of Algeria, but the question of “peace” between East and West, to which it subordinates its position on Algeria. This is shown very concretely: when it cannot help it, the PCF leadership puts up with committees for peace in Algeria that are independent of its own Peace Movement; but tries to torpedo them because those who are active in such committees refuse to be docile tools in the variations of Soviet diplomacy. The Algerian revolution has received no effective aid from the PCF. Under the pretext that the struggle against the Algerian war must be a mass struggle, the PCF leadership has denounced individuals who have contributed personal help to the Algerians, describing them on occasion as provocateurs, especially if they are oppositional communists.
After de Gaulle’s arrival at power, and with a certain delay in reorienting itself, the PCF leadership put forward in its programme the slogan of a new Constituent Assembly – with a view to reestablishing a “renewed” democracy. But on the morrow of the January 1960 events – during which the PCF leadership yielded to the prohibition of public meetings – the spokesman of the Communist parliamentary group, Waldeck-Rochet, a member of the Political Bureau, asked the government for new parliamentary elections. This was recognizing the framework of the regime of the Fifth Republic, and not merely fighting inside it because of necessity.
At the same time, the PCF leadership, through the voice of Thorez, after general remarks against personal power, made an appeal for a grouping identical with that of the Resistance during the war years; such an appeal, on the eve of Khrushchev’s arrival in France, was plainly aimed at the Gaullists.
At certain moments the ambiguity of the PCF policy toward de Gaulle becomes evident even to considerable strata of working-class militants. Thus, during the one-hour strike on February 1st, many had the feeling that they were working for the benefit of de Gaulle. And there is not the slightest doubt that it is de Gaulle who profits most from the enormous confusion that arose in connection with Khrushchev’s visit to France, Gaullists and Communists side by side cheerfully shouting – these, Hurray for de Gaulle! and those, Hurray for Khrushchev!
 
Where Is Gaullism Going?
Bonapartism has taken on a clearer aspect, but it has nowise said its last word, or, as yet, shown all its characteristics.
It is scarcely worried by the fact that there is much discontent with it, because none of the big formations is carrying on an active struggle against it. Bonapartism has no need of active support; a few big tours through the provinces from time to time suffice; what it lives on above all is political apathy – an apathy that it feeds by all the means at its disposal. For it, danger will begin when political resistance becomes active, militant. We are not yet at that point.
Like the Fourth Republic, the new regime will experience its most serious difficulties on account of the continuance of the war in Algeria. The Algiers Putsch probably marks the end of the trend to the right which has steadily shown itself in France since the beginning of the Algerian revolution; but, on account of the betrayal and deficiencies of the workers’ leaderships, the possibilities – rather limited ones, on account of the regime established after 13 May 1958 – of a reactivation and mobilization of the masses against the war in Algeria are not exploited as they should be.
Nevertheless, though it must not be expected that the great masses will soon emerge from their political apathy and indifference, the series of events that have occurred from 1958 to 1960 rather favors a political re-awakening of the militants on the level of political thought. They had been overwhelmed by the May 1958 coup de force, ending in the victory of a united front of all bourgeois currents, backed by the leadership of the Socialist Party. On the occasion of the Algiers Putsch, they saw that there was division inside the bourgeois camp, and recourse was made to their own intervention, even if only of a benign sort; and it was the ultras who came out the losers. But in either case they could see how the numerically limited Gaullist team exploited at one time the right and at another the workers’ movement. For part of them, the question is now being raised of a policy that de Gaulle cannot exploit; this is an aspiration toward an independent class policy. The extent of this phenomenon must not be exaggerated, but, however limited and however little sensed it may still be at present, it is nonetheless one of the most essential factors on which a revolutionary vanguard must stake for the definition and achievement of its present tasks.
*
As long as the war in Algeria lasts, the future of France will be blocked. It is de Gaulle himself who stated this explicitly in his radio speech against the 29 January Putsch in Algiers. As he is now settling down for years into the war in Algeria, the obstacles will accumulate on the path of the modernization of French society; as big capital is not ready to give up its goals and its profits, it is inescapable that the masses will clash with the state power both concerning an improvement in wages for the workers, office employees, and functionaries, and concerning the general improvement in living conditions in both town and country (more and better housing, schools, roads, etc). It is to be stressed that, though the installation of the Gaullist regime was marked by a spread of political indifference, carefully kept up by the radio, the TV, and the big newspapers, the new regime has nowise been characterized by the disappearance of immediate demands, including by the big losers in the operation of 13 May 1958, the workers.
Granted, the workers’ struggles have taken on a different character. It would be mistaken to expect, in the immediate future, big generalized struggles, and false to spread that idea in the present correlation of forces. But, beginning with the Spring of 1959, the workers and functionaries have been restating their demands, and we have witnessed numerous partial and limited conflicts. We cannot within the limits of this article proceed to a detailed examination of the problems raised by these struggles or of the policy followed by the principal labor leadership – that of the CGT – or of what should have been done. Let us simply say that the CGT, guided by the policy of the PCF, did not seek to put forward general demands or to educate the workers through these struggles with a view to decisive struggles at a later stage against the political regime and against the social regime; it limited itself to exploiting, for demands at the plant or trade level, the advantage given to the working class by a period of full employment. For the French economy, apart from a few very local pockets, is going through a good conjuncture, and the war in Algeria for its part is retaining conscripts in the army for at least 27 months – which withdraws about 200,000 young men from the labor market. In any case, there is no reason to think that the workers will not continue to make demands; indeed, quite the contrary.
Other social categories are being led or will be led to make demands. The very limited economic forces which are sparking the present regime are extremely dynamic, aiming at considerably speeding up the process of modernization, and consequently of concentration, of the French economy, especially in the sectors that modernization has heretofore reached very little or not at all (a large number of conversion industries, peasantry, distribution). It is not surprising that – by the fault of the workers’ leaderships who have refused to appeal to the strength of the workers – petty-bourgeois strata injured by the economic policy of big capital have been directly polited politically by reactionary currents. Indirectly, Bonapartism makes use of this in its skilful play of counter-weights against the demonstrations and demands of the working class.
These demands by all the social categories can only become accentuated by the continuation of the war in Algeria – which is blocking the future. From a longer-term viewpoint, the agitation that will result therefrom will tend to nurture political oppositions – all the more so in that the new regime, cornered by the difficuties inherent in the perpetuation of the war, will not fail to show a different face from that rather paternalistic and benign one with which it has up till now confronted demonstrations for demands. If it permitted itself to be tough with deputies who could do nothing but chatter, sending them packing, we may be sure that it will have no hesitation about unleashing the police and the CRS, and demanding severe sentences from the courts, against the workers and the toiling masses generally.
*
Thus there is being revealed, in its instability and in its strength, the political regime which was the end-product of the failure of bourgeois democracy, the betrayal and deficiencies of the workers’ leaderships, the continuance of the colonial war, and the French economy’s needs for modernization. The balance of social forces turns around the person of the “providential man.” Political forces are in hibernation. The machine keeps running, partly under its own momentum, partly according to the caprices of its present “great man.” Barring an accident to him, it will run like this for a period. Will he, or will he not, attain peace in Algeria? That is the decisive question. To achieve that, he would have to make more than verbal concessions; he has to grant the Algerian people something substantial.
In the uncertainty of the outlook, one thing however is clear: while the working class of France has not been led by its big organizations to bring real help to the Algerian revolution, it is the enormous sacrifices of the Algerian people that will still provide the French workers with the opportunities to emerge from their political torpor and to find once more the path of revolutionary combat.
23 March 1960

Footnote
1. See our numbers 3, 4, 5, and 6; also the author’s preface to the reissue of Où va la France? (Leon Trotsky, Ecrits, volume II, Paris, Editions de la Quatrième, 1958).
 

e Frank: The Workers' Parties and de Gaulle (June 1958)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
The Workers’ Parties and de Gaulle
(June 1958)

From Fourth International (Paris), No. 3, Summer 1958, pp. 15–22.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In its history France has experienced several Bonapartist operations prior to that of de Gaulle, and comparisons between them still offer some interest. From both the bourgeois and the proletarian point of view, the de Gaulle operation presents an extraordinary picture.
It was the war of Algeria following on that of Vietnam which led the French army to bring off its coup de force. This was carried out in an atmosphere unconnected with this political operation. There was no economic crisis as in 1851, no military collapse and exodus as in 1940. The war of Algeria had lasted three and a half years, and throughout that whole time in the metropolis the bourgeoisie had gone on showing an indifference, a really surprising unconcern, about the war. Everyone was occupied with his own business, which was prosperous. Everyone was thinking about his coming vacation. The parliamentary regime had become the least of the worries of the bourgeois.
But if there was really one thing that differentiated the de Gaulle operation from its predecessors, it was the situation of the working class. It was not suffering from a bloodletting, as after June 1848. It was not, as in 1940, mobilized and with the CP in illegality. It had not been pushed into the background of the political scene. It had its parties, its trade unions, its press.
But, just like the bourgeoisie, it was but little concerned with the war in Algeria in the immediately previous years. These years of prosperity had assured it of a limited but unquestionable improvement in its living conditions; it had obtained three weeks of paid vacations. It also looked with contempt on the parliamentary game and the interminable ministerial crises. For this state of mind in the working class, it was the traditional leaderships – of the Socialist and Communist Parties – that bear the responsibility. If, for the first time in French history, a Bonapartist operation could succeed without the prior defeat of the working class and the popular masses, it was owing to those leaderships, and it is not unuseful to point out how they prepared such a defeat.
 
I: The Socialist Party
The overall line of the Guy Mollet leadership is well known, but his perfidy appears still more in the detailed examination of his various proceedings. Guy Mollet reached the leadership of the SP in 1946-1947 at the head of a left tendency that blamed the Daniel Mayer leadership for too timorous a policy.
But Guy Mollet quickly turned right, anticommunism becoming the fixed quantity in his political variations. He also constructed, for the first time in the history of the SP, an apparatus that guaranteed him control of the party. As French policy, beginning with the Liberation, evolved toward the right, the SP ended up by finding itself in the opposition between 1952 and 1955. It returned to power at the beginning of 1956 after the election victory of the “Republican Front” composed essentially of a combination of the SP and the Radical Party then led by Mendès-France.
Although the latter was the recognized leader of the “Republican Front” during the election campaign, Guy Mollet became the head of the new government, in view of the preponderant place held in the National Assembly by the SP – with the exception of the French CP, to which, at that moment, no attention was paid in the parliamentary world. In the legislature elected in 1956, everything depended on the Socialist group: this was seen in May 1958. During the election campaign Guy Mollet had vigorously criticized the war of Algeria: an idiotic and hopeless war, he called it. The victory of the Republican Front, paralleled by the strengthening of the Communist parliamentary group, meant that the country was expecting from the new parliament a policy of peace in Algeria. Willingly or not, Guy Mollet fell into the traps of the ultras and settlers of Algeria. His first choice for Minister of Algeria had been General Catroux, a “republican” who was saying that he would stop at nothing. But when Guy Mollet was received at Algiers with tomatoes, he persuaded Catroux to resign and in his place named Lacoste, who was to give a full demonstration of his socialism. In proceeding to make this designation, Guy Mollet, who had retreated before the fascist riot of 6 February 1956 at Algiers, considered it something “healthy.”
Beginning with that moment, it was a steady retreat before the settlers and the army. In Algeria itself Lacoste was not directing anything; but he was covering up everything and had become the principal traveling salesman to make France accept the war of Algeria and all the infamies that it brought in its train.
As for the Guy Mollet ministry, it was “special powers,” it was “pacification” by the sending of about half a million draftees, it was the Ben Bella affair. It was also the Suez campaign. It was the whitewashing given the torturers.
This policy (which was nowise countered by that of the FCP) aided the progress of the reaction in France. In the SP itself, there could be observed the development of a fascisizing wing (speeches of Lacoste and Lejeune at the SP Toulouse Congress). But, unlike what happened in 1933–1934, when the Blum leadership was forced to expel the “neos” (Déat ...), the Guy Mollet leadership made a bloc with this current against those who were calling for another Algerian policy, however moderate it might be. The leadership took sanctions against its opponents, going as far as expulsion (Philip) and above all depriving in practice almost the whole minority of its right of expression in the party congresses and conferences.
Overthrown as premier, Guy Mollet became the power behind the throne in the two following cabinets (Bourgès-Manoury and Gaillard) who kept Lacoste on as Minister of Algeria. Guy Mollet also forced his party to swallow the formation of these governments and to support them, although resistance to this policy began to develop in the party. When the Gaillard government was overthrown, Guy Mollet pretended to be angry with the right (”the most stupid in the world,” he claimed) and had the National Council on May 2nd and 3rd vote that the SP would no longer take part in any government, being satisfied to assure it of its support. He thus succeeded in strengthening his authority over the SP, an authority that had been somewhat damaged. At the time the Pflimlin government was formed, the SP was outside the government, and, by this fact, Lacoste was no longer Minister of Algeria. It was then that the Algiers plot took an open form. Lacoste, who was informed about it, let it go on, hoping that he would be the beneficiary from it. He refused to return to Algeria at a time when constitutionally he still had to assure “current affairs,” i.e., public order (against the fascists), and in speeches spurred the ultras on to action.
 
Guy Mollet and the Socialist Parliamentary Group
As soon as the Algiers coup occurred, there could be noted dissonances between the attitude of Guy Mollet and that of the Socialist parliamentary group. The very day of the Algiers coup, May 13th, Guy Mollet was trying to discourage Pflimlin from going through with his appeal to be invested by the National Assembly. The Socialist parliamentary group, on the contrary, which was not aware of this intervention by Guy Mollet, was pushing Pflimlin to ask for this vote by the National Assembly, which granted it to him.
The next day, May 14th, the Socialist group and the Directing Committee decided on participation in the Pflimlin government. “When the Republic appears menaced, the Socialist Party is always present,” declared Guy Mollet, who was becoming vice-premier, accompanied by other Socialist ministers, among them Jules Moch at the Interior, where ten years before he had distinguished himself by a ferocious repression of the miners’ strike. On May 15th, a joint appeal by the Directing Committee and the parliamentary group:
The Republic is threatened. Civil and military insurrection in Algeria and the manifesto of General de Gaulle are evidence that the assault against the republican regime has been launched [...] To face this peril, the Socialist Party has decided to participate in the government [...] But the Republic is defended not only in parliament and the government [...]
But in face of a declaration by de Gaulle, there were to be noted two different attitudes, that of Guy Mollet and that of the spokesman of the Socialist parliamentary group at the National Assembly in its 16 May session.
Guy Mollet asked de Gaulle to make an effort:
It is true that General de Gaulle has given the Republic back to the fatherland [...] We see that Algeria’s belonging to our national community is brought into question, and we greatly regret that we do not read the slightest phrase of condemnation of this in General de Gaulle’s message. We should need to have the general complete his declaration, clearly insufficient.
Naegelen, in the name of the Socialist group, uttered a condemnation:
We were expecting something quite different from General de Gaulle. His statement is only an accusation harking back to all candidates for dictatorship in all countries, against the regime of parties [...] Over the head of the parliament elected by the nation, over the head of the legally invested government, over the head of the chief of state, General de Gaulle has addressed the country to say that he is ready to assume the powers of the Republic: this plural is indeed an indication that he is demanding dictatorship. To this overweening pretention, we rise in opposition.
On May 18th, Jules Moch made a thunderous declaration on the radio, alluding to his role as a strikebreaker:
The fate of the Republic is at stake [...] Strengthened by former experience, I can give the assurance that the government will not disappoint or fail in its duty.
Following a new declaration by de Gaulle, which was in part an answer to the solicitation of Guy Mollet, on May 19th, the Socialist parliamentary group and the Directing Committee stated:
The SP notes that General de Gaulle has demanded powers that would be conferred on him -as a result of an exceptional procedure whose modalities he would himself determine, and has thus denied the Constitution of the Republic. The SP has confidence that the government will maintain order and legality, resist all pressures, and maintain national unity within the framework of the Republic.
But on this same day, Pinay announced that he had advised Guy Mollet to make contact – either alone, or, better, together with Pflimlin – with General de Gaulle in order to find out his intentions. But, he added, the vice-premier refused to undertake such an initiative ... Indeed!
On May 23rd, on emerging from a meeting of the Socialist group, its president, Deixonne, stated:
The Socialist group would not lend itself to a compromise from which our freedoms would suffer [...] We will not pay for the return of Algeria to legality by the loss of the Republic [...]
At this moment still the Socialist group was unanimous. It is true that Lacoste was not present. But on the 24th an article by him appeared in The new Republic of Bordeaux (Gaullist), in which he wrote: “I am overwhelmed and filled with admiration” (by what was going on in Algeria).
On May 25th, following on the Ajaccio coup, the SP associated itself with a declaration of the “National Committee for Republican Defense” (Radicals, MRP, SFIO, etc.) in which can be read:
[...] calls on the members of the organizations signing this message to be ready for any eventuality and to consider themselves mobilized for safeguarding our endangered national unity and freedoms.
Late on the 26th, the Socialist parliamentary group voted a resolution supporting the strike decided on by the CGT:
The group has expressed the wish that the success of the strike launched by the CGT will be aided to the maximum extent. It furthermore hopes that there will be organized tomorrow in Paris a big mass demonstration. The Directing Committee of the party will meet in order to take an official decision and to plan the modalities. But that did not suit Guy Mollet, and later, on the 27th, the Directing Committee issued the following communique:
The Directing Committee of the SP formally denies the information appearing this morning in certain newspapers according to which it might be taking a decision in favor of demonstrations in agreement with the CP or the CGT. The party’s members are asked to conform strictly to the instructions that have been communicated to the federal secretaries.
But for the first time there occurred a division in the Directing Committee, composed of 43 majority Molletists out of 45 members. This text was adopted by 17 votes against 9.
During the night of the 26th–27th there occurred an interview between Pflimlin and de Gaulle, and on the 27th de Gaulle made a statement according to which he had begun the process of constituting his government. The same day the Socialist parliamentary group adopted, by 112 votes against 3, and 1 abstention, a manifesto in which it was said:
General de Gaulle has just made it known that he is undertaking what he calls the “regular process” in view of forming his government. The Socialist parliamentarians declare: [...] 2. that they will in no case rally to the candidacy of General de Gaulle, which, by the very form in which it is posed and by the considerations that accompany it, is and remains under any hypothesis a challenge to republican legality.
Thus, parliamentarily, de Gaulle seemed not to have a chance. On the 28th the great demonstration from the Nation to the Republic took place. But the same day it was learned that Guy Mollet had got in touch with de Gaulle through the intermediary of a Socialist deputy, Piette, more familiar with certain services than with the class struggle, and that as a result of these relations Guy Mollet (vice-premier, let us not forget) had written de Gaulle a letter, without the knowledge of the premier and naturally without the knowledge of the Directing Committee of the SP. The text of this letter has never been published. The 29th of May was to be the day of the final manoeuvres. Coty was to send a message to parliament. Within the SP Guy Mollet – the bureaucrat – was running the risk of no longer carrying weight with either the Directing Committee or the parliamentary group. So we saw the intervention of the former President of the Republic, Vincent Auriol – the “democrat” – who, in the last previous months, had given his support to the minority against the Guy Mollet leadership. The exchange of letters between Auriol and de Gaulle has been published. It was a manoeuvre in the grand style to pacify the “consciences” of a few Socialists and republicans. On May 30th Le Populaire was still trying to save appearances:
In spite of everything, and having weighed all the risks and dangers, the SP will take a position in conformity with its traditions and its past: it will not disavow itself.
The same day Guy Mollet went to de Gaulle’s home at Colombey, accompanied by the president of the Socialist parliamentary group, who is not usually mistaken for a master-mind, and who returned convinced. Guy Mollet finally obtained the capitulation of part of the Socialist deputies (among them that swaggerer Jules Moch), enough to give a pseudo-appearance of legality to de Gaulle’s accession to power. The powerful demonstration of May 28th brought pressure on the Directing Committee and on the parliamentary group in the opposite direction to the pressures and manoeuvres of the Guy Mollets, Auriols, Lejeunes, et al., who were carrying on a campaign for de Gaulle. It finally ended up in the following votes: Directing Committee and parliamentary group, meeting jointly: 77 for de Gaulle, 74 against. But the figures, broken down, give the following: Directing Committee: 18 for, 23 against; deputies: 40 for, 50 against. It was the Socialist senators who brought about the Gaullist majority.
At the time of de Gaulle’s investiture by the National Assembly, the parliamentary group divided up: 42 for de Gaulle, 49 against, 3 absent. True, the deputies who had voted against de Gaulle were not going outside the framework of parliamentary democracy, but such a vote constituted a very hard blow to the Guy Mollet leadership. Mollet himself, furthermore, at one moment turned in his resignation, but withdrew it again soon afterward. Since then, the Directing Committee has decided to postpone the party congress first set for the end of June and to replace it by a national conference.
The minority – who hope to become the majority – are organizing to demand this congress. They are counting on the support of the Socialist International. It is, however, possible that things will not be pushed to a split before the presentation of the draft constitution worked up by the de Gaulle government, about which any ambiguity will be all the less possible in that it can be answered only by a Yes or a No. Thus the de Gaulle operation was able to be carried out with the complete support of Guy Mollet, accompanied by all his artful dodges as an old manoeuvrer in parliament and at congresses. The SP’s general secretary has a seat in the de Gaulle government, and tries thereby to give it a surety of republicanism and liberalism.
 
The Meaning of the Division in the Socialist Party
Guy Mollet has not only betrayed the working class (that was done long ago); he has betrayed even his own party, whose natural milieu is bourgeois parliamentarianism. Without such a betrayal, de Gaulle could not have had the slightest appearance of legality, he would not have had a parliamentary majority and would have had to push the coup d’état to the point where it fully took on the aspect of a military intervention against the National Assembly. The resultant situation within the SP, the state of split that has aroused savage rightists against Guy Mollet, has something very surprising about it. But this situation is quite explicable.
The SP, at the Liberation, found itself with a diminished working-class base, especially among the most decisive layers of the working class that went over to the FCP. But the place occupied by the SP on the chess-board of the Fourth Republic guaranteed it (save for a short period) a key position in governments, and caused various currents to converge on this party. In the south of France, it replaced in some areas the Radical Party, with a petty-bourgeois peasant electoral base. In addition, while at the time of the Third Republic it already had a clientele of petty functionaries (schoolteachers, postal employees ...), after 1945 it saw its ranks swelled by high and middle functionaries (prefects, governors of colonies, ministerial administrative assistants ...) who came to it especially to aid their careers.
In this situation it was automatic that the SP tops, already far from the working-class ranks, were going to become even more strongly bourgeoisified. In appearance, the SP had succeeded in winning important positions in the state. The reality was that the state had topped the SP, and the apparatus created by Guy Mollet was often very close to the state apparatus.
The recent crisis tends to break up what was, socially speaking, artificially united. In spite of where it has been led by ministerial participations, the SP, by its origins and by the place it occupies in the political structure of France, had remained the traditional reformist workers’ party, whose existence is fundamentally bound up with that of parliamentary democracy. It would be wrong to claim that the lines of the present division are already unchangeable and that they are of an impeccable class purity. But the resistance to de Gaulle has shown itself there where the SP has a serious working-class base or clientele, whereas the careerists were turning toward de Gaulle. A remarkable example was afforded during the crisis by the Nord Federation. It is, together with that of the Pas-de-Calais, the most numerous in the SP, one of the most rightist and anti-communist. For years Guy Mollet was guaranteed a majority in his party just by the addition of a few votes to those of these two federations. The Nord Federation was at all times one of the most hostile to any united front with the CP, even in the short periods of collaboration at the time of the 1935–1936 Popular Front and the 1944–1946 Liberation. But on May 27th the Socialist Nord Federation supported the strike order given by the CGT miners’ union.
We shall certainly see some comings-and-goings among the Socialist deputies and leaders in the next months; but on the organizational level, the tendency that will stand out is that of the SP appearing as the reformist workers’ party, struggling to defend or restore the parliamentary frame that is its natural working milieu.
Thanks to such a change, essential questions like that of the Communist-Socialist united front will appear in a new aspect.
 
II: The Communist Party
The policy of the French CP, majority party of the working class since the Liberation, has since that period had a steady line which, in the same way as that of the SP, caused the recent defeat. Thorez claims priority in the conception of the parliamentary “new paths” toward socialism. We shall leave verification of the matter to those whom the question might interest, but there is no doubt that the . whole policy that he has followed since the Liberation was – even during a few leftist jolts – basically parliamentary, and nowise aimed at going on to a society building socialism. In fact, during the whole period elapsed since the Liberation, the FCP leadership has never stopped saying that, the alternative for France was not capitalism or socialism, but democracy or fascism. It would be easy to give several pages of quotations from reports to the Political Bureau. As we shall see further on, the FCP leadership persists in the same conception even after de Gaulle’s arrival at power.
This policy is explained above all by a lining up with Moscow, which constantly seeks a maintenance of the status quo. That implies a bourgeois France in which the FCP tries to aid a bourgeois wing less dependent on Washington, anti-American if possible. Because of this, it can be said without exaggeration that, though the FCP leadership criticized the authoritarian conceptions of de Gaulle, it has long handled him personally with kid gloves because of certain hopes the Kremlin had in him. Let us not forget that Thorez was a minister of de Gaulle, and that at that period – on his return from Moscow – he made the “patriotic workers’ militias” dissolve and give up their arms, in order that there might be “a single army, a single police, a single state.” (Thorez, Ivry Speech, 1945).
When de Gaulle, after giving up power, made a first political incursion in 1947 against the “system,” the then editor-in-chief of l’Humanité was censured because he had allowed himself to engage in a mere irreverent pleasantry against de Gaulle. Even during the last period of the crisis, de Gaulle was never treated on the same level as the Soustelles and Massus. The slogans for the May 28th and June 1st demonstrations were to spare de Gaulle any harsh epithets. And anyone could note the deferential and respectful attitude of the Communist deputies in the National Assembly when de Gaulle presented himself there for his investiture and later for the vote of the project granting the power to prepare a new constitution. The search for bourgeois allies had led the FCP leadership to the worst of betrayals, that of the Algerian revolution. The FCP’s variations in this matter have been numerous, but it has never made a recognition, frank and consistent in application of policy, of independence for Algeria. We refer our readers to the document written on this question by the FLN itself, which we published in our last issue. It is the most crushing indictment, showing that the FCP’s policy was never in conformity with the principles professed by this party in the name of Marxism-Leninism on the colonial question. Since then we have seen – • even during the crisis – the FCP deputies again vote “full powers” to Pflimlin, who was flaunting his intention of carrying out a more intense military action in Algeria and who turned these “full powers” over to General Salan who was then obeying the orders of the “Public Safety Committee” of Algiers and not those of the Pflimlin government.
L’Humanité Day by Day
Let us see how the FCP evaluated the events then taking place and what policy it followed. The main accent was laid on parliamentary action.
On May 13th, the coup de force at Algiers. The same day, investiture of Pflimlin. The Communist group abstained, making the following declaration:
The proposed premier having affirmed the desire of his government to continue the war in Algeria, the source of all the evils from which the country is suffering, the Communist group decides not to grant him its votes. But at the hour when, faced by the riots in Algiers and by generals entered into rebellion against the Republic, the proposed premier declares that he will not yield to the factious coup de force, the Communist deputies unanimously decide on voluntary abstention from voting, thus giving the government a possibility of being formed.
Thus it was above all on the “firmness” of the government and the parliament that the FCP leadership was laying its stake.
The mass meeting at the Cirque d’Hiver planned for the 14th was prohibited by this “firm” republican government. The FCP leadership simply accepted this prohibition and sent its functionaries to disperse those who had come in spite of the prohibition:
The slogan was: “Go back to your neighborhoods, disperse, go find other republicans to prepare the answer to the fascist coup de force.” (L’Humanité, 15 May)
May 15th: first declaration by de Gaulle exploiting and encouraging the coup de force at Algiers. L’Humanité promptly published an extra, in which were recommended, among other things, appeals to Coty: “Multiply, by thousands and thousands, protests to the President of the Republic, for safeguarding the Republic.”
May 16th: the government obtained the vote of the state of emergency (including the Communist votes), which was never to be used against Algiers or de Gaulle, but only to prevent any interventions by the workers.
In l’Humanité of May 17th, an article by Fajon, member of the Political Bureau, the director of the newspaper, presented this vote as a victory for democracy:
In the great combat undertaken to bar the road to de Gaulle and military dictatorship, yesterday was a good day [...] By launching their attack against the Republic four days ago, de Gaulle and his accomplices thought they would win without striking a blow. Their coup did not come off. It is democracy that has won a first great victory.
May 19th: press conference by de Gaulle, who was taking one step forward toward power. In answer to this conference, a Political Bureau statement of the same day affirmed: “Victories have been won. For five days fascism has been held in check.” May 20th: the National Assembly voted special powers for Algeria, powers entrusted by Pflimlin to Salan. The Communist deputies voted in favor. In l’Humanité of May 21st, an editorial by Pierre Gourtade thus commented on this vote:
It was a good day [...] The Republic is asserting itself. It is winning not only time – which was only twenty-four hours ago a dramatic necessity – it is growing stronger [...] We are stronger today than yesterday. And the whole left is with us. So is the Republic which will emerge improved from this test.
In l’Humanité of May 22nd, an editorial by Waldeck-Rochet, a Political Bureau member, who repeated the argumentation of Courtade:
The National Assembly condemned the men of the plot by according immense majorities to the nation’s legitimate government which, despite its weaknesses, has stated that it wants to fight for the respect of republican legality [...] Last Tuesday’s vote on the special powers enabled the government to consolidate its position.
An editorial by Fajon in l’Humanité of May 23rd:
On the parliamentary level, [our party] has given the Pflimlin government the possibility of getting formed, next of obtaining the means it demanded in order to defend republican legality, and finally of consolidating itself as a result of massive votes. Thus the danger has retreated. [Our emphasis]
On May 25th, far from retreating, the danger was expressed by the coup de force at Ajaccio. Beginning with this moment, the FCP’s leadership was to raise timid protests toward the Pflimlin government: it is not energetic enough, it does not turn to the country ...
L’Humanité of May 26th: “The government limits itself to yesterday’s timid decisions.” L’Humanité of May 27th, in a report on the previous day’s speech in parliament by Duclos: “The government has fallen behind the state of mind of the republican country ...”
But on this same day de Gaulle made a new declaration that openly announced that he had made official contacts with members of the government, that he had set going the process that would bring him to power.
At the National Assembly, Duclos spoke up to say to Pflimlin: you want to leave and make place for de Gaulle. But the conclusion to such a quite correct affirmation was just simply: we shall vote in favor of your project of reactionary revision of the constitution.
On May 28th, when Coty turned officially to de Gaulle, the Political Bureau, in a statement, was still counting parliamentary noses: “Yesterday there were only 165 supporters of de Gaulle at the Assembly, whereas 408 votes were cast for the defense of the Republic.”
Thus the emphasis was put on the firmness to be given to the official authorities of the Republic to defeat the plot of the rebels. And, what is more, it was announced day after day that this parliamentary policy was winning successes.
Beginning with May 13th – if we are to believe L’Humanité, directly inspired by the FCP’s Political Bureau – we were going from success to success against fascism, the Pflimlin government and the parliament were growing stronger in their determination to defend the republic, and then suddenly, at the very moment when several hundreds of thousands of workers were demonstrating in the streets of Paris, an accident happened: the government collapsed, the parliament capitulated, and Gaullism carried the day! While the deputies were carrying on the battle “for the Republic” by supporting a government which, in the shadows, was conspiring de Gaulle’s coming to power, what was asked of the workers? The most current term, “vigilance,” in practice meant most of the time immobilization in headquarters. Street demonstrations were cut down, and, when the authorities forbade them, called off. There were work stoppages, strikes, but these were carried out in a sporadic way, without coordination, and never with the perspective of an active general strike that would bring about a conflict with the state forces that were raising de Gaulle to power. On the whole, the workers’ actions were subordinated either to the parliamentary and legalistic tactic toward the Pflimlin government, or to the intentions and decisions of the other “republican” groups.
 
Toward the Bourgeois Tops
This whole policy, in the opposite direction to the real evolution of the class, found its expression in the mammoth demonstration of May 28th. The coup of Algiers occurred on May 13th. Demonstrations had taken place in various provincial cities, but working-class Paris had not demonstrated in any force. What was going on? The FCP leadership did not dare issue in its own name alone a call for a big street demonstration: it knew that a call – from itself alone – would not have produced much of an echo. Formally there was no joint appeal, there was no united front, for the leaders of the left bourgeois organizations and the Socialist Party, of Force Ouvrière and the CFTC, rejected any agreement with the Stalinist leaders. Granted, there were tacit agreements, and the Radical and Socialist leaders were well aware, when they launched the call for the demonstration of 28 May, that the FCP and the CGT would join in it.
The masses answered on May 28th because for them it was in fact a question of a joint Communist-Socialist demonstration. While all the leaders, from the bourgeois to the Stalinists, were still in agreement that there should be no shout or banner other than “Long live the Republic,” the Paris workers were spontaneously shouting: Popular Front, Unity of action, The left to power, Peace in Algeria. For the workers, Popular Front has another meaning than what it has for the leaders. For the workers, the Popular Front is in fact Communist-Socialist unity in action, for down in the ranks they see only a few Radical shopkeepers to whom they attach no importance, and they do not grasp the role of the bourgeois leaders at the Popular Front’s summit. The FCP leadership, therefore, lined up with some uncertain parliamentary top people, and was way behind the aspirations of the masses. It did not try to correct itself either the next day or in the following days. But, when de Gaulle’s coming to power became sure for June 1st, it decided to cover up its whole opportunistic policy by an operation of a pseudo-leftist appearance, street demonstrations in which only members of the party were in practice to participate, in order to be able to say that only the party had fought to the end and that the defeat was owing to the others.
 
Like the Bourbons
Soon after the end of the crisis, on June 9th and 10th, there was held a session of the Central Committee of the FCP, in which the leadership showed that, like the Bourbons, it had learned nothing and forgotten nothing. The champions of self-criticism found that everything had been very good, that the leadership had been clear-sighted, that the party had showed itself to be a “fine party,” and that it should just go on as in the past.
When Thorez said that he had a “fine party,” he specified immediately what he meant thereby: the apparatus has not experienced break-ups like those in 1939–1940. Thorez perhaps spoke too soon. There are two explanations by the FCP leaders about what has just happened. In his closing speech at this CC meeting, Thorez said:
A crisis of the regime opened and has wound up in the formation of a government of personal dictatorship which opens the way to fascism. The army, in its present composition, has taken on more and more the aspect of pretorian troops, it has been led more and more to set itself above the nation.
The Gaullist plot is the sign, not of the strength of the bourgeoisie, but of its weakness. By having recourse to personal power, to dictatorship, it recognizes that it is unable to guarantee its domination any longer by traditional means. It makes the confession of its impotence to solve the problems of its own decline, by which it is assailed. In an article in the June 21st Humanité, devoted to Algeria, he repeats the same explanation:
The malfunctioning of institutions was not the deep cause of the crisis that France is passing through. It was, rather, the expression and the sign thereof. The dominant reality was and remains [...] the incapacity of the ruling classes to solve the problems posed by our epoch. First of all must be emphasized their impotence in face of the questions raised by the general crisis of colonialism.
Thus the profound cause is capitalism, unable to solve the problems of the period, whose weakness forces it to throw itself into the desperate measures of dictatorship. Quite right.
But here is another explanation in the resolution adopted by the same CC:
The cause of the evils from which France is suffering is neither democracy nor the parliamentary regime, but on the contrary the permanent violation, by anti-communism, of the wishes of universal suffrage and the principles of the representative regime.
It is no longer the incapacity of the bourgeoisie, but the bad way in which parliamentarism is applied. But by whom, if not by the representatives of the bourgeoisie, and precisely because parliament is no longer a good instrument for capitalist domination? And so, instead of calling on the proletariat to solve the problems by the seizure of power and the building of socialism, Thorez declared to the CC: “What is necessary is to correct that bad application that has been made of institutions and to guarantee at last their normal functioning.” And the CC resolution specifies:
The remedy for governmental disorder and impotence does not consist in throwing democracy overboard, but on the contrary in guaranteeing its normal functioning by re-establishing the country’s independence and by giving the working class and its party, side-by-side with the others, the place belonging to it in parliament and in the government. Nothing but its place, but its full place [...]
The choice is not between fascism and communism. It is between a personal dictatorship backed by reaction and militarism leading to fascism, and a regime of democracy so as to carry out the policy desired by the majority of Frenchmen.
What impeccable reasoning! The bourgeoisie is incapable of solving problems by the parliamentary regime. It is therefore necessary to go back to this regime, while asking the bourgeoisie only to give the working class – read, the FCP leadership – the place belonging to it in the bourgeois parliament and also a few seats in the government. At the CC session held some weeks before the crisis, the reporter Servin was explaining that it could not be a question of fighting for socialism because the relationship of forces was not in favor of the working class, which was weak. Now the FCP leadership explains the reactionary coup de force by the weakness of the bourgeoisie. But in any case, whether the relationship of forces between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie be in one direction or the other., for the FCP leadership it is never the moment to put the struggle for power on the order of the day. In fact the situation in France has shown that the parliamentary regime is at its last gasp, and that – as the Communist International declared in its early years – either the working class would go over to the attack on the regime, or else capitalism, savagely defending its domination over society, would not hesitate to go beyond parliamentary forms to install regimes of open dictatorship.
The evolution of the Stalinists on the question of workers’ power is truly significant. At the beginning of the struggle against the Left Opposition in the years 1923–1929, the proletarian revolution was, according to them, on the order of the day in economically advanced countries, but not in underdeveloped countries like China. Thirty years later, when capitalism has been broken as a social system over a third of the globe, including China, socialism is no longer on the order of the day even in the advanced capitalist countries of Western Europe!
Now let us see how the FCP leadership proposes to carry on the struggle against the rising dictatorship.
All toilers, all democrats, all adversaries of personal power, owe it to themselves, from now on, to prepare a massive NO by our people at the time of the October consultation. The organization of this great campaign from now on dominates all our activity. (Thorez)
They will fight with all their energy both for peace in Algeria and so that, at the time of the referendum, universal suffrage will say no to the personal and military dictatorship that would open the road to fascism. (Thorez)
Against the violence of the parachutists, against the armed might of the bourgeois state, the FCP leadership opposes ... universal suffrage, in this case by answering no in a plebescite, i.e., a mockery of universal suffrage itself.
The FCP leadership had praised to high heaven the conception of the “new paths,” i.e., the use of parliament to build socialism. But in fact there is no more parliament. How, even if one accepts the perspective of a re-establishment of bourgeois parliamentarism, an illusory perspective, how can it be arrived at without recourse to violence ? The leadership is a prisoner of its parliamentary and legalistic conception just at the moment when its preferred instrument has ceased to function.
The FCP leadership has not brought the slightest criticism to bear on its conception of the “new paths”; it has not even retained a certain reservation which it had introduced into its conception, namely, that violence must be resorted to if the bourgeoisie resorts to it. By omitting, after the Algiers coup, this part of its conception of the “new paths,” the FCP leadership shows that for it what was in question there was just a stylistic clause, without any real value, that it had just plain settled down into bourgeois parliamentarism, and that it was no more concerned about the fight for socialism than the SP leadership was. The FCP leadership believed that it could profit by this period of crisis and the days immediately following, in order to strike blows at oppositionals, engaging particularly in expulsions in the intellectual circles where for so long now it has wanted to strike. This bureaucratic offensive, however, happened to be topped by the bureaucratic offensive of the Kremlin, signalized by the assassination of Imre Nagy and his companions. Soviet intervention in Hungary had much cut off the FCP from other labor and socialist formations of all tendencies. Events in France – the war of Algeria, the reactionary danger, and finally de Gaulle’s coming to power – had not permitted it to surmount this situation, but at least openings had been created. This time its cutting-off threatens to be irremediable, for the feeling of broad layers of workers is: With you? why, that would be worse than de Gaulle. Truly Khrushchev has worked for de Gaulle better than anybody could have done.
 
A New Stage
A stage in the history of the French workers’ movement, opened at the Liberation, is now closed. After having had the possibility at that moment to set up, almost without striking a blow, a Socialist-Communist government that would have opened the road to the European socialist revolution, that movement was led by these two leaderships of ill omen to see de-Gaulle come “coldly” to dictatorship. The slope to climb back up will be hard to scale. French capitalism has occupied controlling positions from which it can be dislodged only by the action of the working class raised to the highest level. All the old political formations set up in the Third and Fourth Republics will undergo shakings-up, overturns, and disappearances. There must be added to them the old workers’ leaderships which – originating at different periods out of the class struggle – have, under different forms, settled down into the parliamentary political world of French society. We are entering into an era of struggles, of splits, and of regroupments in these old formations. The present background of defeat will generate difficulties during a whole period for the revolutionary Marxist current and for those who will try to find a line of revolutionary behavior again. But at a later stage, that cannot be far off, the exigencies of the objective situation will on the contrary operate in the direction of a pitiless elimination of half-measures, of unfinished ideas, of timorous thinking, and will stimulate the creation of a new leadership capable of leading the revolutionary struggle for the seizure of power.
21 June 1958
 

e Frank: First Fruits of Gaullism (Autumn 1958)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
First Fruits of Gaullism
(Autumn 1958)

From Fourth International (Paris), No. 4, Autumn 1958, pp. 28–33.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The two most important events so far under the de Gaulle regime have been: the September 28th referendum, with its landslide vote; and his manoeuvre in Algeria with a view to the coming legislative elections.
 
1: The Slump in CP Votes
That the referendum of September 28th would produce a “yes” majority had been generally foreseen, it only confirmed the success of the May 13th coup and de Gaulle’s coming to power. But that the majority of the “yes”-votes in France amounted to 80% constituted a general surprise both for the government and for all formations, from the right to the left. Such a result could be explained neither by the extent of the official propaganda nor by measures of police pressure – after all, this was not Algeria.
What caused this 80% vote is the fact that, to the general surprise, a very large number of traditional electors of the Communist Party voted “yes.” This is a fact recognized by all, including the leadership of that party. In the report he presented to the Central Committee in the name of the Political Bureau, Servin admitted that
not just a million Communist electors voted yes, but more, [...] it concerned not only electors recently won over in January 1956, but often electors who had long voted Communist, [...] it is the first time since the Liberation that such a phenomenon has occurred, [...] the Communist electors who voted “yes” do not always belong to the middle classes – far from it, [and that there must be noted] noticeable losses in workers’ areas and often in the most wretched areas of all.
All these statements are correct and it can even be said that the “more” than one million losses is of the order of one and a half million votes.
But with Servin it is a long way from these correct observations to explanations thereof. More exactly, he gives various more or less superficial explanations, but he does not go to the bottom of the problem, while here and there letting some truths slip out.
 
The “Yes” and the “No” of It
Servin examines why people of different opinions – electors of the left, Communist electors – voted “yes.” At no moment does he ask himself who the “no”-voters are. Now only by beginning there, is it be possible to understand the intensity of the shift which took place.
The “no” votes comprised – apart from a very small number of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats – essentially that part of the French population – workers, intellectuals, and members of the middle classes – who are for Socialism: Communists, Socialists, trade-unionists, organized by or gravitating around the workers’ organizations, politicized elements who do not follow the big organizations just because of their immediate slogans but because they see in them centres of organization, bulwarks, for the extension of the struggle for socialism. This whole politicized part of the population had understood the great danger constituted by the new regime, and that is why it demonstrated in some force, as in Paris on September 4th. Those 4,600,000 “no” votes represent the part of the population which does not float as a consequence of this or that political pressure or circumstance.
On the contrary, those (especially Socialists and Communists) who have voted left since the Liberation and who said “yes” to de Gaulle on September 28th, are those who have been carried along by circumstances, by immediate aspirations or slogans of the parties, but who have not been won over by them to the cause of socialism, and who now have been thrown by similar aspirations and past disillusions into the arms of the reaction and dictatorship.
 
“Humiliated In Their National Pride ...”
In his own way Servin, wanting to defend the policy of his party, made a striking expose of it.
Significant [...] is the result of the plebiscite in departments like the Meuse and others, where the party made considerable gains in 1956 thanks to its fight against the CED and revengeful German rearming.
Servin insisted, just as the Communist Party has not ceased doing for many years, upon the “national character” of his party’s policy, in opposition to a “policy of unconditionally lining up with the desires of the State Department” which has compromised “national independence and grandeur.” Then he observed that “for millions of Frenchmen humiliated in their national pride by the servility of preceding governments, de Gaulle has appeared as the guarantor of national grandeur and independence.” But he did not ask himself why, among those millions of Frenchmen, almost one and a half millions, after placing their trust in the French CP, are turning toward de Gaulle.
In reality, into the vote of September 28th there enters much less humiliated “national pride” than Thorez thinks, and – as we shall see further on – a great desire for a change in all the conditions of existence. To the degree, however, to which a petty-bourgeois part of the population had been won over to the French CP by means of patriotic chauvinist arguments about national grandeur, and as this party has done nothing – quite the contrary – to educate these people in the direction of socialism, it is completely normal that at a given moment they saw in de Gaulle a better champion of “national pride” than Thorez and Duclos.
 
Imperialist Contamination
This “national” propaganda has served Gaullism all the more in that the leadership of the French CP also has a “national” attitude towards the struggle of the colonial peoples. It never stops talking about the “national interests” to be defended in the countries colonized by French imperialism. At this juncture, the “national interests” in Algeria and elsewhere are, as Marx and Lenin have taught, the interests of the ruling class, i.e., French capitalism. The only interests of the French working class in these regions of the globe lie in the victory of the colonized peoples and in the defeat of French imperialism. In order to defend the “national interests” in Algeria and elsewhere, electors won over to the French CP by its chauvinist propaganda in the past have finally given their preference to de Gaulle.
Thorez devoted a considerable part of his speech in the Central Committee to condemning the methods that the FLN has used in France, implying that they were responsible for a large number of “yes” votes. Thorez was trying to keep as far away from the FLN as possible, as if that would prevent the bourgeoisie from setting up provocations or manufacturing counterfeits as it may need them at the proper moment. But Thorez’s speech was a new blow that will weaken the already slight enough sense of solidarity of the French working class with the Algerian revolution. Thorez gave great lessons in Marxism to the revolutionary Algerians, and reminded them of the Bolsheviks’ condemnation of the Social-Revolutionaries; but he forgot to make a far more valid comparison, that with the Resistance under the German occupation. In his speech Thorez permitted himself to say that part of the working class is “contaminated” by imperialist ideology – which is true enough, but ... he contributed to it and is still doing so. Concerning the past policy of the French CP, we refer our readers to the declaration made by the French Federation of the FLN on this subject. [1] Concerning the present, what else does this attack of Thorez mean if not that the Algerians do not have the right to attack French imperialism on its own territory? Is that not a contamination by imperialist ideology, simply by a capitulation to the opinion of French petty-bourgeois who have not been disturbed by the tortures committed in Algeria against the Algerian people, but who get indignant about anything in France itself that might upset their digestion?
 
The Desire for a Change
The most important of the reasons furnished by Servin for the extent of the “yes” votes is “the will among our people for a real change,” to which is added “the unquestionable discredit of a parliamentarism which appears in the eyes of the great masses to be the cause of the miseries of the country and of the people.” We completely agree on this point. The masses were disgusted with the Fourth Republic. But Servin does not ask himself why, under those conditions, masses who previously put their trust in the PCF no longer trusted in it to ensure this change.
It might indeed seem to be surprising that the masses’ desire for a change did not show itself in a way that profited a party which calls itself communist, i.e. whose basic programme is that of the greatest and most profound change that can be brought to humanity; a party which swears only by the Soviet Union where gigantic changes have been accomplished in the course of the 40 years since the October Revolution. How explain that the masses’ desire for a change was not demonstrated in favor of this party, and even turned away from it in favor of a general who sees France in the world as she was two or three centuries ago?
 
”To Slant French Policy ...”
The explanation is rather simple. The French Communist Party hailed the Five-Year Plans and the Sputnik, but the policy it proposed for France was at most a reformist policy. There could be no question for this party, at least since the Liberation, of fighting for socialism in France; one had to be satisfied with petitions, parliamentary proceedings, and pressures – the whole constituting “a line which had chosen as its goal the slanting of French policy,” as Servin himself defined it. And lastly, it is perhaps useful to recall that at the Central Committee session following de Gaulle’s coming to power, in June of this year, the leadership of the French Communist Party limited the slogans just to the “defense of the Republic” and condemned proposals to put forward the idea of a Constituent Assembly, of a programme, as proposals likely to “divide the left.”
Thus we reach one of the profound reasons for the loss of numerous workers’ votes, including – as Servin recognized – “in the most wretched areas.” A very large number of poor people, of wretched people, have in fact for many years expressed their dissatisfaction with their lot and their aspirations for a better life by voting for the French CP , which appeared to them as the party capable of bringing about great changes, great transformations, as in the USSR. And then, as the years went by, they perceived that this party talked a lot but that instead of trying to bring about a great social change, it wanted only to “slant” French policy: those masses, not highly educated politically, have certainly not used this term of Servin’s, but they have understood very well the substance of what it is expressing. “To slant” means to modify slightly within the framework of the regime, not to overthrow it. And so it is not surprising that after all, at the moment of a great social clash, hundreds of thousands of non-politicized people abandoned this party and let themselves be taken in by a general who was not talking about “slanting” policy, but about sweeping away the whole “system.” For these masses the French CP no longer appeared as a factor of change, while de Gaulle appeared to them as capable of bringing about the change they were looking for.
 
It’s the Fault of the Others!
If we leave aside some incidental reasons furnished by Servin, such as the Hungarian events (it was not far from being Rajk’s and Nagy’s fault that the French CP lost so many votes), another reason alleged as major was the “division of the left.” Servin attributed this to the anti-communist propaganda of the bourgeoisie and to the persistence of anti-communism on the part of the other formations that appealed to vote “no.”
Once more, for the leadership of the French CP, everything bad that happens is the fault of others. This is at best a simplistic argument. Does Servin believe that some day capital will renounce its anti-communism? Does he also think that capital will not find any more Guy Mollets at its disposal? Does he even think that the sincere reformists – and there are such people – will abjure their reformism? In this case, the role of the Communist Party would be very simple indeed. The value of a genuine communist leadership must show itself precisely in its capacity to promote a genuine united-front policy which brings the masses into action and thus to force at least a part of the Social-Democratic leadership to follow the current of the masses. Now the leadership of the French CP was more and more incapable of ensuring such a policy. The leadership of the French CP had lost the confidence of a considerable proportion of the Communist voters; how can it be supposed that at the same time it could exercise an attraction on those who previously were more or less hostile towards it? The leadership of the French CP must lay the fault at its own door if the manoeuvres of the bourgeoisie and of its agents such as Guy Mollet succeeded.
Immediately after September 28th, Servin wanted to justify once more the March 12th 1956 vote for the special powers, under the pretext of driving the Socialists into a corner, to see whether Guy Mollet would respect his January 2nd 1956 contract with the voters. Worse confusion cannot be imagined. The contract of January 2nd was for peace in Algeria. The project voted on March 12th was “pacification,” i.e., war in Algeria. On March 12th there was not “division” but “union” of the left, Communists included, on the parliamentary plane, to give the army a free hand in Algeria. The united front on the contrary would have required at that moment a policy in the direction of the masses, calling them boldly to action against the war of Algeria. It would especially have required unreserved support to those demonstrations of draftees which were occurring over the whole territory of France. But at that moment the leadership of the French CP – perhaps in order to permit Guy Mollet to respect his contract? – denounced the demonstrations as the work of provocateurs. So what was then contract of the leadership of the French CP with the voters and how was it kept? It would not be surprising if, among the “yes” voters, there are alas not a few young men who participated in those draftees’ demonstrations and who were in this way left to themselves or rather abandoned to the propaganda of the general staff.
 
The Correct Line and Bad Contacts
Servin went ahead nevertheless with a certain self-criticism, a very cautious one, in the following terms:
It is an unquestionable fact that almost one and a half million Communist electors voted “yes” and we had not felt it coming – not to mention the sentiments animating non-Communist layers. In a word, that means that our contacts with the masses sometimes are not what might be desired, and that this was the case during the campaign of the plebiscite. It seems that we do not always know how to listen to what is going on among the masses.
Starting from there, Servin went on to give good advice to the members of the party – to make the trade unions, the Peace Movement, the Tenants’ Federation, etc etc.. function – as if the defeat of September 28th were due just to incapacity in this field.
But first of all, what allows Servin to say that relations with the masses are only sometimes not what might be desired, as during the referendum campaign? Servin dared say: “We do not always know how to listen to what is going on among the masses.” But if the members of the Political Bureau and of the Central Committee knew how to listen even just to the rank-and-file militants of their own party instead of bludgeoning them up and down and sideways with the “always correct line,” they would have known for quite a while that the contacts of their party with the masses are even less than might be desired. For several years already, while the number of votes of the French CP still remained steady, the party was incapable of mobilizing the masses for an action on its own slogans – not to speak of the no-longer successful petitions, the skeletonic public meetings, the absenteeism from cell meetings, and diminishing membership.
Contacts with the masses had deteriorated a long time ago; that is a fact which every serious militant of the French CP has observed. But that raises the question for a party which, like the French CP, has had the confidence of the majority of the working class since the end of the war: just what is the difference between its line and its relations with the masses? We confess that we are unable to figure out just where this difference might be found. A party already possessing the confidence of the masses must find the slogans capable of mobilizing them: that is what a correct line is. Given the differences between a referendum and elections, it is not excluded that the candidates of the French CP win back votes in the November elections; but we can be sure that, in the best of cases, the recovery will be slight. In reality, September showed that the contacts of the French CP with the masses were bad, and not only at that moment; it produced with the force of the figures, the result, the final upshot, of the whole policy of the French CP since the Liberation, i.e., the condemnation of this “always correct line.”
 
The Relationship of Forces
Servin’s account began with a picture of the steady worsening of the situation since the Communists were eliminated from the government in 1947. If Servin is asked how this could happen, he answers that there was a big plot fomented by the Americans and carried out by Auriol and Ramadier. But in January 1946, it was de Gaulle who had to withdraw from the government; and this fact Servin explains by the strength of the workers. He even stated that at the Liberation there was “a relationship of forces favorable to the working class.” (It was not exactly that which was brought up in 1952 for fighting Marty and expelling him from the French CP.) But Servin forgot to say what contributed to a deterioration in the relationship of forces. The bourgeoisie, the Socialist leaders such as Ramadier? Once more, they were only playing their part. A mass party cannot attribute its setbacks and defeats’ as above all due to others, to enemies. The servants of the bourgeoisie were able to play their roles more easily because they were helped by the leadership of the French CP: was it not Thorez who, at Ivry in 1945, made an appeal to the workers to turn in their arms, to dissolve their committees, because there should be “only one police, only one army, only one state”? The army of Salan and Massu, the police of Soustelle and Dides, the state of de Gaulle ...
 
Sic the Oppositionals!
The keynote of the whole report of Servin was defensive – the CC resolution even feels the need of justifying, and what is more, in pitiable terms, “the existence and the activity” of a Communist Party! – except when he began to speak of the oppositionals inside the party. The “inefficiency” of the party should not be brought into question, because this was a “convenient theme, both for absolving the Socialist Party from its responsibilities and sometimes also for putting one’s feet in one’s slippers.” Why? Nobody knows. On the contrary, everyone can easily understand that, if someone starts by becoming aware of the party’s inefficiency, he can, without any intellectual subtlety, go on to examine the value of the party’s policy and the value of its leadership.
It is probable that the leadership of the French CP still has a sufficiently strong apparatus to keep control of the party, but at what a cost. We repeat: the defeat of September 28th is not episodical; it is not only a defeat of the CP’s policy; it is also a defeat of the toiling masses. And a continuation of the policy followed by the French CP, if it does not run up against a strong opposition from its rank-and-file militants, can only lead the French CP, and under the present circumstances the working class as well, to new defeats and even to a catastrophe.
 
“New Perspectives”
“The result of the plebiscite,” Servin declared, “cannot fail to produce a shock, which might be negative if we do not give legitimate reasons for confidence, if we do not show new perspectives.”
New perspectives? But would that not be a new line? Don’t worry – or, on the contrary, worry more than ever: the new perspectives differ from the old ones in very few things, just a pinch more of opportunism.
It is obviously easy for Servin to say that de Gaulle will run up against great difficulties in Algeria, in Negro Africa, and in the economic field: everybody knows that, from one end to the other of the French and international political chess-board. The changes which he will introduce will not be to the liking of the toiling masses who voted for him on September 28th. But that does not mean that the masses will easily turn against him and that, after they said “yes,” it will be enough for them to be simply requested to say “no” to make de Gaulle and the dictatorship go away. There will have to be a policy – that is to say, slogans, a perspective, means for fighting, and organizational forms to rally the discontent of the masses and at the given moment to transform it into action.
Slogans? Obviously there are in the programme of the French CP slogans for the defense of the masses’ standard of living and of democratic liberties. But already there is a retreat on the question of Algeria and Negro Africa: the “right to independence” is scarcely mentioned, what is particularly emphasized is the “new relationship” between France and those countries which are not yet independent. On the international plane there is the eternal jawing about relaxation ,of tension, disarmament, and other things that are illusions in the present world.
But it is above all on the plane of political prospects that the new perspectives resemble the old ones. The masses want a change. The French CP promises them, as in the past, “the renewal of democracy,” “a strong and stable republican government.” To justify the continuation of a policy of class collaboration with the Mendès-France wing of the bourgeoisie, the CC resolution claims that the loyal support given by the Communists to the People’s Front government in 1936, the participation of the Communists in the government until 1947, brought the people their greatest social conquests in a quarter of a century.
This is putting things really upside down. All the social conquests were obtained by the action of the masses (the occupation of the factories in 1936, the Resistance and the movements at the Liberation). In both cases the bourgeoisie used the workers’ leaderships (Socialist and Communist) to dam up the movement of the masses, to prevent them from flooding beyond the limits of the capitalist regime, and to re-establish capitalist order. After that, the capitalists drove out of the government the ministers of the workers’ parties who had finished their chores; they even liquidated bourgeois democracy in 1939 and in 1958 because it does not permit the capitalists to direct the country as suits their convenience.
The leadership of the French CP proposes quite simply to recommence the operation a third time in the future, by coming to an agreement from now on with the bourgeois candidate assigned for this purpose. Mendès-France says openly that the administration of de Gaulle contains the greatest dangers for the capitalist regime and he is presenting himself as a reserve bourgeois leadership.
We are here touching on the crucial problem. It is evident that the loss of bourgeois democracy will sooner or later awaken in the masses a nostalgia for democratic liberties, and it is indispensable to put forward democratic slogans. But within what context should this be done? The experiences of France since 1934 are merely added to all the other experiences between the two wars (Germany, Austria, Spain, Italy). When, in the era of declining capitalism, the old bourgeois democracies cannot continue, the capitalists turn to the “strong state.” As for the non-politicized masses, their disappointment with bourgeois democracy makes them turn – for lack of a socialist solution boldly put forward by the workers’ parties – towards “providential men” who are at the service of capital and who practise dictatorial and reactionary policies. This question of perspectives will serve as a touchstone both for those in the French CP who are opposed to its leadership, and to the militants of the new Autonomous Socialist Party (SFIO).
The 4,600,000 “no” votes represent, as we said above, that part of the toiling population that has been won for socialism, independently of the different conceptions and tactics which might divide them. It is a quite considerable force, on condition that it be really placed at the service of socialism. The only perspective which today can stimulate those opposed to the regime and permit them to get back the ear of the masses as the regime of de Gaulle gradually shows all its aspects, is precisely to say that the mistakes of the past will not be repeated, that the leadership of the state and of the economy will not be given back to other capitalist groupings, that capitalism will be expropriated, and that the construction of a socialist society will be begun – a society which will, naturally, not be in the Stalinist image where liberties and rights are concerned.
 
How to Fight de Gaulle?
The defeat of September 28th has rendered the leaders of the French CP more timorous than ever. “The popular masses, taught by their own experience and enlightened by the French Communist Party [...] will soon discover the real character of this Gaullist policy ,and will know how to find the means to fulfill their aspirations by democratic paths,” declares the resolution of the Political Bureau approved by the CC. So it is not the French CP that is showing them these ways; it is the masses themselves who are finding them? Well, we did not know that the leadership of the French CP had such confidence in the spontaneity of the masses. But let us pass over this point and see a little what these “democratic ways” will be. Thorez, in his speech in the Central Committee, specified: We shall not let ourselves be turned away from our 1946 theses, confirmed ten years later by our XIVth Congress, on the possibility of peaceful roads to pass over to socialism, and on the role that can be played by a genuine parliament, as the expression of popular sovereignty and based on the masses.
The French parliament has shown only that it was an excellent instrument for passing “legally” from bourgeois democracy to military dictatorship. Is it on the future puppet parliament of the Fifth Republic that the Thorez leadership is relying for re-establishing bourgeois democracy? Is it by petitions that it hopes to settle accounts with the paratroopers, the police clubs, the concentration camps established as a sort of house-warming for the new constitution?
The old-time democrats of the bourgeoisie’s revolutionary period had audacity quite other than that of Thorez and Servin. They did not hesitate to say that the revolutionary struggle, the insurrection, was the supreme democratic means, the means of a people against tyranny. But from the Jacobins to the present workers’ leaders, what a long way it is! And from Marx, who saw in force “the great midwife of society,” those so-called Bolsheviks have gone over to Bernstein who, at the beginning of the century, claimed already to have found “painless childbirth” of societies by parliamentary ways.
If one wants really to fight against de Gaulle, it is necessary to begin by educating the militants and the masses in a spirit of revolutionary struggle for power.
 
For a New Revolutionary Leadership
The September 28th referendum is the sharpest condemnation of a leadership which twelve years ago had won the confidence of the majority of the working class and which through its opportunist policy has repelled one and a half million of its voters towards a Bonapartism of a most grotesque form. Just when part of the Socialist leaders are breaking with Guy Mollet, when there is thus being manifested the very beginning of a renewal of the workers’ movement, the leadership of the French CP demonstrates more than ever its inability to engage in self-criticism, to grasp even to a slight extent the responsibilities it bears in the defeat. It sinks still more into lining up with the bourgeois politicians who are getting ready to be the Newfoundlands of capitalism when the Fifth Republic goes down. This policy is fatal for the workers’ movement. Before possibly being able to bring about a precarious “renewal of democracy,” it will permit the Gaullist regime to beat down the workers’ movement all the more brutally, to decimate the organizations, to destroy a great number of workers’ cadres, precisely by still more disorienting the militants and failing to give them any realistic policy for fighting against this regime.
Whatever “the leadership of the French CP may do, this defeat will produce a crisis among the Communist militants. In the report of Servin there is not the slightest reply to the numerous agonizing questions they are asking themselves. This crisis is necessary and will be salutary if the Communist militants make the indispensable effort to return to the policy of Lenin, to eliminate a bankrupt leadership, and to create the conditions for democratic discussion in the workers’ movement necessary for the renascence of a new leadership to ensure the counter-attack.
 
2. De Gaulle’s Electoral Manoeuvres
The September 28th referendum strengthened de Gaulle’s position in France, but it did not settle anything whatever in Algeria; while in Negro Africa the position taken by Sekou Touré and the vote of French Guinea upset de Gaulle’s plans and created a situation that is still far from being unraveled.
In the first place, de Gaulle wants to use his success for the coming legislative elections, set for November 23rd and 30th, and for reaching a solution in Algeria. The danger for him here was a big victory for the pro-fascist right that claims to represent him, for this would shift the coming Assembly (however unimportant its place in things may be) too far to the right. In order to be the “arbiter,” he must arbitrate between people of opposed viewpoints: he wants to keep in his government Pflimlin and Guy Mollet as well as Soustelle and Pinay. The danger took a double form: in France itself an election in which the consolidated right would eliminate not only a large number of Communist deputies (which was also de Gaulle’s aim) but also many of Guy Mollet’s candidates; in Algeria an election under the control of the Public Safety Committees which would produce 70 “ultra” deputies, the men of Soustelle-de Serigny, and even still more “ultra” ones.
To obviate these dangers, the solution in France was quite simple: it was enough to institute a single-name ballot with two ballotings, which would favor what are called the “notables,” i.e., men having local positions, who have been elected for years on end, and would keep big political shifts extremely limited. To make the operation even surer, a gerrymandering of election districts was undertaken.
For Algeria, something quite different was needed. At the beginning of October de Gaulle made a speech at Constantine announcing a “five-year programme” for Algeria. In it the most dazzling promises were made about everything except land questions; financially, the war in Algeria should not be continued and the metropolis should devote to Algeria the capital normally invested at home. Even if a sight-draft were written against the future profits of Sahara oil, the demagogy was a bit thick, and could not make people forget that for Algerians there is first of all a political problem, that of their independence, and that it was not going to be solved by electing 70 ultras and “beni-oui-ouis” [equivalents of “Uncle Toms”].
And so de Gaulle decided to break up the Public Safety Committee which, created on May 13th, had continued, since his accession to power on June 1st, to exercise a sort of dual power in Algeria. To do this, he ordered the army officers to leave this committee. General Salan, who holds power in Algeria, was trying to get de Gaulle to modify his decision, but de Gaulle forestalled him by publishing it. The army officers yielded. In the Public Safety Committee, one part of the ultras tried to organize manifestations (general strike, demonstration in the Forum), but it all fizzled out like a damp squib. Thus once more it was shown that the May 13th coup could not have succeeded had it not been for the participation of the army.
De Gaulle also decided that the elections in Algeria should be “free” and that the army should stand aside from the election campaign. It is probable that de Gaulle means this decision seriously, for he would like, through the elections, to find “valid interlocutors”; for that purpose, it is rather more than likely that he has had indirect contacts with the provisional Algerian government so that the latter would permit certain Algerians to run. Even admitting that no obstacles were put in the way of de Gaulle’s intentions by the Algerian government (which is not at all certain), there are obstacles on the French side. De Gaulle has obtained from the French command the withdrawal of the officers from the Public Safety Committee. But bonds continue to exist, bonds which, albeit less official, are none the less real – all the more so in that it is not the members of the little fascist groups who are the real political brains. The men who count are Soustelle and de Serigny. They immediately understood that politically de Gaulle must not be publicly opposed; but they have plenty of means of intervening in the elections to cross up de Gaulle’s plans, and the principal means at their disposal is an important part of the army chiefs in Algeria.
It remains to be seen what de Gaulle’s manoeuvre will produce in the coming elections in Algeria; meanwhile, it had a considerable political effect in France: it dumbfounded everybody. The right is falling into step, while the aggressive democrats who voted “no” on September 28th now present the spectacle of saluting de Gaulle as the man who is going to make peace in Algeria. Even l’Humanité said that the whole country approves de Gaulle’s decisions. There can be no doubt that under these conditions political apathy is going to spread even further among the broad masses – which will free de Gaulle’s hands even more. The defeat of May 13th has not yet borne all its fruits.

Footnote
1. See The French Communist Party and the Algerian Revolution in Fourth International, no. 2, Spring 1958.
 

re Frank: In France - Economic Crisis and the Strikes 2 (July 1931)




P. Frank   |  In France

Trotskyist Writers   |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
In France
Economic Crisis and the Strikes
(July 1931)

In the International of Labor, The Militant, Vol. IV No. 16, 25 July 1931, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

(Continued from last issue)
The compulsory contributions of the workers to social insurance marked the first wage decreases. The party and the C.G.T.U. finally issued the correct slogan “against the workers’ contribution”, after a series of vacillations, during which they sometimes demanded the struggle against the whole social insurance law, or else the creation of insurance treasuries by the trade unions for the purpose of carrying out the law. These vacillations, together with the policy of the “third period” hurt the revolutionary organizations tremendously, and when they finally issued the slogan “Against the workers’ contribution”, they no longer found any strong echo in the masses. In the North, the influence exercized by the reformists through the communal administrations, cooperatives, sport leagues, workers’ singing societies, etc., is very extensive. They came forward as the most zealous agitators for the law which they had themselves demanded with a great vocal display. In order to put an end to the dissatisfaction which arose as a result of the withholding of five percent of the wage by the bosses for the compulsory insurance contribution, the reformist organizations of the North raised the demand for a wage increase of one-fourth of a franc per hour (about 1 cent), that is, they accepted basically the payment of contributions by the workers. The great majority of the workers took up the struggle for one-fourth of a franc “wage increase”. The C.P.F. and the C.G.T.U., in spite of the relatively favorable conditions, did not understand how to establish the united front, and instead they issued the slogan of “one-half of a franc wage increase.” Without any hindrance from the revolutionary trade unions, the reformists had a free hand for their parliamentary horse trade with the bosses and were able after a few weeks of struggle to strangle the strike with impunity. They abandoned the one-fourth of a franc wage increase and accepted a sort of “bonus for steady work”; the workers who have worked in the factory regularly for more than six months, receive the insurance contribution as compensation from the boss each week.
 
Failure of the Communist Party
Among the workers there were splendid moods for struggle. In sharp contrast to the conduct of the reformist leaders, who constantly pushed for negotiations, they repeatedly effected an energetic resistance in conflicts with the armed forces. At no stage in the struggle did the C.P.F. and the C.G.T.C. succeed, through the realization of the united front, to draw closer to the masses of the fighters and in this manner to win over broad sections of the working class to the Communist slogans. The result was a new ebb of their influence; the revolutionary trade unions lost heavily in membership. A municipal council election in Tourcoing, fourteen days after the end of the strike, showed a substantial decline in the votes given to the party.
During the course of this, the capitalist offensive against the miners in the Northern department, that is, against two-thirds of the union membership, opened up in all fury. The announcement of an impending wage reduction evoked a strong dissatisfaction among the miners. Extremely favorable opportunities for an action were at hand. Here too the reformist influence was appreciable: out of a total of 200,000 miners about 6,000 members fall to the revolutionary and about 50,000 members to the reformist union, the latter being the strongest trade union in France. From the very first day, it should have been the task of the Communists on the basis of the generally raised demand “against any wage reductions” to set up the united front. To propose to the reformist organizations a joint action, a joint struggle – that should have been the first step that the revolutionary union should have taken. The Centrists vacillated back and forth so that the reformist trade union lenders were able to carry out their shameless treachery and consent to a wage reduction without a serious revolt of the workers replying to their crime. The miners had no confidence in the revolutionary union. Finally, the C.G.T.U. found itself compelled – so as not to discredit itself forever in the eyes of its members and sympathizers – to call the strike itself. Only a minority of 25,000 miners followed its call, a vanguard whose struggle was followed with sympathy by the whole proletariat, but which was unable to convert this sympathy into deeds. After a week, the workers had to return to the mines with a smaller wage. As to the relationship of forces between the reformist and revolutionary unions, the strike only contributed unessential changes. Yet there has rarely been a more favorable opportunity to extend the influence of the revolutionary organizations over tens of thousands of workers who had seen the betrayal of the reformists. The impotence of the C.G.T.U., however, did not permit to separate these workers from their old organizations.
In the C.P.F. as well as in the C.G.T.U., the discussion on these strike movements was prevented.
(To Be Continued)



Paris


PIERRE FRANK



 

re Frank: In France - Economic Crisis and the Strikes 1 (July 1931)




P. Frank   |  In France

Trotskyist Writers   |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
In France
Economic Crisis and the Strikes
(July 1931)

In the International of Labor, The Militant, Vol. IV No. 15, 18 July 1931, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

France is one of the last of the European countries to be gripped by the economic crisis. In possession of an absorptive internal market and at the same time a cheaply producing refining industry which opened the foreign markets to it, capitalist France looks back upon a prosperity period, which lasted into the second half of 1930. Only in the autumn of 1930 and the winter of 1931 did the crisis make itself felt heavily in France too. The development of the agrarian crisis and the price fall of finished goods threw French industry into a difficult position, whose after-effects the working class felt quickly and for a long time. Unemployment assumed a great scope, relative to French conditions: instead of the up to then prevalent shortage of labor, which led to the immigration of foreign-born workers, hundreds of thousands of workers now found themselves either thrown out of a job completely or put upon part time. At the same time, a stubborn offensive of capital set in to diminish the wages and the general standard cf living of the workers.
How did the French proletariat reply to this attack? In general, the proletariat has not yet taken up the defense energetically. Because the policy of the revolutionary organizations, the Communist party and the C.G.T.U. (red trade union center), as a result of the policy of the “third period”, caught, it in an exhausted state, the influence of bourgeois propaganda could make itself felt very strongly in broad sections of the working class. The steadily growing reformist organizations, on the other hand, endeavored to maintain the calm among the workers. The influence of bourgeois propaganda was above all expressed in strong anti-foreigner currents against the three million foreign born workers laboring in France and the half million colonial workers exploited to the bone by French capitalism. These anti-foreigner currents, abetted by the reformists, penetrated right into the circles of the revolutionary organizations. They frequently made their appearance not only in the unemployment councils formed by the C.G.T.U. and in the revolutionary trade unions, but also in the Communist party itself.
The first big struggles broke out in August and September 1930, in the period of transition between the abating prosperity and the incoming crisis. For years the French bourgeoisie was accustomed to see a meek proletariat before it. A strike of 4,000 to 5,000 workers was looked upon as very important: most of the labor conflicts were limited to a few hundred participants and slight rises in wages sufficed to send them back again. The bourgeoisie carried through the rationalization of the factories without encountering any noteworthy resistance. To consolidate the apparatus of power it introduced – under the pretext of protecting the workers against certain evils – social insurance which burdened them with a tax on wages in the form of compulsory contributions and chained them to capitalism under Draconic conditions. On July 1, 1930, the law came into force: at the same moment, a ferment set in throughout the country which finally broke out openly in August in the North of France in a movement which embraced close to 200,000 textile and metal workers. Some smaller movements in other parts of the country (for example, in the Lower Seine department) flared up only to be extinguished again. The labor struggles in the North lasted for weeks.
(To Be Continued)



Paris


PIERRE FRANK



 

re Frank: In France - Economic Crisis and the Strikes (July 1931)




P. Frank   |  Trotskyist Writers   |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
In France
Economic Crisis and the Strikes
(July 1931)

In the International of Labor, The Militant, Vol. IV No. 15, 18 July 1931, p. 2 & Vol. IV No. 16, 25 July 1931, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Part 1

Part 2
 

e Frank: Report on the Colonial Revolution (October 1957)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Report on the Colonial Revolution
Presented by Comrade Pierre Frank
(October 1957)

Presented to the Fifth Congress of the Fourth International, October 1957.
From Fourth International (Paris), Vol. 1 No. 1, Winter 1958, pp. 27–32.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The colonial revolution, the movement of the colonial peoples to free themselves from the imperialist yoke, was the dominant reality in the world during the years which immediately followed the period of the Second World War. It is only now that a factor of equally capital importance is added to the steadily continuing colonial revolution: the political revolution beginning in the workers’ states still under the yoke of the bureaucracy.
For more than a dozen years, revolutionary movements in colonial and semi-colonial countries have never ceased to shake the capitalist world. They have won decisive victories. The revolutionary tide continues to rise on all the continents which were colonized.
The colonial revolution has led revolutionary Marxists to a complete re-evaluation of their previous perspectives on the progress of the world revolution. In fact, from the first victory of the revolution, from October 1917, until the years immediately following the Second World War, revolutionary Marxists, that is to say, the Third International under Lenin’s and Trotsky’s leadership, then the Fourth International, had based their orientations on a different perspective which was as follows: the revolution started in the Soviet Union would extend itself and triumph in the West.
We certainly did not underestimate the revolutionary movements in the East. We can find in Lenin’s and Trotsky’s works phrases envisaging the possibility of victories of the revolution in the East, but these were merely possible eventualities. – The revolutionary Marxist strategy was mainly directed toward the West, toward Europe. The defeat of the second Chinese Revolution in 1927 did not make us give up the struggle for reform of the Communist International, because the centre of gravity of the workers’ movement still remained in Europe. We had been educated with the perspective of the German revolution, centre of the European revolution, centre of the world revolution. The German labor movement was the centre of the world labor movement, and it was only after its defeat that we moved on from the struggle for reform within the Third International to the struggle for the Fourth International. Even after the years of fascism, at the end of the Second World War, it was still on the revolutionary upsurge in Europe that we were essentially centred.
The march of events has, however, followed quite another road: the world revolution which won its first victory in the Soviet Union has first of all made its way through the countries which today we call underdeveloped, before its triumph in those countries where capitalism is the most developed. This is an event which has been much exploited by all sorts of revisionists in their fight against Marxism. But Marxism has already run into many others and is none the worse for it. In reality, Marxism is the only instrument which permits precisely to analyze, to understand, and to orient ourselves amid the extremely complex events of these last few years since the end of the Second World War.
The fundamental crisis of capitalism following upon the First then the Second World War has led to a considerable weakening of the capitalist system. At the end of the Second World War, confronted by an extremely intense revolutionary crisis, capitalism was confronted by a very serious choice. Unable to make a stand with equal strength on all fronts, it deliberately concentrated its forces on the European Metropolitan countries and kept minor forces in Asia. It was necessary for it to maintain the European bastions at all costs. Thanks above all to the betrayals of the Stalinist and reformist leaderships, it has succeeded in establishing a certain equilibrium – unstable, still, a certain equilibrium nevertheless – in the principal European countries.
On the other hand, in Asia where capitalism kept only limited forces and where the native bourgeoisie was also very weak, the colonial revolution in its march forward marked up a most decisive victory in China. Independently of the policy of the Chinese Communist Party, the uprising of the Chinese peasant masses was so powerful that it finally carried along in the struggle the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. And it is the capitalist regime which was swept away.
Imperialism had scarcely regained a certain equilibrium, a sort of stability, in Europe, when it realized that it had lost quite decisive positions in Asia. It is then that it intervened, with the Korean War, in the attempt to halt the advance of the revolution in the Far East.
We have thus arrived at a situation which did not at all enter into the perspectives which we had before the war. The increased decline of capitalism, the very prolonged delay of the European revolution, and the colonial revolution’s marking up decisive victories – such is the picture, which has opened a new perspective, a much more concrete one, of the progress of the world revolution. At present, we witness the continuation of the colonial revolution and the first steps made by the political revolution in the workers’ states. The most probable perspective now is that the development of both is preparing the outbreak of the proletarian revolution in Europe, while the revolution in the U.S.A. will constitute the final link for the victory of the world revolution.
We do not present such a picture and such perspectives in order to draw a historical fresco. This is a question of primordial importance for such an organization as ours, which has set itself the task of guiding and leading the world revolution, taken as a whole; and this task is a concrete perspective for us, not in a distant future but in a relatively near future. It is a very important question to know where to concentrate our forces, to determine the objectives of the world revolution in this and that sector.
It is also useful to recall this re-evaluation that we have made in order to engage in a critical examination of ideas, conceptions, and writings of the past, so that we can judge them in the light of the perspective we had at that time and to understand why certain things appear to us mistaken today and to what extent they were mistaken. All we wrote, all we put forward, in the period preceding the Second World War and at the end of that war was conceived and written according to our previous perspective. We cannot engage in a serious critical examination by taking up only this or that idea, this or that phrase; we must place them in the overall perspective which existed prior to this situation.
For instance, some comrades have wondered whether the theory of the permanent revolution, which has been so well confirmed on the whole, did not however reveal certain lacunae, whether it might not be necessary to render it more flexible, and whether there might not have been some errors committed on this subject. For example, it is a very important fact that in China the proletariat did not intervene directly as the leadership of the revolution, and the proletarian leadership, was assured only indirectly through the leadership of workers’ party which furthermore did all it could to prevent the Chinese proletariat from acting. Another remark made by some comrades is that though the in a series of colonial and semi-colonial countries, is a certain industrialization which is not at all negligible, and which has been brought about under a bourgeois leadership. Another remark made by some comrades is that though the imperialist metropolitan countries have lost a certain number of colonies, this has not had immediately catastrophic effects on the capitalist system, since we have in the last few years witnessed a quite extraordinary economic “boom.” Lastly, the example of India has raised many questions among comrades. India obtained, under the leadership of the native bourgeoisie, an independence which was not merely formal, and she is playing a quite important role on the world scale. But we had maintained vigorously before the war that the Indian bourgeoisie would not be able to lead India to independence; we can quote quite characteristic sentences by Trotsky on this subject. The question is therefore raised: did we not underestimate the possibilities of the native bourgeoisie?
We must review all these observations, examine them one by one, but – as I have just said – we cannot make such an examination isolatedly. We have to situate these things in relation to the perspective we had formerly, in relation to the conditions existing at that time. For instance, in the case of China, there is nothing in common between the situation during the years 1925–27 and the situation of 1946–47 and afterwards. I have mentioned the withdrawal of a great part of the forces of imperialism from the Far East. Furthermore, the Chinese bourgeoisie had been considerably weakened during the years of war against Japan. Besides, the Chinese Red Armies received very serious armament. We were faced with completely exceptional circumstances, in which the factor of the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party and its policy played a much less important role in the overall picture, not to speak of course of the extreme weakness, from a numerical point of view, of the Chinese proletariat in the whole population, which remained constant throughout the revolution. It is because of these exceptional conditions that we say that the example of China is quite exceptional, that it does not permit of diminishing at all the essential notion of the leading role of the proletariat in the revolution in under-developed countries.
Concerning the problems of the economy, i.e. the development of industrialization and the economic relations between the metropolitan countries and the colonial countries, I would rather leave this question to the report on political and economic perspectives in which it will be more broadly developed. In this report, you will find the explanation on the particular conditions, the reason why the loss of a certain number of colonies has not had catastrophic consequences for imperialism. But I believe it is quite clear, from the violence and the vigor of the imperialists’ resistance in the Middle East, that they understand the importance of the struggle and they are fighting in a situation which is for them extremely vital. This is much more decisive for them than what they have already lost.
Let us come to the example of India which is certainly by far the most important. It is quite sure that in 1948 we underestimated the degree of independence secured by India at that time. That is very clear when we reread the document of our Second World Congress on the colonial movements of that period.
What is the origin of this mistake that we committed? It is quite true, I repeat, that we oriented ourselves above all on more rapid victories of the revolution in Europe, which would have had very important repercussions on the development of the Indian proletariat. It would subsequently have made great progress and the Indian bourgeoisie would not have had so much room for manoeuvre as it in fact has had.
In this connection it is not a bad idea briefly to take up again certain theoretical problems, because I do not think that the question of national independence constitutes an essential part of the theory of the permanent revolution. This appears quite clearly when we retrace it back to its source, that is, when we examine the conditions in which Trotsky developed the theory of the “permanent revolution,” and re-read his principal writing on this subject, his book The Permanent Revolution.
Trotsky formulated his theory of the permanent revolution in relation to Czarist Russia, which was not only not a colonial or semi-colonial country, but on the contrary was an imperialism of a very particular type. The problem raised was not that of independence, but the following problem. Russia was an economically underdeveloped country, which had not yet solved the democratic tasks, in the first place the agrarian revolution. It was the tasks of the agrarian revolution that Trotsky put forward both in 1905 and in his 1928 book on the permanent revolution. The basic idea which Trotsky developed in relation to Czarist Russia and which was taken up again later concerning other economically backward countries, is as follows. The bourgeoisie of these countries, he says, is not able to fulfill the role played by the bourgeoisies of the modern capitalist countries who accomplished the revolutions of the XVIIth, XVIIIth, and XIXth Centuries. It is not capable of resolutely taking the leadership of the nation in order to fulfill thoroughly, right through to the end, the tasks completed by its predecessors. It is not able to do this, because it is attached by a thousand ties to imperialism, to landed property, and besides it is too weak and it sees rising up before it the menace of the native proletariat which forms an integral part of the world proletariat. Trotsky never said that the bourgeoisie would not undertake any struggle at all, but only that it would not carry this struggle through to the end; that it could not succeed in creating a stable bourgeois regime as did the bourgeoisies of the European countries in the XVIIth, XVIIIth, and XIXth Centuries; and that, under the new historical conditions, it is up to the proletariat, despite its numerical weakness, to take the leadership of the nation in solving the democratic tasks. The proletariat, in seizing the power, would of course not be able to limit itself to mere democratic tasks and would begin the tasks of the socialist construction of society. These few words recall the essence, the basis, of the theory of the permanent revolution. The principal chapter of Trotsky’s book on this subject is entitled: “The permanent revolution is the transformation of the nation under the leadership of the proletariat.”
The permanent revolution does not mean that the native bourgeoisie is not able to conduct a certain struggle against imperialism, that colonial society cannot experience any development under the regime of this native bourgeoisie. It signifies essentially that the native bourgeoisie cannot accomplish the entirety of the democratic tasks and, unlike its forerunners of the last centuries, it cannot install a regime by which capitalism would acquire a stability for a whole historical period. It is from this point of view that we must look at the situation in India, examine what has happened in India since the proclamation of independence.
In this period, the independence of India has become a sure fact. Yet the whole development which we have witnessed is not owing to the intrinsic force of the Indian bourgeoisie, but to the concurrence of most particular circumstances, above all on the international plane. We can see the circumstances that have been in favor of the Indian bourgeoisie. It has received support and aid from both the East and the West. I am not for the moment discussing the importance of this aid. In spite of these circumstances, the Indian bourgeoisie has not solved the democratic tasks; and Nehru’s regime, the regime of the Congress, is now approaching a new stage which, according to all well-informed observers, is full of dangers and will be decisive for the stability of the regime of the Indian bourgeoisie.
It must be noted first that the Indian bourgeoisie has not solved the problem of national unity. On the contrary, it acquired its independence only at the cost of an enormous amputation – the creation of Pakistan which is itself a country composed of detached pieces; and it is quite certain that the question of some form of reunification of India will be posed again on the order of the day. As to the agrarian question, it cannot be said that the Indian bourgeoisie has settled this question, it cannot be said even that it has tackled it. In the past period, Nehru has above all on the one hand exploited international conditions, and on the other played a Bonapartist role in Indian society, exploiting in particular the prestige acquired in the course of past struggles which were in fact conducted mainly under the leadership of the Congress Party.
On the economic plane, the new regime, the regime of the Congress, has not brought the masses very appreciable improvements, and it also offers them very few perspectives for the future. There are comparisons which one can or cannot make by means of statistics; but the masses make comparisons in their own way without looking at charts. More particularly, the Indian masses, like all masses in Asia, make their comparison with the development of China. It is due to the conditions of this comparison that Nehru proposed a second five-year plan destined to give hopes to the masses, to present to them a different road toward socialism, an Indian road toward socialism, a sort of cheap solution which would spare them all kinds of sufferings experienced by the Chinese population.
The second Indian five-year plan was conceived in a quite audacious manner; but once they started to carry it out, they found themselves faced by an economic and financial situation implying very serious dangers which considerably compromise the carrying out of the second five-year plan. India lacks foreign exchange. It is also suffering from inflation; and today it seems that all the projects of the second five-year plan are much compromised, unless India receives enormous credits. That is why we see the Indian government today begging to left and right, or rather to East and West, for quite considerable credits. Nehru starts to behave in a very modest way toward the United States in the attempt to obtain extremely important credits.
This situation in India provokes extremely serious worries among a number of bourgeois or social-democratic observers. Let us quote only two: the American journalist, Walter Lippman, who is a very well-informed specialist on international problems, and the principal economist of the Labour Party, Balogh. They declare that, if there is not a most considerable intervention by the capitalist countries, the United States and Great Britain, if there is not really decisive aid, it will be impossible to maintain the stability of the regime in India, and they add that there will then be a danger of India’s taking the road followed by China. Lippman goes even further to say that the Syrian affair is quite a minor affair in face of all that is beginning to appear on the Indian horizon.
I believe that nobody among us has any illusions – after all the experiences we have passed through – about the possibilities for capitalism to intervene in a decisive way in such a country as India to assure the stability of its regime. By this I do. not mean that bourgeois India will not receive any aid at all; nor do I mean that things are going directly toward a development of the proletarian revolution, but I believe that we must understand: it is not the stability but the crisis of the bourgeois regime which is on the order of the day.
The conclusion that we can draw from the experience of India is that, in the years from independence up until now, what has happened has not been the manifestation of the intrinsic strength of the Indian bourgeoisie, but has been due to its possibilities of playing, in a much more prolonged way than we could have imagined, a Bonapartist role, both on the national and the international scale. There has not been stabilization; the day of reckoning is later than we thought, but it is approaching. The transformation of the nation is not being carried out, and has not been carried out, under the leadership of the bourgeoisie. There has been a number of transformations, but not a fundamental one; the deadline is approaching and the problem of the transformation of the nation raises the problem of the leadership of the proletariat.
The example of India has extraordinary significance; it is decisive for a general explanation of what the possibilities of the native bourgeoisie in a number of colonial and semi-colonial countries have seemed to be in the past few years. In each case, there exist specific and particular factors which have played a role. They are different for India and for Egypt. But in no case has the native bourgeoisie played an important role because of its own strength. It has not stabilized the nation. Its role has been out of proportion with its own forces owing to the conditions in which it was placed. Let us recall once again these conditions: a considerable weakening of capitalism, a reinforcement of the workers’ states, and a prolonged delay of the proletarian revolution in the capitalist countries, above all because of the leaderships of the working class. The tempo of revolutionary developments has been modified and slowed down, but we are unquestionably approaching, or we have already entered into, a new stage. This situation appears very clearly in India, and, by the way, this will be a question that we shall have to examine as to our tasks in the organizational part of this congress.
In the Far East there also arises the question of Indonesia. There too movements of extraordinary importance are taking place: we have already seen in the last few months the very important results of the elections, which are the sign of an unusually powerful revolutionary impulse. I think that a qualified comrade will intervene on this question in detail in the course of the discussion, and so I shall not deal with it in this report.
If we are today witnessing a new revolutionary upsurge appearing on the horizon in the Far East, especially in India and Indonesia, the colonial revolution is now at its climax, on the other hand, in the Arab world, from Casablanca to Bagdad.
The whole world knows the extreme importance of those regions where this revolution is going on, from all points of view: political, economic, and military. At that point three continents converge: Asia, Europe, and Africa. Through it passes the shortest route between Europe and the Far East. It runs all the way from the borders of the Caucasian oil fields to that point on the coast closest to the American continent. The petroleum resources of the Middle East are very well known; now announcement is made of fabulous resources in the Sahara, which lies next to North Africa. It is thus understandable why the game being played on the international scale for these regions is so extremely savage. We face a situation full of great danger for the outbreak of the Third World War. Since the Suez affair, within a year’s time, we have already had several incidents, several crises, Jordan, and now Syria; we shall certainly experience several others. To quote Foster Dulles, we are leaning “over the abyss.”
Now let us move on to the question of the revolution’s own strength in the Arab countries. These may be divided into two groups, each having a more marked unity of its own: the Middle East on the one hand, and North Africa on the other.
In the Middle East, it is Egypt which plays the leading role, and it will certainly play a more and more important role owing to the fact that it is the most industrialized country of this whole region, of all the Arab countries. This leading role is at present taken by a bourgeois leadership, that of Nasser. In his own way, and in terms which are not Marxist, Nasser has quite well described the situation which was developing and what his own conceptions were. We have several times quoted in our publications passages from Nasser’s book, The Philosophy of Revolution, in which he explains the intervention of the Egyptian officers’ corps to get rid of corrupted cliques, to transform their country into a modern state with an important economic development. After that, Nasser then explains his own observations: following the military coup d’etat which drove out King Farouk, instead of having the unanimity of the nation behind those who had carried out this coup d’etat, he saw a swarm of private aspirations and interests rise up. And he comes to the conclusion that in his country there is occurring a combination of two revolutions at once. On the one hand a revolution whose purpose is to liberate the country from the imperialist yoke; on the other hand, a social revolution in which the masses aim at greater well-being, at a new state of affairs.
In his own words – which are not Marxist terms – Nasser rediscovers what we have always said about the theory of permanent revolution, about the dual nature of revolution in under-developed countries. Of course, Nasser also describes his conception, his perspectives, his programme, which are those of a military man who wants things to be done in an orderly way. The two revolutions must not come about at the same time. First the political revolution, the liberation from the imperialist yoke. Once this one is completed, it will be decided at the top how gradually to improve the internal situation. It is very difficult to explain more clearly the conception of the present bourgeois leadership of the Egyptian revolution; it is worded quite clearly. Of course it will develop in a quite different way from what can be decided at the top.
Comrade Mischa will certainly speak on this problem of Egypt and the Middle East. He has already made an important contribution to the preparatory discussion for the Congress, all the more important in that it already outlines a programme for our movement in the Middle East. I wish to mention here only two points. In his articles, Comrade Mischa has very correctly shown the difference between Nasser’s and Peron’s attitudes toward the working-class movement. This difference is very important and very great; but I think that it is owing especially to the conditions themselves, to the fact that the workers’ movement in Argentina, unlike that in Egypt, had a great and long tradition of organization. It is probably the very logic of the struggle, the very logic of the development of the situation, which will compel Nasser also to take the working masses much more into account in the future. During the Port Said events, Nasser was bold enough to arm the masses, because the development of the workers’ movement is still very weak in Egypt. One can be sure that with the development of the situation, he will show much less daring in such situations, and that his attitude will be much more varied and complicated towards the working masses of Egypt.
Another point to which I wish to draw your attention is the organization which exists especially in Syria and Jordan, and which also engages in illegal action in Iraq. I am speaking of the Socialist Party of Arab Renascence, the Baath Party. At first sight, this party looks to me like an Arabian variety of a party of the M.N.R. type. We must study this very closely. Here is surely a political centre where Marxist currents can very well develop.
Now I come to North Africa. I will give only a few essential ideas. We shall surely have several speeches which will develop these problems. It must be so, because this is the most advanced point in the combat of the colonial revolution. It requires from us not only political support but also, as much as possible, material aid, to the revolutionary struggle which is taking place.
For years and years, the policy of French imperialism has been to try to split the three countries composing North Africa, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco. It has done this first of all with the hope of maintaining its hold on the whole of North Africa, without granting any concessions. Then it gave a little to Tunisia; it is what was called “internal autonomy.” Next, it had to give Morocco what was called “independence in interdependence”; it was obliged to bring back the sultan who had been exiled to Madagascar.
Having granted Morocco independence, it had to give it to Tunisia immediately.
Under these conditions, French imperialism thought that it could maintain its authority more than ever in Algeria, which is actually the key to all North Africa. Without Algeria’s independence, Tunisia’s and Morocco’s are rather problematical.
All the calculations of imperialism were baffled, for the insurrection began immediately in Algeria in November 1954. French imperialism is making enormous efforts to crush the Algerian revolution. It keeps half a million soldiers of the regular army there, for a population of about 8 million inhabitants. It spends 2 billion francs a day. French imperialism can practically no longer find any natives there ready to play the part of Bao-Daï and to be imperialism’s servants. At the moment, the French parliament is discussing a “framework-law” to determine a new status for Algeria. It is being discussed by all French parties. It is being presented to all the governments of the world. It cannot be presented to the Algerians, because there is not one among them all to present it to. But why is French imperialism so obstinate and why does it go on with a policy which is visibly hopeless? Algeria does not have what French bourgeois call, in their own vocabulary, “valid counter-spokesmen,” because of the composition of society in that country. It is difficult, not to say impossible, for them to go through with a political transaction resembling that which they were able to bring off in other colonies. The reign of French imperialism in Algeria since the 1830s has caused the native landowners practically to die out. There are native bourgeois, but they are few, and it is very difficult to say that they form a native bourgeois class in a structural sense. The bourgeois stratum is very limited. There is also an Algerian petty-bourgeoisie, but it is extremely poor. It cannot be anything but poor when one realizes that the great mass of the population is not a proletarian population, a proletariat properly so-called; it is a kind of sub-proletariat, a sort of plebeian mass living in an extremely miserable way, such as there are few to be seen in the world. The best expression to describe this socially is the English word “pauper.” Even the French statistics, the official ones, admit that the great majority of this population has a total income in Algeria lower than the savings sent by the 400,000 Algerian workers living in France, and yet these are paid the lowest salaries while, doing the hardest work. I think that the official figure on the income of an Algerian family is 20,000 francs [approximately 42 dollars, or 15 pounds] a year. This is what explains the highly explosive nature of the Algerian revolution and the great difficulty imperialism has in finding a consistent social stratum of owners, capable of assuming the leadership of that country.
Of course this revolution in Algeria plays an explosive part also for the neighboring countries, i.e., Tunisia and Morocco.
Therefore, besides French imperialism, the native bourgeoisies of Tunisia and Morocco are extremely sensitive to what is happening in Algeria, for the social equilibrium in their countries is seriously threatened. In the course of the last month or of the last six weeks, we have seen Bourguiba, the most qualified representative of the Tunisian bourgeoisie, eliminating the monarchy, and we have also seen the Sultan of Morocco taking measures against a certain number of feudal landowners who had been too openly allied to French imperialism. Such measures in Tunisia and Morocco are preventive measures, concessions in face of the ferment which is going on in these countries, and which is stirred up, stimulated, and strengthened by the struggle of the Algerian people. Bourguiba, the most clear-sighted representative of the bourgeoisie of these countries, wants to find a solution which will enable a bourgeois regime to be established in Algeria. He has taken up, in a certain form, the idea of a North African Federation, which is indeed inherent in the historical development of these countries. But he especially hopes to be able to support, by means of the Tunisian and Moroccan bourgeoisies, whatever Algerian bourgeoisie there may be.
Concerning the working and poor peasant masses in Algeria, we must stress first of all that the native trade-union movement is now freed from the tutelage of the French federations. It must be noted that during all the former period, French imperialism prevented natives from leading the trade unions, from having their own trade-union movement; it preferred to have trade unions even under Stalinist leadership as long as they were dependent on a French federation led by Paris, and tied to it. It was the same thing in Morocco.
Concerning the struggle in Algeria, the National Liberation Front, which is today the real leadership of the Algerian revolution, first put the accent, during a whole period, on military problems, the problems of armed struggle, exclusively from a military point of view. Then it gave its attention to political and social problems, which became concretized in the programme adopted last year at its congress. We reproduced very large excerpts from these texts in La Verité des Travailleurs. Among the most important points, aside from the very important role it gives to the proletariat, the one which it seems most necessary to us to stress is the creation, the establishment, of an organization, a local administration on the basis of committees of a popular type. Of course this must be regarded in a quite relative way, given the complicated situation in which the Algerian revolution is developing.
Certainly the most serious brake on political development in the Algerian revolution is the criminal attitude of the leaderships of the French working class. They have practically done all that was possible, each with its own policy, to break up any action by the French proletariat in aid of the Algerian revolution. As we all know, there have been a few good words said, now and then, by the Stalinist leaders. But it was not really serious, and it is easy to understand that the Algerian Communist Party has in fact disappeared. Last year, when the Guy Mollet government called hundreds of thousands of workers back to the army to send them to Algeria, demonstrations took place throughout France. Spontaneously, the young men in the railroad stations did not want to go. The Communist Party did nothing to organize and develop these struggles, and on the contrary, where there were violent incidents, it denounced them as being the work of provocateurs.
Since the beginning of 1957, we have witnessed a very great political apathy of the toiling masses; and those whom we hear, those who demonstrate, are a reactionary, fascist minority, taking advantage of this situation. There is in France a series of petty-bourgeois movements, of left-wing petty-bourgeois personalities, who of course do not have an imperialistic attitude, who stand for the independence of Algeria or for negotiations with the Algerians; but their real attitude, if we get to the bottom of their thoughts, is that, let us say, of people supporting a good French Commonwealth, giving good advice in a paternalistic way. The Algerians were right, of course, when in their newspaper they sent them packing and invited them to sweep their own doorstep first.
Under the circumstances thus created for the Algerians, the idea of socialism, the idea of communism, is particularly imperiled. There are European workers, even European Communists, who did not understand for a long time the difference between Guy Mollet and socialism, between Stalin and communism. For the workers of the colonial countries, whose cultural level is naturally very low, to distinguish socialism, communism, from Guy Mollet, Thorez & Co., becomes a difficult problem.
One very important factor for the future of the Algerian revolution is the existence of several hundreds of thousands of Algerians who have taken part in industrial life as workers in France, in the French workers’ movement, who have taken part in its struggles, and have given a good number of cadres to the workers’ movement such as factory delegates and trade-union militants, and who have an important part to play in the future of the Algerian revolution.
I should now like to say a few words on a question which surely preoccupies all militants, and on which they have little information outside of France. It is the question of the conflict between the two organizations: the National Liberation Front, and the M.N.A. We must answer first of all the assertion of Lambert’s group concerning the M.N.A. which they call the Bolshevik Party in the Algerian revolution. The M.N.A. is not a Bolshevik party. It is not even a workers’ party. The M.N.A., like the F.L.N., is a nationalist organization whose social composition is naturally linked to that of the Algerian population. The rank and file of these organizations is composed of workers and very poor peasants.
From the point of view of programme, it is impossible to see a great difference between the texts which are issued. Both of them want independence, an Algerian constitution, agrarian reform. If we, who are used to studying programmes with a microscope, do not see essential differences, it is clear that the Algerian masses, in turning on a broad scale to the Front and not to the M.N.A., do so for other reasons than those of programme What are the facts from this point of view? From the very beginning, the Front has had greater weight in the revolution in Algeria. At first, the M.N.A. had a very large majority among the Algerian emigration in France. By all the means for verification that we have at our disposal (responses to strike calls, the positions of Algerian delegates in the factories, etc.) we can – if not measure in a precise way, for these things cannot be measured – at least determine just what the tendencies are. On this point there can be no mistake. Today, the majority of the Algerian emigration, which was changing in 1956, is with the Front: and the M.N.A. holds its positions only in the North of France and in Belgium.
For the Algerian masses, it is the Front which is leading the struggle and this is the reason for their choice between the F.L.N. and the M.N.A. Actually, what we learned after a few months of armed struggle were the conditions in which it was launched. It was the men of the Front who began the combat.
The very few French militants who for many years had been watching the Algerian organization, the M.T.L.D., which after the war was the leading organization among the emigration and in Algeria, knew that a crisis was building up in this organization. Beginning in 1947, we learned of a whole series of incidents. They had individual aspects, and not a mass global aspect, but they were important political symptoms. The crisis took on a sharp character during the period 1952–1954, at the moment when the struggle was going on in Tunisia and Morocco, and when, by this struggle, the Tunisians and Moroccans were wrenching out some gains, while during that time the M.T.L.D. was impotent, powerless, and did not move. This brought on a crisis in the top ranks, which were torn among themselves. It also led a series of intermediate cadres, very numerous in this organization, the cadres of what was a para-military organization of the M.T.L.D., disgusted by the crisis at the top, to take the initiative of acting independently of the tops, and of beginning the armed struggle. At the top, after the split in the M.T.L.D., one of the tendencies was completely wiped out. The other one, that of Messali Hadj, for several months adopted a wait-and-see attitude toward the insurrection, and declared itself in favor of the armed struggle only about six months after it had begun. So, in Algeria, Messali’s tendency, the M.N.A., was unable to play an important part in the armed struggle. It is the F.L.N., created by the organizers of the insurrection, which has kept the leadership of the armed fight. It seems to us that this is an adequate explanation of the choice of the masses between the F.L.N. and the M.N.A.
Our attitude, and especially that of the French section, has been inspired by the desire to help, to the whole extent of our forces, the victory of the Algerian people. We did not think that this could be done by considering that the social and political contrasts were already clearly established in the revolutionary movements. We think that it is the development of the revolution, its progress, which will enable Marxist currents to arise and grow strong.
One more word must be said on the recent development of the M.N.A. Becoming more and more a minority, the M.N.A. – for reasons of pure manoeuvre, it seems to us – has taken disastrous positions. Did it hope for a better hearing from the Americans? In any case it has made declarations – to the United Nations, to the State Department, to the Adenauer government – which display what the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, Pineau, called in his speech to the United Nations last February, “pro-occidentalism.” Finally, it has organized Algerian trade unions in France, instead of calling upon the Algerian workers to go into the unions of the workers with whom they are in the factories.
Of course, our position does not copy that of the Lambert group, just substituting one organization for the other. We do not identify ourselves with the F.L.N., which would be politically wrong. We support the Algerian revolution as it is, with its present leadership as it is. This does not at all prevent us from giving our political estimate of the policy of the organizations and the leaderships of this revolution.
I have stressed several points; there are still many other aspects of the Algerian revolution to be treated. But I remind you once more that it is the farthest advanced point of the colonial revolution today. Supported only by the other colonized peoples, or those recently freed from the imperialist yoke, it is betrayed every day by the traditional organizations of the proletariat, which have done everything in their power to mislead the French proletariat which is directly concerned with the victory of the Algerian people. It is our duty to intervene everywhere in the movement of the working class to put an end to this scandalous situation. The whole history of our movement is marked by actions, as vigorous as possible, to attract the attention, to stir up the action, of the workers’ movement, towards the place where the revolution is grappling closely with the class enemy. We must remain faithful to our tradition in the case of Algeria.
*
North Africa and the Middle East bring us to the main bulk of the African continent. The imperialists already feel there, in varying degrees, the peoples’ desire of liberation. These peoples start out from a lower level, we often witness the decomposition of tribal structures, and because of this, the transition to socialism will be more abrupt and complicated.
A general survey of these questions has been given in an article by Comrade Germain during the preparatory discussion for this Congress. But it is obvious that we cannot stop at that point. We have to examine carefully the existing movements, the mass movements, the organizations of the intelligentsia who play a very important part in the life of these countries. The trade-union movement also begins to be widely developed there, and in several African countries, we have witnessed widespread strike struggles.
In all these movements there exists a deep intellectual search for fundamental answers to the problems of the African revolution. The formation now of a few valuable Marxist cadres could have a decisive effect upon the course of the revolution in those countries.
In this report I do not intend to develop the situation and the problems of our party both in Latin America and in Ceylon. The delegates from these countries will do it far better than I could. I will confine myself to a single remark in each case.
In Latin America the first act of force ordered by the United States, the intervention against the Arbenz government of Guatemala, took place at the time of our last Congress. Since then there has occurred the action against Peron. And now, the situation in Bolivia is rising to a paroxysm. But all these events also demonstrate, especially in the example of Argentina, the impossibility for imperialism and its agents in those countries to succeed in stabilizing any regime whatever for however short a time. The same would hold true, if eventually imperialism were to bring back Peron in order to check the social disintegration in Argentina.
As for Ceylon, we wish to stress before the Congress the courageous resistance of our section against the communalist currents on the language question. This attitude strengthened the party and we are convinced that it will pay us dividends before long.
It now remains for us to see how the discussion on the colonial revolution can be concluded. At the meeting of the International Executive Committee which had put this item on the agenda, there were planned: a general preamble – to be prepared by the I.S. – and special texts on the revolution in different parts of the world – which were to be written especially by comrades of sections which are, and with good reason, more directly concerned with these questions. Unfortunately, owing to the considerable tasks of which we are all aware, these last documents are missing. Only a few articles for the discussion could be written by some comrades.
The Colonial Commission which was named at the beginning of this Congress met before the opening of this discussion. It examined what could be done and finally proposes this to you. On one hand, the discussion is to be carried on here on the report and the general preamble, and we must by the end of this Congress have an amended and perfected preamble. But this preamble by its very nature will remain too general. The Commission proposes to use the presence here of many qualified comrades in order to work up texts on the situation in a certain number of countries of the greatest importance for the colonial revolution. These texts should be ready before the end of the month following the Congress. With them the I.S. would prepare a text of synthesis on the present state of the colonial revolution, and this text would be submitted to the next session of the International Executive Committee which would adopt it definitively in the name of the Congress. This is the solution which seems to us to be the most practical.
*
For us, it is not only a text that is in question. All of us here are aware of the significance of the colonial revolution for the victory of socialism. In all colonial countries, in all the movements of colonial peoples, there is a search, an ardent desire to understand, to find the solutions for their emancipation. This text that we have to prepare must be not only a document for us, for our own activity as the Fourth International; it must be prepared as a tool for great masses of militants among the colonial peoples, as a weapon for their combat. By helping these men to fight, we shall hasten the progress of our movement. The victory of the colonial peoples is also a victory of the Fourth International.
 

re Frank: Bonapartism in Europe (1945)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Bonapartism in Europe
(November 1945)

From Fourth International, Vol.7 No.3, March 1946, pp.93-94.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




This is the second section of Pierre Frank’s article on Bonapartism. The preceding section appeared in the January issue of Fourth International. We are publishing this section as a discussion article – Ed.




The importance of a correct definition of the European governments goes beyond the domain of theory. What Trotsky wrote in 1932 on the subject of bonapartism in Germany preserves all its value mutatis mutandis for the bonpartism of 1945:
If we have insistently demanded that a distinction be made between Fascism and Bonapartism, it has been in no wise out of theoretical pedantry. Names are used to distinguish between concepts; concepts, in politics, in turn serve to distinguish among real forces. The smashing of Fascism would leave no room for Bonapartism, and. it is to be hoped, would mean the direct introduction to the social revolution.
Only – the proletariat is not aimed for the revolution. The reciprocal relations between Social Democracy and the Bonapartist government on the one hand, and between Bonapartism and Fascism on the other – while they do not decide the fundamental questions – distinguish by what roads and in what tempo the struggle between the proletariat and the Fascist counter-revolution will be prepared.
One must no more confuse the bonapartism “of the right” with fascism than the bonapartism “of the left” with democracy. We have seen that bonapartism takes very different forms according to the conditions in which the two mortally opposed camps find themselves; we maintain also that the existence of democratic liberties, even of very great democratic liberties, does not suffice to make a regime democratic. The bonapartists à la Kerensky, Popular Front ... are even notorious for their flood of democratic liberty up to the point where capitalist society thereby even risks its balance and is in danger of capsizing. Democratic liberties do not proceed, as in a regime which one can correctly define as democratic, from the existence of a margin for reforms within capitalism, but on the contrary, from a situation of acute crisis, the result of the absence of all margin for reforms.
Precisely because we do not generally have in Europe at the present time democratic regimes, because there is literally no place for them and because the extension of democratic liberties can only undermine the bonapartist regimes, we put forward the most extreme democratic demands, in connection of course with the transitional demands which prepare the duality of power.
The resolution of the recent national conference of the English section of the Fourth International ignores, alas, in a general fashion bonapartism for Europe, and employs the expression, devoid of content, “democratic counter-revolution” for the European governments. The resolution contains on the other hand a fairly good example for the future development of events in Europe, namely that of Spain in the period which extends from the fall of Primo de Rivera up to the civil war against the fascism of Franco. In all this period of the Spanish Republic there was no democratic regime properly speaking.
Bonapartism, as will probably be the case in all Europe, expressed itself through a series of epileptic convulsions, of great shifts to the right and to the left. The same phenomenon likewise occurred in France after 1934: 1934, violent reactionary attack; 1936, general strike and occupation of the factories; 1940, coup d’etat of Bordeaux; 1944, uprising against the Petain regime. These great leaps follow one another, accompanied by deepening division of the nation along with a political clarification on both sides in regard to the decisive struggle. [1]
The use of democratic slogans – combined with transitional slogans – is justified more precisely because the possibilities of a democratic regime are non-existent, because present-day bonapartism is completely unstable and the struggle for the most extreme democratic demands can only end its existence. But again it is necessary for us to understand one another on the democratic slogans which we adopt and not to define slogans as democratic when they are not.
Let us merely recall in passing that the partisans of the Three Theses seriously propose to make a struggle for the freedom of religion – a democratic slogan, unquestionably – one of the most essential points in the struggle against fascism. For anyone who has not completely lost the use of his faculties in the course of these terrible years of reaction through which we have passed, it is clear that such a democratic slogan has nothing in common with us. It is on the contrary more and more evident that this slogan is today the property of a whole section of reaction which does not dare to show its true face.
But a great error, even a very dangerous error, has been committed in qualifying as democratic and in proposing to our organization the slogan of “the Republic” (cf. the article of Comrade Logan on Italy). We are completely in favor of the slogan “Down with the monarchy” in Italy, in Greece, and for all the countries where this institution inherited from feudalism exists. We are no less in favor of the slogan of the Assembly of a single chamber which is against the Senate, the House of Lords, etc. . . . But between these slogans and the “Republic” there is a deep moat which we cannot cross. In one case we endeavor to direct the masses against institutions of a profoundly reactionary character, which limit, even under the capitalist, regime, the possibility of democratic expression of the masses, and which, in moments of crisis become quasi-automatically the rallying point for the forces of the counter-revolution. In the other case, we would advance the slogan which, if we made the mistake of adopting it, would make us the promoters of a completely vague state form. “The Republic”? This slogan does not concern a partial objective but puts to the fore the very question of the state. What republic can we recommend in the current epoch? The Republic of Workers and Peasants Soviets alone, and not a bourgeois republic. The slogan of “the Republic” is absolutely silent on this point and can only, by its confusion, favor the class enemy.
It is evident that, despite our rejection of this slogan, we will not be neutral in the plebiscites which may be held in Europe on the question of the monarchy. We shall call the workers and peasants to vote against the monarchy, but clearly specifying that we do not have the choice as to the other term of the alternative, that we are voting against the monarchy but not in favor of the bourgeois republic.
It is almost twenty years ago that the Italian Social Democrats in one of their fits of theoretical audacity inscribed in their program of the struggle against fascism the slogan of “the democratic republic of the toilers” and, for a certain period, the Italian Communist Party, in one of its zig-zags to the right, had an equivocal position towards this slogan. When in 1930, a section of the leadership of the Italian CP broke with Stalinism, formed the New Italian Opposition and turned toward the Left Opposition, this slogan was the object of a clarification in the exchange of views which took place at that time. The old opposition, that of the Bordigists, had an absolutely negative attitude on democratic slogans; it was especially necessary that the new Italian comrades should not take for their part a position which could be exploited by the Bordigists and which would have been fatal in the struggle against fascism. In a letter to the comrades in the NOI Trotsky expressed himself as follows on the slogan of the Italian Social Democrats:
While advancing one or another set of democratic slogans we must irreconcilably fight against all forms of democratic charlatanism. Such low-grade charlatanism is represented by the slogan of the Italian Social Democracy: “The Democratic Republic of the Toilers”. The “Toilers republic” can be only the class state of the proletariat. The “Democratic Republic” is only a masked rule of the bourgeoisie. The combination of the two is a naive petty bourgeois illusion of the Social Democratic rank and file (workers, peasants) and deliberate treachery on the part of the Social Democratic leaders (all these Turatis, Modiglianis and their ilk). Let me once again remark in passing that I was and remain opposed to the formula of a “National Assembly on the basis of worker-peasant committees” precisely because this formula approaches the Social Democratic slogan of the “Democratic Toilers Republic” and, consequently, can render extremely difficult for us the struggle against the Social Democrats. May 14, 1930.
The slogan of “the Republic” as such is also as erroneous and pernicious as that of “The Democratic Republic of the Toilers” although, we are persuaded, few comrades in our international organization would have at present an inclination to mix in the above fashion the forms of bourgeois power with the forms of proletarian power. But it is not the thoughts and intentions of this or that comrade which are under discussion but the slogan of “the Republic” itself. This is not a democratic slogan but, to employ the strong expression of Trotsky, democratic charlatanism.
The theoretical principles and positions which are a part of the accumulated capital of the Bolshevik-Leninists, gained in the course of their years of struggle against Stalinism, reformism and all the varieties of centrism in the workers’ movement, and which we have called to mind in this article, obviously far from exhaust the questions which arise on the European situation. But it is indispensable to take them as a point of departure to permit our militants and our sections to orient themselves correctly despite the enormous confusion which rages and which, unhappily, will not fail to rage for the duration of a complete period, up to the point when the events and ourselves, in assisting events by a correct policy, consciously array an important fraction of the working class under the flag of the Fourth International.
 
Footnote
1. Since we here speak of the resolution of our English comrades let us note that it defines the new Labor government as “Kerenskyism”. The Bonapartism, that they ignored, has found the means to insinuate itself into their document under a very special name. But we do not think that the present Attlee government is bonapartist à la Kerensky. Without questioning the coming to power of this government, that is to say, of a formation which rests on the working class but wishes to leave intact. The City and British capitalism, at the moment when the latter has only gained a victory at the price of its very substance, will accelerate the downfall of British imperialism. The oldest of democracies has, as a result of the last elections, reached a dead end. But the term “Kerenskyism” is not appropriate, for it already presupposes the accomplishment of the passage from democracy to this form of bonapartism. On the contrary, it is in the future, probably very soon, that this passage will occur and the English workers and their organizations will then have to face an important crisis. In England one can only observe features of bonapartism. For example the Labor government, under the pressure of capital and encouraged by the administrative apparatus, of which it hasn’t harmed a hair, is inclined to play a role of referee above the parties, while a section of the Labor parliamentary group endeavors to continue representing in a reformist and parliamentary fashion the worker masses who have elected them.

re Frank: Democracy or Bonapartism in Europe? (1945)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Democracy or Bonapartism in Europe?
(November 1945)

From Fourth International, Vol.7 No.2, February 1946, pp.45-49
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




This article by a prominent European Trotskyist was written shortly after the French elections, October 31, 1945. The cabinet crisis which occurred several weeks afterwards seems to confirm the main contention of this article, the bonapartist character of the de Gaulle regime.
The second section of this study on Democratic Liberties, Demands and Bonapartism will be published in the next issue of Fourth International. — Ed.




The problems of the proletarian revolution are posed today in Europe under the most varied aspects. It is not surprising therefore that differences on these questions are expressed in the ranks of the revolutionary vanguard. The comrades of the Socialist Workers Party in particular have discussed several questions concerning democratic demands and the possibilities of democratic regimes in Europe. If for some it were only a question of putting the emphasis on democratic demands while for others one of putting it on the slogans of Soviets and the Socialist United States of Europe, this difference would very likely be resolved in the daily activities of the parties, provided both tendencies knew how to connect dialectically the democratic slogans and the specific slogans of the proletarian revolution. On the other hand a question which must be treated with the greatest precision and which cannot be settled by daily activity is that of the nature of the present regimes in Europe. It is a theoretical problem of the first importance to know whether or not we have democratic regimes in Europe, for differences on this point must finally result — which is not necessarily the case with democratic slogans — in different policies, as happened on the question of the nature of the Soviet State which has so often been brought forward during the years of Stalinist degeneration and reaction.
 
Do Democratic Regimes Exist in “Liberated” Europe?
Our reply to this question obviously does not depend on the criteria required by the Foreign Office and the State Department for the diplomatic recognition of a government, any more than on those defined by Stalinist propaganda. Bourgeois democracy is a political form the analysis of which has been made by the most eminent Marxists and it is their analysis which serves completely to guide us on this matter.
The principal problem of Europe is Germany. Unfortunately, under present conditions, the political forms and formations there are still only in an embryonic state; the military occupation governments stifle all political life capable of disturbing their own aims. Consequently, Germany scarcely affords us criteria concerning the political forms of the state in Europe.
Throughout that part of Europe occupied by the Red Army great overturns are taking place; but the Stalinist maneuvers completely distort the simplest bits of information. In any event we are not confronted with democratic governments far or near. These are governments based on capitalist property, under the control of the Moscow bureaucracy, and with a greater or lesser base in the worker and poor peasant masses. Only the presence of the Red Army assures their continuance.
But after all, the discussion among the American comrades has dealt, and moreover rightly so, with the countries of Western Europe, those which are in the “zone of influence” of American and British democratic imperialism.
Unquestionably, the most characteristic example in this zone is that of France, which once again constitutes the most appropriate subject for a Marxist study of specifically political questions. Let us say in the beginning that everything that is true for France is not necessarily true at present, for Italy, the Scandinavian countries, Belgium, etc., but it is certainly in France that the political tendencies manifest themselves with the greatest clarity and distinctness.
Do we have a democratic regime in France? Comrade Morrow, in an article aimed at summarizing the positions of his tendency in the discussion, replies in the affirmative in the following terms:
The struggle of the masses is limited by the fact that it still accepts the leadership of the reformist parties. The objective resultant is bourgeois democracy.
Another factor working for bourgeois democracy is the resistance of a section of the French capitalist class, led by de Gaulle, to US domination. There was much indignation at the plenum, notably from Comrade Cannon, when I defined the Gaullists as a bourgeois-democratic tendency. The majority could not understand this quite simple phenomena, that a section of the French capitalist class, first to resist German imperialism and then to resist US domination, was for a period basing itself on the masses through the mediation of the reformist parties. (Fourth International, May 1945).
We shall endeavor to show by an analysis of the class relations that this reasoning is faulty on a number of points. As one knows, it is always profitable not to examine a question solely by its appearance at a given moment, but to see it in its historical development over a longer period. This is very easy for us to do since the Fourth International has taken very clear positions on France over a period of many years.
In February 1934 a violent reactionary attack dealt a mortal blow to the democratic Third Republic. The new regime was defined by Trotsky as follows:
“... a preventive Bonapartist regime cloaking itself with the worn-out formulae of the parliamentary state and maneuvering between the insufficiently strong camp of the fascist regime and the insufficiently class conscious camp of the proletarian state” (August 1934).
The violent reactionary attack awakened the laboring masses. A strong surge to the left took place, which forced a leftward shift of the Bonapartist governments, at the same time that the Popular Front was created to check and mislead the revolutionary movement of the masses. The year 1936 saw the triumph of the Popular Front thanks to the exploitation of strong democratic illusions; but it also saw a strong surge of the workers (June 1936). The division of France into mortally hostile camps deepened. The regime of the Popular Front was not a democratic regime; it contained within itself numerous elements of Bonapartism as we shall see further on.
With Munich and the liquidation of the Popular Front, the governments of Daladier and Reynaud, resembling those of Doumergue and Flandin, prepared the Bordeaux transaction of June 1940 which served to install the Petain regime. Despite the support it received from German imperialism (it held power only with German support and went under as soon as the German Army had to quit French territory), this regime was not considered by us as fascist but rather as Bonapartist. In the notes he dictated for an article shortly before his assassination, which he did not have the time to write, Trotsky expressed himself as follows:
In France there is no fascism in the real sense of the term. The regime of the senile Marshal Petain represents a senile form of Bonapartism of the epoch of imperialist decline ... Precisely because Petain’s regime is senile Bonapartism it contains no element of stability and can be overthrown by a revolutionary mass uprising much sooner than a fascist regime. (Fourth International, October 1940).
Several months later a manifesto of the International Secretariat entitled France Under Hitler and Petain declares:
The swift invasion of the German troops has shattered the administrative system. The only group representing a certain relative solidity were the top ranks of the Army. Around them rallied some Anglophobe politicians. This combination was crowned by the octogenarian Petain. The new Bonaparte did not even use cannon against parliament, which decided on its own hook to disappear ...
The struggle for democracy under the flag of England and the United States will not lead to a noticeably different situation. General de Gaulle struggles against “slavery” at the head of colonial governors, that is to say, of slave masters. In his appeals this “leader” uses, just like Petain, the royal “we.” The defense of democracy is in good hands! If England should install de Gaulle in France tomorrow, his regime would not in the least be distinguished from that of the Bonapartist government of Petain. (November 1940).
Thus our most responsible international body had predicted that a simple substitution of gangs following a victory of the Allies would not signify a change in the nature of the political regime. Have events verified this prediction or not? We find ourselves in the presence of an evaluation on the historical scale based on positions which were defended for many years by the Fourth International against all other theories and cheap labels spread by the other tendencies and formations of the labor movement. If an error was committed it would truly be a considerable one and we would be urgently obliged to seek the reasons for it and correct it. As for ourselves, we don’t believe that our organization was in error on this point. We sought to define the regime of de Gaulle in 1944 at the moment when he had ceased being the leader of a military legion at London and had become the head of the government installed in Algeria as the step before becoming the head of the government at Paris. We gave only a personal evaluation which does not have the authority of the citations given above but one may well excuse us for reprinting it here, for it applies in large measure to the present regime in France.
The significance of the sentence pronounced by the Algiers tribunal goes far beyond the personality of Pucheu and of his judges. The sentence reveals the common nature of the Petain regime in France and the de Gaulle regime now established in North Africa which lays claim to the future government of France. At the same time, the sentence may serve to lay open some of the differences between the two regimes.
The Petain regime is the dictatorship of the army and the police in the service of big capital. This is Bonapartism, not fascism. It is Bonapartism propped up by the Gestapo and the German occupation troops.
The de Gaulle regime — especially since its establishment at Algiers — contains an ever increasing number of men from the army and the police who have deserted Vichy. This too is Bonapartism. It is Bonapartism propped up by the Allied troops and the crumbs of Lease-Lend.
The differences between these two Bonapartist regimes are in no way exhausted by the fact that some of these French patriots have a marked preference for Basic English as opposed to the jargon of the Völkischer Beobachter.
In France, independent working class organizations are driven to illegality by Petain; in Algeria, where reaction still reigned supreme at the time of the proletarian offensive of 1936, the de Gaulle regime cannot help tolerating the open expression of trade unions and working class parties and must even seek their collaboration.
In France, Petain is constantly being spurred on by the agitation of the fascist organizations, in particular by Doriot’s PPF. In Algeria, these same fascist organizations have been reduced to illegality and there actually appears to be no fascist movement in existence at Algiers. Obviously, one of these bonapartist regimes leans essentially on fascist reaction, whereas the other leans more towards the exploited masses. This is nowise to the credit of one or other of the leading cliques, it is simply the resultant of the class forces in operation; but it is a fact of great importance for the future development of the class struggle. (Fourth International, June 1944).
We don’t see that the “liberation” of France has brought fundamental changes in the above-mentioned characteristics of the de Gaulle regime. Unquestionably the weight of the worker masses is markedly heavier in France than in Algeria and the stronger democratic traditions are factors which contribute to weakening the regime and force it to drape itself in enough shapeless camouflage to hide its Bonapartist traits; but it doesn’t change its nature.
 
Bonapartism
After having shown the continuity of our political analysis for more than ten years of French history and before proceeding to a more penetrating study of the de Gaulle regime, we believe it worthwhile to review some generalizations on Bonapartism at the cost of a new series of citations.
In Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State Engels explains how a Bonapartist form of state appears under certain circumstances:
At certain periods it occurs that the struggling classes balance each other so nearly that the public power gains a certain degree of independence by posing as the mediator between them. The absolute monarchy of the 17th and 18th century was in such a position balancing the nobles and the burghers against one another. So was the Bonapartism of the first, and still more of the Second Empire, playing the proletariat against the bourgeoisie and vice versa. The latest performance of this kind, in which rulers and ruled appear equally ridiculous is the German Empire of Bismarckian make, in which capitalists and laborers are balanced against one another and equally cheated for the benefit of the degenerate Prussian cabbage junkers.
Limiting ourselves in this article to the Bonapartism of the capitalist regime we merely call to mind the definition of Bonapartism applied and explained on many occasions by Trotsky in reference to the Stalinist dictatorship. But Trotsky was very insistent in attributing this conception of Bonapartism to the von Papen and von Schleicher governments in the months preceding Hitler’s coming to power; he did this in two pamphlets one of which The Only Road devotes itself mainly to this very question. He showed the same insistence concerning the Doumergue and Flandin ministries in France which had resulted from the violently reactionary attack of February 6, 1934. He showed the differences in the class relations between a democratic regime and a Bonapartist regime:
The passing over of the bourgeoisie from the parliamentary to the bonapartist regime does not finally exclude Social-Democracy from that legal combination of forces upon which capitalist government bases itself. Schleicher, as is well known, sought in his time the aid of the trade unions. Through his friend Marquet, Doumergue has without doubt relations with Jouhaux and Co. ... The essence of the democratic state consists, as is well known, in the fact that everyone has the right to say and write what he pleases but that the big capitalists retain the power of deciding all important questions. This result is obtained by means of a complicated system of partial concessions (reforms), of illusions, bribery, deceit and intimidation. When the economic possibility of partial concessions (“reforms”) becomes exhausted, Social-Democracy ceases to be “the main political support of the bourgeoisie.” This signifies: capital can no longer rely upon a lamed “public opinion”; it needs a state apparatus which is independent of the masses — i.e. bonapartist.
In the one case, society turns almost in a circle about the big bourgeoisie as a pivot; the latter finds in the petty bourgeoisie and in a section of the working class a stable foundation; consequently the government and the state apparatus rest on these strata by means of a parliamentary majority. In the other case the big bourgeoisie does not find sufficient support in the masses which are polarised towards the camp of the revolution and the camp of the counter-revolution; under these conditions in order to save the social order the state apparatus, with the forces of repression in the forefront, tends to raise itself above society. The state machine no longer rests on a mass base but maintains itself in unstable equilibrium between two camps; these feats of social gymnastics come to a lamentable end the moment one of the camps takes the initiative in a decisive struggle.
The examples mentioned above for Germany of 1932 and France of 1934 are those of a weak bonapartism in the period of capitalist decline; the qualification of bonapartism in their case was not contested in our ranks probably because, as Trotsky wrote, it is still easy to recognize in an old man the characteristics which he possessed in his youth,
But the bonapartism of declining capitalism can cloak itself in other costumes. In certain cases it is fairly difficult to recognize it, for example in the case of governments of the left, even very much to the left, notably of the Popular Front type. There bonapartism is so outrageously varnished with a democratic sheen that many allow themselves to be taken in by it. The existence of bonapartist elements in the Kerensky regime was the subject of a chapter of The History of the Russian Revolution by Trotsky who characterized Kerensky as “the mathematical center of Russian bonapartism.” This theoretical evaluation was in agreement with that of Lenin who, on September 23, 1917, wrote to the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party: “We must give ... a correct and clear slogan: to drive out the Bonapartist gang of Kerensky with its fake pre-parliament.” There was no question there of an agitational formula. In State and Revolution, the greatest Marxist classic on the question of the state, Lenin, after having recalled the terms of Engels cited above with the same examples, adds the following phrase:
“Such, we add, is the present Kerensky government in Republican Russia since it began to persecute the revolutionary proletariat, at a moment when, thanks to the leadership of the petty bourgeois democrats, the Soviets had already become impotent while the bourgeoisie was not yet strong enough openly to disperse them.”
Certain individuals may be surprised to see an idea applied to regimes so widely separated from one another and will doubt its usefulness. Many other ideas familiar to Marxists are applied to extremely wide fields and yet are no less correct and useful. For example centrism. Also, for example, the dictatorship of the proletariat, which is applied to the Paris Commune under its leadership of Proudhonists and Blanquists, as well as to Soviet Russia under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky. The term “bonapartism” does not completely exhaust the characterization of a regime, but it is indispensable to employ it in present day Europe, if one wishes to go forward with the least chance of error. Let us add finally that Marxism is not alone in the possession of such important general ideas; all the sciences do likewise. Thus chemists call bodies carbides which differ more widely from one another than the bonapartism of Schleicher and that of Kerensky. And chemistry doesn’t get along so badly either on that account. The contrary is true.
Let us note that the greatest theoreticians of Marxism did not at all define the political nature of a bourgeois regime by the positions which the latter held in the field of foreign policy but solely and simply by the position it occupied in relation to the classes composing the nation. Let us likewise observe that the limitation of the struggle of the masses because of the treacherous leaderships (according to the expression of Comrade Morrow) or, what amounts to the same, the paralysis or impotence of the mass organizations (to employ the terms of Lenin or Trotsky) does not give as “objective resultant” a bourgeois democracy, in the conditions of present day France, but rather a bonapartism which possesses an apparent strength.
 
The de Gaulle Government


 


The conditions which dictate a bonapartist regime to the bourgeoisie equally dictate a foreign policy which is in no way a policy of “resistance.” The social crisis of France acquires a particularly acute character precisely because of the change of its world position. But to see French capitalism or part of it “resisting” American or German imperialism and becoming democratic by virtue of this is to fall into error.
France’s crisis owes its extreme acuteness to the fact that a great power of the 19th century must accommodate itself to a second-rate position in the capitalist world of the twentieth century, because of the weakness of its economic base which has remained stagnant in the face of the development of new and younger powers. A retrogression of this type (like that occurring in Great Britain after its “victory” in the Second World War) does not only signify securing a camp stool in place of an armchair in the international conferences, but above all a considerable lowering of the national revenue, and therefore a considerable reduction in the standard of life, particularly for the working masses. The first luxury article that capitalism tries to eliminate under such circumstances is democracy. Well before 1939 big capital in France understood that it could no longer claim a seat of great power as in the past. It had to find a protector for a future full of threats. Inertia had more or less kept it trailing behind British imperialism; but it was easy to see that the latter was also in serious straits although it had more reserves to hold out longer. To resist the revolutionary movements it was necessary to look elsewhere than London and its ailing democracy. Besides, French heavy industry had some special business reasons for orienting French capital towards German imperialism, which, with the coming to power of the Nazis moved forward with seven-league boots.
But if French capitalism turned its eyes towards German imperialism and was guilty of counter-revolutionary defeatism in 1940 in the interests of its domestic politics, it none the less sought to prevent those few cards which remained in its hand from being completely taken away, knowing that German imperialism was still far from having consolidated its positions and that it had not been able to secure any better ally than Italy. On the other hand an important section of French capitalism (finished goods, industries, luxury articles, tourist trade) could not because of its special interests neglect the American continent where it had its principal customers. As a result, French imperialism, pulled from opposite sides, endeavored to play an intermediary role between Germany and the United States immediately after the debacle of June 1940, hoping to be able to earn a small commission for this work. It hasn’t been forgotten that certain elements of American capitalism lent themselves for a time to this (Leahy mission). But when it became clear that the United States was intransigent toward German imperialism and the latter had no further chance of victory, this role of go-between was abandoned and the Bank of France and the Comités des Forges themselves became “resistant,” in their own fashion, of course. Billions were transferred to Algeria in the months preceding the occupation of North Africa by the Americans; the top French administration made contact with de Gaulle.
For a little more than a year, de Gaulle, as head of the government, while endeavoring from time to time to rattle his wooden sabre a bit, tried to reestablish this courtier’s policy, adopting it to the new principal powers, that is to say, the US and the USSR, and ignoring England. De Gaulle quickly signed a treaty of alliance with the USSR, but this document soon proved to be worthless, for Stalin, having nothing to get from de Gaulle, let him down in all the international conferences which have been held since then. In his recent visit to Washington de Gaulle obtained some loans for French economy (in which sufficiently important American business interests are involved) but he returned empty-handed from the political point of view. It took him less than a year to learn that it is one thing to play the role of arbiter between two weaker states and another thing for a small state to wish to maneuver between two great powers. General de Gaulle would have been able to learn something about this without having to experience it if he had addressed himself to certain ancient Polish colonels. Finally, de Gaulle who was openly attacked by a section of the French bourgeoisie for his policy of isolation has taken a small step towards England and the countries of Western Europe by proposing to create an association resembling one for the blind and the paralyzed.
Any way one may examine it this foreign policy of French capitalism is in no way “resistant” and, besides, there is nothing in it which predisposes the “Gaullists” to democracy.

If one studies the class relations in France, the bonapartist character of the de Gaulle government appears in the greatest clarity, since the day of “liberation” up to the elections of October 21,1945 and to the conditions created by them.
The liberation of Paris was accomplished under the leadership of the Comité National de la Resistance (CNR), whose mass base was constituted by the workers’ organizations (General Confederation of Labor, Communist Party, Socialist Party) and the militias composed in great part of worker members of these organizations. The CNR and more particularly the workers’ organizations, would have been able at this time to establish themselves in power, supporting themselves on the militias and the local committees of resistance. (These last represented in a bureaucratic fashion, and not democratically, the proletariat and the exploited masses in general.) In this period de Gaulle personally had very few real forces and would not have been able to oppose the CNR. As for the reaction and the old capitalist forces they were completely demoralized and disorganized and were hiding themselves. To save the capitalist regime thus left stripped bare, it was necessary from the very beginning to find something to cover it again and to camouflage it for the eyes of the masses. For this desired effect the uniform of a resisting general was used and they raised him as the representative of the nation, above classes, parties and groupings. In many respects this operation resembled that which occurred in February 1917 when the conciliators of the Petrograd soviet yielded the power, surrendering without firing a shot, to a provisional government without any real base.
It goes without saying that the bonapartism thus created has not at all the intention of leading too precarious an existence. It. seeks to create a base for itself while securing the complicity of the leadership of the political formations and others who, in the given period, canalize the class forces between which it tries to maintain itself.
 
Traitorous Working Class Leaders
From the very first de Gaulle had to obtain the collaboration of the leaders of the parties which included the working class in order to accomplish the dissolution of the militias, the submission of the local committees of resistance to the organizations of the old bourgeois states as well as a unification of all the armed forces under the control of the government artificially created by these leaders themselves. Despite the support of the traitorous leaders, this operation took several months to achieve.
Every bonapartist government in France has tried to create a base for itself in the peasantry; the army having been for a very long time a sort of protector of the middle peasantry (see The Eighteenth Brumaire in particular where Marx wrote “The uniform was the holiday costume of the peasant.”) In the new circumstances de Gaulle has remained faithful to the bonapartist tradition. Shortly after the Second World War when the countryside suffered from the manpower shortage and it was necessary to resort to the employment of prisoners of war for the tasks of trained workers, especially in the mines, de Gaulle attempted to maintain an army of one million men, that is, a standing army superior to those which France had preceding the years of re-armament and direct preparation for the war. Promises have been made to the peasantry, higher prices have been allowed for their products, etc., without much being accomplished, however, in the way of results, since the peasants need manpower, materials, livestock, seeds, manufactured products; since there is a shortage of all these things; and since the profits they can make on the black market cannot be used to obtain these things.
The elections which have just taken place provide one of the most striking proofs of the bonapartist character of the regime. Elections, a constituent, a parliament, a government responsible to an elected assembly, are so many disagreeable things for the general. He couldn’t throw all this into the garbage can. What he was interested in above all was to wield stable power which would not be at the mercy of an assembly. Look, he said, at the history of the Third Republic with its cascades of falling ministries. Thus he decided that simultaneously with democratic elections to elect an assembly on the bases of program and parties, there should be held a referendum in the nature of a plebiscite designed to deprive the elected assembly of the greater part of its rights and to preserve, on the other hand, the greater part of the power in his own hands. Upon the announcement of this referendum a number of the democratic politicians of France shouted “bonapartism.” Surely it was not a knowledge of Marxist literature on this question but very simply an elementary knowledge of the history of their country which led them to such declarations.
For a long time the French bourgeoisie has sought to resolve a problem that the years have made as insoluble as squaring the circle. It wanted “a strong state,” in part to insure the defense of its frontiers, but mainly to hold in check the domestic enemy, the working class; but all the same, it did not wish this state to become too strong, for each time that it has permitted the state to entrench itself too strongly, it quickly found its own posterior in contact with the military boots. To assure themselves that the state would not be further disturbed by political conflicts, the generals evinced an intention to transform the whole country into a barracks and to deprive everyone, including the bourgeoisie themselves, of political rights. This is the essential reason why even the most reactionary and personally arbitrary democratic politicians of the Third Republic, notably Clemenceau and Poincairé, opposed and fought vigorously against the interference of the generals in politics. But that is already ancient history.
In the October 21 elections the end of the democratic regime was incontestably demonstrated by the inglorious foundering of the principal formation of the Third Republic, the Radical party, which had dominated and been maintained in every possible and imaginable way by that Republic. In Whither France Trotsky showed among other things that the policy of the Popular Front, the alliance of workers’ organizations with the Radical party, was going in a direction directly contrary to the development of the situation, that is to say, to the decomposition of bourgeois democracy and of its principal party, that of the Radicals.
But the voting has created a situation in which bonapartism is literally under one’s nose. The double vote of October 21 — the democratic elections and the plebiscite — has resulted in the most desirable situation for a general of the coup d’etat.
 
Votes Almost Equally Divided
In the elections for the Constituent Assembly, the votes were pretty nearly equally divided between three parties: the Stalinist Party followed by a majority of the proletariat and by an important layer of the petty bourgeoisie of the towns and countryside; the Socialist Party, with a minority of the proletariat (without however losing its working class base in northern France) and a very great number of petty bourgeois votes. Finally the Mouvement Republicain Populaire (MRP), organized by Catholic politicians, who before the war flirted with the Popular Front and during the war participated in the resistance, but who were always solid pillars of the capitalist regime. In return, they received on October 21 all the votes of the reactionaries who have realized that they had no chance at all under their old colors.
The plebiscite is such a model stratagem that you can say without fear of deception it could only have been conceived beneath the kepi of a general. A direct question for or against de Gaulle would never have given the desired result, for the present day bonapartism is too weak to intimidate the voters.
Therefore guile was necessary. It was decided to pose two questions instead of one. (They even dreamt for a moment of posing three to do the job better.) To the first question there was no doubt that, save for a tiny minority of greybeards, everyone was going to reply Yes; the Third Republic is dead. To say Yes to the first question was to influence many voters to say Yes to the second question; besides it is easier to say Yes than No even in a referendum. It sufficed to wrap the second question in fine-spun language to finish the sowing of confusion. The result was a majority of about 60 percent of the votes for de Gaulle, who on the strength of this will receive the post of head of the government from the new assembly.
What is going to happen? De Gaulle, feeling strong with 13,000,000 votes behind him, does not have to share counsel with anyone. Before him is an assembly with three parties of practically equal numbers, and a perspective of new elections in nine months. They will all maneuver with each other. The Assembly and also the ministry in which the representatives will find each other again, will have to submit to the arbitration and will of General de Gaulle. All that resembles parliamentarism and democracy is going to be discredited in quarrels and in impotence; but there will always be a general to restore order!
At least for the most immediate future, the French government will be composed of representatives of the three parties. The Socialist party which cannot play the role of bonapartism is in the most difficult position. It evidently does not wish to form a government with the Stalinists alone (the latter strongly indicated this possibility the day after the elections, because they were sure that the socialists would not take it into consideration; the Stalinists kept insisting strongly and will do nothing to realize it). The Socialist party can no more, under the present conditions form a ministry with the MRP, leaving the Stalinists in the opposition. [1]
As for de Gaulle, it is evidently all to his advantage to make the ministry a nest of intrigues and disputes by introducing into it members of the three parties, which will contribute to discredit them and to reinforce his personal position. It is quite possible, as the Stalinists do not wish to conduct too “revolutionary” a policy and the MRP not being able to adopt too soon an openly reactionary attitude, that the crisis will not open in the very first days. But it is not the desire of the politicians — in or out of uniform — which regulates the development of events. The class conflicts will not fail at an early date to place the political problems on a razor’s edge.
 
Footnote
1. Before the elections, Leon Blum, who couldn’t fail to see the bonapartial danger, endeavored as is his custom to exercise it by sophisms. At first affirmed that a referendum is not necessarily a plebiscite — which is true; he added that the October 21 referendum would not be one — which was false, for its object was a vote of personal confidence and very large prerogatives to de Gaulle. Finally Blum, taking into account that the elected constituent would formally have the right to change, in very difficult conditions, the head of the government, decided that for that reason he should remain at the disposition of this assembly. No more than de Gaulle did he present himself to the will of the voters, and tried to a certain degree to hold himself above the parties, including his own party.

e Frank: One Year of Gaullism (April 1959)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
One Year of Gaullism
(April 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 6, Spring 1959, pp. 28–31.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

When this issue is published, it will be nearly one year since de Gaulle was installed in power, the parliamentary French Republic having given way to a regime of a typically Bonapartist personal power.
In a series of articles published in previous issues of this magazine, we have see how the operation was carried out. A recently published book, The 13 Plots of 13 May [1], though written in a journalistic tone to glorify those who benefited by the operation, confirms the gist of what we pointed out. The groups that were kicking up a row in Algeria, the little groups (fascist or other) in Paris – all that meant very little. They provided more noise than action. The overthrow of the parliamentary regime was possible only because of the combination of two factors: the refusal of the army’s top cadres, especially the chief of the general staff, General Ely, any longer to obey the civil power that derived its authority from the parliament; the activity of the general-secretary of the Socialist Party, Guy Mollet. According to the authors of this book, he “was a 14th plot all by himself and perhaps the most representative of them all.” And indeed de Gaulle was able to come to power only because Guy Mollet sowed the greatest confusion in the SP and thus more than contributed to the paralysis of the working class, disoriented by the whole policy of the French CP, especially on the Algerian question.
We have also seen, in the previously published articles, the deeper why of the operation: because the dynamic and modernized part of French capitalism could not go forward with a parliamentary structure of power which under the then conditions of French society gave too many possibilities for the archaic and sometimes even parasitic sectors of the economy to impede the necessary advance of the re-equipped sectors. We may say that this understanding of the deeper causes of the change of regime is now spreading to many circles both in the workers’ movement or its periphery and in bourgeois spheres.
Never before has the French bourgeoisie brought about such a change of regime under genuinely peaceful conditions. Never before has it had a power concentrated in so few hands. The new parliament is not even asking to use the meagre prerogatives accorded to it by the new constitution. The governmental cabinet is above all an office for recording the decisions taken by de Gaulle and a few key-men, some of whom are not even ministers. A “Community” has been set up between the Fifth Republic and several republics that were formerly colonies, which has no statute and is worked out among a few men without any control over them.
Thus de Gaulle pictures himself in the lineage of Louis XIV and Napoleon I. “L’etat, c’est moi.” I order ... my government ... my ministers ...
But what has he done in the year now ending? We leave aside those speeches worthy of a colonel presenting the regimental flag to recruits. We shall mention only as a reminder his paternalist proposals about international policy to a world which is quite able to distinguish between the France of capitalism’s beginnings and the France of today.
Where the new regime has produced some impression among the open-mouthed is in the Malraux floor-show. Since the University was almost unanimously hostile to the new regime, de Gaulle has enjoyed making a bit of noise about a few decisions concerning the administrations of the state theatres.
During the last 12 months, the government has issued a spate of ordinances which have considerably modified certain fields, especially in the administration. Nobody can say what all these ordinances contain – nobody, that is, save the prime minister to “My General,” Debré, who is a real fanatic about administration and who believes in the virtues of the state bureaucracy.
But two questions were posed to the new regime: the economic situation created by the launching of the European Common Market and by a recession in Europe; and the Algerian affair.
In economic matters, the government could not do other than to put itself at the service of French capitalism so that it may take its place in the Common Market. It also utilized the recession in order to make a strong attack on the conditions of the laboring people, especially on social security. Wages have again fallen behind prices. All this was done in the name of economic “liberalism”: the principal financial expert who prepared the government’s decision invoked the authority of Bastiat! Already, however, a tendency is coming out for measures of a Keynesian sort.
Still, the French economy, whatever the means employed, is going forward – into a blind alley, for the government wants to engage in numerous projects, including the manufacture of an atomic bomb, while showing itself incapable of finding a solution to the war in Algeria that is costing about 2,000 million francs a day.
If de Gaulle arrived at power without too great difficulties, if Guy Mollet and Thorez, each in his own way, led the masses astray, it was above all because the governments resulting from the 2 January 1956 elections, where the voters voted for peace, got deeper and deeper into the war, and many people thought that de Gaulle could bring peace in Algeria. His private remarks prior to May 13th, like those of an oracle, were interpreted by everyone in the meaning that best suited himself. Illusions about de Gaulle’s position on Algeria existed – perhaps still exist – even among the FLN tops.
Once arrived in power, he continued this game of sibylline declarations, after which the press and parties would engage in ridiculous exegeses. He regained – probably with some difficulty – the control of the top men of the army in Algeria; the matter is more doubtful concerning a whole series of officers who are not near the end of their careers. He did not succeed in breaking up the FLN – which seems to have been his main objective – because he really had nothing to offer. And now he is seeing in Algeria the revival – this time aimed against himself – of the discontent of the ultras, who attribute the continuation of the war to aid from abroad, to defeatists and traitors in France, and to de Gaulle’s complicity with them.
De Gaulle’s biggest success in France had consisted in pushing into the background the Algerian war which from 1955 to 13 May 1958 had been at the centre of all manifestations of political life in France. In the recent municipal elections, it was a question of social security, of unemployment, of the pensions for the last two wars’ ex-servicemen; the Algerian war was scarcely mentioned, in fourth or fifth place. The Communist Party did nothing to breast this current. And so it is not to be hoped for that this state of affairs will be rapidly overcome. But it is inevitable that the war of Algeria will come back, and strongly, into the foreground, for there are the above-mentioned costs which will bring about disastrous economic consequences; for there are, despite the lies in the press, an exacerbation of the fighting in Algeria and daily losses in human lives. If the reaction is alone in making itself heard at present, it is nonetheless true that the great masses of the metropolis do not feel that this war is in their interest and are skeptical about its outcome. The deficiencies and betrayals of the workers’ leaderships contribute to making the Algerian question into a factor of putrefaction in the social body.
*
We had defined Gaullism as a Bonapartist and not a fascist regime. Just as Trotsky had done for pre-1933 Germany, the distinction thus made had for its aim an understanding of the correlation of various social forces in order to deduce therefrom the prospects and possibilities for the workers’ movement.
De Gaulle, we said, wanted to set up a strong power; he was able to establish a regime that will demonstrate brutality toward the masses, but the resolute use of the forces of the state does not alter the fact that this regime has only a weak social base of its own. It will operate especially by balancing between opposed social forces. In the last analysis, this means, socially speaking, that the new regime, even when it proves its strength, is extremely unstable, and that it must at certain moments find itself faced with critical situations which will afford possibilities to the workers or risk being exploited by fascicizing forces. The new regime has not avoided civil war, as is thought by so many petty-bourgeois imbeciles who would not hesitate to call themselves men of the left; it has only postponed the deadline for awhile, changed the correlation of forces, and turned the initiative over to the bourgeoisie.
In the months following May 13th, it might have seemed that our analysis was erroneous: how could it be said that the new regime had a narrow social base when in the September referendum it had collected 80% of the votes? when in the November legislative elections it had succeeded in taking about 1,500,000 votes away from the Communist Party – something unseen since the Liberation? Not to mention the collapse of old bourgeois parties like the Radicals.
The March 1959 municipal elections have provided a more complete chart of what happened in the country. Granted, the purely local and municipal aspects of these elections must be taken into account. But the political trends were clear in the big cities, where these elections have a pronouncedly political character. The Communist Party won back close to a million votes; the polarization was also visible on the right; the Radical Party, formerly the great occupier of the town halls, disappeared, part of its inheritance falling to the Mollet Socialists, part to the right. Whereas, after the November elections, the government thought it had got too much of a good thing, after the municipal elections it did not know what kind of a face to put on the matter. “I do not concern myself with the electoral conjuncture,” the general finally said, not ill content to leave his prime minister to get out of the scrape as best he could.
The alleged Marxists of the Thorez and Duclos stripe, whom a combination of circumstances has put at the head of the majority of the workers in France, pretend not to remember the votes of the second half of 1958, and cynically declare to the members of the French CP: the municipal elections show that the voters agree with us because our line is correct. This political existentialism in reality just conjures away a phenomenon that is new and of considerable importance.
It is possible that between September-November 1958 and March 1959 about a million former Communist voters may have voted UNR and then returned to voting PCF. It is more likely that the real figure of the voters who thus oscillated between these two formations was in the neighborhood of half a million, for various indications testify to the fact that there was a change in the nature of the abstentions: in September and November, it was former rightist abstentionists who took the trouble to vote in order to support de Gaulle, while former Communist voters stayed home, considering that it was at that time useless to vote. In March 1959 the opposite phenomenon occurred: on the right, many people, disappointed in de Gaulle, went back to abstentionism, while the left went to the ballot-boxes because everyone felt that an anti-government vote was coming.
Whether the first or the second hypothesis be accepted, a phenomenon unknown since the Liberation appeared: very big shifts (either from abstention to voting or vice versa, or from one extreme to the other) were made by a considerable number of voters, to the amount of between half a million and a million.
In this way, de Gaulle’s arrival at power, which was to put an end to the cascade of ministries, which was to ensure political stability, was accompanied by considerable oscillations on the part of very broad masses, going from one extreme to the other. This phenomenon is apparent in the election results, while on the surface of things there was only political apathy to be seen.
How to explain such a contradiction? The operation of May 13th destroyed the completely tottering equilibrium of the Fourth Republic, but did not replace it by any new equilibrium of a genuine sort. The old political representation has become inadequate, and great masses are hunting for solutions, for extreme rather than temperate solutions. This is what they had the opportunity of expressing by their ballots; but they are apathetic and have not taken any action because, first, de Gaulle had at his disposal a certain amount of credit (which is still not entirely squandered), and then because nobody called on them to act, especially not the workers’ and leftist organizations which are presenting as the only perspective the renovation of defunct republics.
This apathy does not mean that society has been politically atomized, as a fascist regime would have done; it indicates a long ripening of forces which do not succeed in finding a way out, and to which nobody possessed of authority is proposing a solution.
And so, despite all the instability inherent in the new regime, nothing indicates that it cannot last for some time. For big capital, it is an almost ideal regime, since weaker interests have no means of bringing pressure on the direction of the state. The real forces of fascism, i.e., the networks that Soustelle & Co are setting up, do not yet have mass strength. The working class finds itself paralyzed by its leaderships. All this combines to enable the Bonapartist regime to tack along and to appear to be powerful over a society that does not know how to pull itself together again.
Under these conditions, although the workers’ movement is no longer in the state of prostration that it found itself in on the morrow of de Gaulle’s arrival at power, and although in the most recent period we have observed some stirrings, we must not have the illusion that the working class is already climbing back up the hill. Indeed, it has not yet had the opportunity of seeing the new regime in all its aspects: there have been no big strikes or big clashes with the forces of capitalist order. The working class’s still great parliamentary illusions have even been strengthened by the municipal election results.
Nevertheless, a new element has just come to light within the masses: a rapprochement between the Communist and Socialist rank-and-file. Whereas for several years now there were observable growing reservations among the Socialist voters about voting for better placed Communist candidates on the second ballot – this was seen even among voters of the UGS, which did not hesitate to call for voting for PCF candidates, and this tendency was still being shown in the November 1958 legislative elections – for several weeks now the contrary trend has been observed; in spite of the directives of the Socialist leaders, a large number of voters transferred their votes to the Communist candidates; and in the municipal elections agreements were made in quite numerous places throughout France for joint lists on the second ballot.
It can easily be imagined how the leadership of the PCF argues from this fact that it proves the correctness of its policy. It does so with all the more effrontery in that it quotes only the most favorable figures. Now if these are examined more closely, it can be seen that, for every Socialist who turned toward the candidates of the PCF, there were two and sometimes three who did not do so. In other words, for the moment this trend of the rank and file toward unity is not strong enough to flood irresistibly over the reformist leaderships’ heads. True, it is necessary to take into account the social composition of the body of Socialist voters, which is not formed only of workers – far from it. But an enormous pressure for unity in the working class would be necessary to overcome this situation, and we are not yet at that point. For if the new regime is acting in a way that aids a trend towards unity, the policy of the PCF has nowise changed the feeling of distrust of very broad masses toward the PCF, the methods it uses in various organizations, and the “Hungarian-style socialism” that it advocates.
*
Thus the first year of the Gaullist regime is about to end without apparently anything stirring. That is both true and false. Since his arrival at power, de Gaulle has strengthened the state machinery, but he has not yet had any clash with the masses. What has been revealed by the elections is that transformations have been produced which, though molecular, are very deep and run in an absolutely unforeseeable direction.
Under these conditions, the present atmosphere of apathy will probably still continue for a period, till the day when everything that is ripening in the depths will surge up, to the great surprise of everybody. We must be prepared and prepare the workers’ movement, under the current sluggish conditions, for the period that will follow, and especially for its abrupt turns.
As a result of the theoretical and political research now being done in little groups with few or no roots in the worker masses, we are witnessing a profusion of the most confused conceptions. There are many who reject what Stalinism (in theory at least) retained of Bolshevism, while keeping the opportunism cultivated by the leadership of the PCF. On one point, however, some slight progress has been made: the idea is developing that, among the causes of the May 1958 defeat, there is to be found the lack of a perspective and programme of transition toward socialism. Thus, although there is confusion – and to spare – about the content of this programme, on the means of promoting it, especially concerning the question of the government to be advocated for this purpose, the idea is making progress – without being stated in these precise terms – that the dilemma is not democracy or fascism, as the Stalinists à la Thorez claim, but socialism or fascism, as only we Trotskyists have been declaring for years now.
And it is only by opening up the prospect of a fight for a socialist society that there can be effectively prepared the overthrow of the personalist regime. The great worker masses have not yet reached this point, but their coming experience will orient them along this road.
April 1959

Footnote
1. M. and S. Bromberger, Les 13 complots du 18 mai, Paris (Fayard).
 

e Frank: The Prophet Unarmed (September 1959)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Book Reviews
The Prophet Unarmed
(September 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 7, Autumn 1959, pp. 79–80.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The Prophet Unarmed: Trotsky 1921–1929
by Isaac Deutscher
Pp. 490. London (Oxford University Press), 1959. 38s
We very warmly recommend to our readers this second volume of Isaac Deutscher’s biography of Trotsky, which has just gone on sale. As in the first volume – which concerned the previous years – we find here the same wealth of facts, testifying to very meticulous research work into numerous sources. What we have the right to expect of a historian is that he understand and demonstrate the concatenation of events, their internal logic, and – when it is a matter of the biography of a man like Trotsky, situated at the centre of gigantic political struggles – cast light on the place, the role, and the purposes of the man under study. From this point of view, Deutscher, without in the least indulging in apologetics, has written a very solid book.
It is true that the five years that have passed between the first and second volumes of Trotsky’s biography have been filled with events that have powerfully aided a better comprehension of years of the greatest and most fatal lacerations in the Bolshevik Party. Destalinization – however limited it still may be today – could not fail to cast a very vivid light on the years of the Stalinization of the Soviet Union. In his preface, Deutscher explains it thoroughly, and at the same time explains why Stalin’s epigones, after having taken two steps forward, take one step backward, and why they also are trying to conjure away the ghost of Trotsky. He also shows the hopelessness of this latter effort in the following lines of his preface:
What the Soviet Union and communism take over from Stalinism is mainly its practical achievement; in other respects, as regards methods of government and political action, ideas, and ’moral climate’, the legacy of the Stalin era is worse than empty; the sooner it is disposed of, the better. But precisely in these respects Trotsky has still much to offer; and the political development can hardly transcend him otherwise than by absorbing all that is vital in his thought and applying it to realities which are far more advanced, varied, and complex than those he knew.
These lines tie the past up with the present and the future. But Deutscher’s book is no more a political work than it is a work of apologetics: it is the book of a historian, but a historian who is treating past questions that retain a burning timeliness. And one of the most valuable aspects of the book is that history is laid open and demonstrated therein with so much cohesion that it cannot fail to lead the reader to draw conclusions about present-day events.
The historical narrative will be a revelation for the majority of readers, for since 1930 there has been such an accumulation of lies about this past that – with the exception of a tiny minority that was able to become acquainted with the truth in pamphlets printed in very small editions – even those who were far from believing in the Stalinist lies could hardly have a correct view of what had happened. Even for those who knew the truth and who really lived these years, so to speak – I refer to the communist militants outside the USSR, who, from this period on, were close to the Bolshevik-Leninists of the Soviet Union – this book will do more than just remind them of a story they already know. It will also permit them to re-examine it, on the one hand in a more complete way (for in that period only fragmentary information got through), and on the other from a distance that allows them to see better the concatenation of events.
The book’s first chapter, titled The Power and the Dream, gives a picture of the Soviet Union immediately after the end of the Civil War, of the dislocation of the economy and of the extraordinary depression of the proletariat. This chapter also gives a view of the problems which then faced the Soviet leaders, and how Lenin and Trotsky in particular reacted. Nobody today can doubt that Lenin and Trotsky were getting ready to lead a fight against the rising bureaucracy. Deutscher recalls this, with all proofs in hand, those furnished by Trotsky and those provided by Khrushchev & Co since the XXth Congress, which corroborate on all points the documents that Trotsky had published some 30 years before. But Deutscher carries his researches still further. He shows that Trotsky had been the first to become aware of the deterioration that was occurring among the top men in the party and the state, and that Lenin, for a period, busy with daily tasks and anxious to maintain the cohesion of the leadership, not yet having measured the current phenomenon at its correct value, resisted several proposals of Trotsky in the Political Bureau. Then he shows Lenin, become conscious of the gravity of the bureaucratic danger, carrying out a turn and decided to lead a resolute and implacable struggle: [...] he used his last ounce of strength to strike a blow at the over-centralized machine of power. He invoked the purpose of the revolution for its own sake, from a deep, disinterested, and remorseful devotion to it. And when at last, a dying man, his mind ablaze, he moved to retrieve the revolution from its heavy encumbrance, it was to Trotsky that he turned as his ally.
Another chapter of the greatest interest is that titled Not by Politics Alone ... – devoted to Trotsky’s position on cultural questions. It can be measured therein how greatly the bureaucracy disfigured Marxism in these questions, and how many intellectuals had their minds so beclouded by the material power at the bureaucracy’s disposal that they swallowed down a crude and indigestible mash of grain-husks which of itself could not hold its own on the plane of ideas. We should like to hope that these pages will aid numerous intellectuals who belatedly broke away from Stalinism to find their way back to the genuine path of Marxism.
We do not want to list in detail every chapter of a book which will instruct its readers and make them reflect. We should, however, like to say a few words about certain questions taken up in this book, on which, in our opinion, there still remains much to be said.
Deutscher on several occasions mentions Trotsky’s hesitation to start the struggle or to continue it. He stresses Trotsky’s silence at the XIIth Congress on the problems of democracy and the party regime, his silence at the XIVth Congress at the time of the break-up of the troika and the conflict between Stalin on the one hand and Zinoviev and Kamenev on the other. And he seeks an explanation therefor, all the more so in that, in volume one, he had highlighted Trotsky’s audacity in 1917. One point he raises is that of the relations between Trotsky and the Old Guard of the Bolshevik Party: Trotsky was, he said, “in it but not of it.” This is partly true and there is no doubt that it was a factor, especially at the beginning; but in 1926–27, the majority of the Old Guard – as Deutscher himself notes – was in opposition to the Stalin-Bukharin leadership and had rallied behind Trotsky and Zinoviev, because the political questions were the determinant ones. If a large number of them later capitulated, that was either because of political divergences, or because of exhaustion. Deutscher gives as the main reason for Trotsky’s attitude the fact that he took his position within the framework of the correlation of forces that existed at that period:
He placed his own person and action within the framework of social forces which determined the course of events; he saw his own role as subordinate to those forces; and his aim, the revival of proletarian democracy, dictated to him the choice of his means.
That would deserve to be considerably developed. Of all the Soviet Bolsheviks who lived through those years, Trotsky was unquestionably the one who had the closest grasp of reality and who was the most far-sighted. Now for a long time it was not against the danger of a stifling bureaucratic power, but against that of a restoration of capitalism, that he led the struggle. A few months ago, in a conversation, a young cadre-element of a “people’s democracy” brought up against us this “error” of Trotsky, for the danger of the restoration of capitalism proved to be non-existent. We do not think it was any error. First of all, Marxism makes no pretensions to astrology; what can be asked of it is, in the first place, a correct analysis of the social forces in presence; as for the correlation of forces between them, that is more difficult to measure. And especially, in the present case, nothing would be more incorrect than to deduce the correlation of forces in the USSR and in the world of nearly 40 years ago by – what the sputniks and luniks of today indicate. The bureaucratic phenomenon was occurring for the first time in a workers’ state, and the possibility of a regime of the Stalinist type was a priori difficult to imagine; but, before anything else, in those years the possibilities of a capitalist restoration were not at all just a product of Trotsky’s imagination. In case a civil war broke out, the pro-capitalist forces, still numerous in this period, would quickly and forcefully have come into the open. It is because Trotsky, more than anyone else, had made a keen appraisal of the dangers of this situation that, in the struggle against the bureaucracy, he had an attitude of extreme prudence that seems in contradiction with the audacity he demonstrated during the Revolution and the Civil War.
There was also, among the elements that weighed in his decisions, a highly complex question that was a stumbling-block for a large part of the Bolshevik cadres who participated in the Left Opposition of 1926–27; and on this point, in our opinion, Deutscher’s thought, although it has advanced compared to that in the first volume, has not succeeded in reaching a satisfactory clarification. It is known that Deutscher insisted on “substitutism,” an idea expressed by Trotsky in 1903 when he was fighting against Lenin, but which he never took up again after 1917. “Substitutism” would seem to be the party’s substituting itself for the class, thinking and deciding for it, and even acting or forcing it to act, it might be said, in spite of itself. After the Civil War, the Soviet working class was exhausted to a degree never experienced before; then the party substituted itself for the class; and that would be Stalinism – Bolshevism nationally and internationally isolated from the working class. Let us grant that Deutscher’s thought is more subtly shaded, and more subtly shaded in volume two than in the last pages of volume one and in other works he has written. But this idea is a quite widespread one in a form without any subtle shadings.
For many members of the Old Guard, the party remained the party, and that led them to capitulation for lack of prospects for a revival of the Soviet and international workers’ movement. In the ’20s it was difficult to determine to what a degree the party was still the Bolshevik Party and to what a degree it had been corrupted by the Soviet bureaucracy. A process, a struggle, were taking place: the party, from being the instrument of the proletariat, was tending to become the instrument of strata that had emerged from the proletariat and its revolution, strata whose specific interests were from the historical point of view distinct from and opposed to those of the proletariat. The Bolshevik Party did not “substitute” itself for the working class under Stalinism. A leading party, even a leading coterie, cannot take the place of a social stratum; they are always its expression, even if in certain cases this does not appear as clearly as was the case in the Soviet Union. The Bolshevik Party became the instrument of a social stratum other than the proletariat. The form of the Communist Party remained the same, but the content was profoundly changed – not only on the plane of ideology, but also on that of men: it was not only the Left Opposition that was physically crushed, not only the Right Opposition, but also (as Khrushchev mentioned at the XXth Congress) the majority of the “winners,” i.e., of the second-rank members who had ensured the victory of Stalin’s leadership. The objection will perhaps be raised that it was in the CP of the USSR that destalinization began. But under present conditions, since that party is the only political forum, it was inevitably there that the first signs of political renewal had to show themselves. But if the bureaucrats and Thermidoreans had every interest in using for their own ends the form of the Bolshevik Party, exploiting at that time its authority in order the better to put over an anti-Bolshevik policy, we are profoundly convinced that the new vanguard of Soviet society, at a given moment in its development, will – in a different way, even to the degree of organizational forms – oppose what has for long years now been only an instrument of oppression of the Soviet workers.
*
Deutscher’s book ends with Trotsky’s exile from the Soviet Union. A new chapter in Trotsky’s life was opening – the last chapter, also full of great events. Let us hope that we may be able to read with as much pleasure as this present volume the end of the biography announced by Deutscher. And let us conclude this hasty review of volume two by quoting the lines with which the author expresses his evaluation of Trotsky:

“Very few men in history have been in such triumphant harmony with their time as Trotsky was in 1917 and after; and so it was not because of any inherent estrangement from the realities of his generation that he then came into conflict with his time. The precursor’s character and temperament led him into it. He had, in 1905, been the forerunner of 1917 and of the Soviets, he had been second to none as the leader of the Soviets in 1917; he had been the prompter of planned economy and industrialization since the early 1920s; and he was to remain the great though not unerring harbinger of some future reawakening of the revolutionary peoples (to that political reawakening the urge to transcend Stalinism which took hold of the Soviet Union in the years 1953–56 was an important pointer; still faint but sure). He fought “against history” in the name of history itself; and against its accomplished facts, which all too often were facts of oppression, he held out the better, the liberating accomplishments of which one day it would be capable.”
September 1959
 

e Frank: The Election Defeat of the French SP and CP (Winter 1959)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
The Election Defeat of the French SP and CP
(Winter 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 5, Winter 1959, pp. 33–36.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The elections of November 23rd and 30th were the logical consequence of the referendum of September 28th, which itself was the inevitable result of the coup of May 13th that caused the fall of the democratic parliamentary regime and installed a new regime aspiring to establish a “strong state.”
The 4,500,000 “no”-votes of the referendum appeared again, 3,800,000 in the vote for the candidates of the French Communist Party, and the rest divided among various left candidates (Mendès-France Radicals, UGS, Autonomous SP, and also a few candidates of the Guy Mollet SP).
By comparison with the preceding elections the proportion of abstentions was 4 to 5% higher, i.e., 800,000 to 1,000,000 votes. It is very probable it is here that a big part of the 1,600,000 votes lost by the CP are to be found. It could also be granted without risk of error that there was a shift in the percentage of usual abstentions. In other words, contrary to preceding elections, it was on the left and not on the right that the mass of the abstentions was to be found.
 
The UNR and the Other Bourgeois Parties
The big winner was the UNR, a new formation set up less than two months before the elections, which was considered by the electors as the eminently “Gaullist” organization, the so-called “Left Gaullists” not having found any audience.
We must in the first place stress the debacle of the traditional bourgeois-democratic parties and of the most outstanding among them, the Radical Party. It had already emerged from the Second World War in a crippled state; its proverbial dexterity had permitted it to find once more an appreciable place in the Fourth Republic. But the contradictions of that republic had deeply divided it. At the elections which inaugurated the Fifth Republic, all its tendencies – the left of Mendès-France, the professionals of the French South (Daladier, Baylet, Bourgès-Maunoury), the split-off right (Morice, Martineau-Déplat) – bit the dust. We are witnessing the probably definitive liquidation of that party which boasted of being the “infantry” of the Republic.
Two bourgeois parties have resisted the drive of the UNR: the Mouvement Republicain Populaire and the Independents.
The MRP was not exactly a traditional party of democracy. It had emerged at the end of the Second World War, gathering former left Christian Democrats, Christian trade-unionists, and all kinds of politicians blessed by the high clergy. At that moment it claimed to be the “party of fidelity” to de Gaulle. It later broke with him to maintain its unity and to play a role in the Fourth Republic. It was under the presidency of one of its members, Pflimlin, that it was rapidly able to rediscover that “fidelity” on the morrow of May 13th.
The case of the Independents is different. There we are in the presence of the classic right, of the well-placed bourgeoisie, of the well-provided-for, the satiated, the “notables.” Normally they are the most desirous of a “strong power” of the Gaullist type. Yet it is to be noted that in Paris, where political currents are expressed more clearly, they had trouble in standing up to the wave of the UNR – which held a grudge against them for the break-up of the Gaullist RPF in 1952 – and even lost positions.
What then is this UNR that picked up a large number of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois votes of which the latter in 1956 had been cast in favor of the Poujadists or the Mendesists), and even a certain number of votes of backward and ex-Communist workers?
Formally, this organization claims it should be seated in the “centre” of the parliamentary hemicycle. That makes no sense. We find here a certain number of bourgeois, well installed in society, and a whole series of people who aspire to obtain a good place in the new regime. Politically, the UNR is a mixture of Bonapartists and fascists. The division is by no means traced out beforehand, it will in the first place depend on the course of events and also on the role played by certain persons. The principal leader, Soustelle, an intellectual without political ideas, is a specialist of the police and espionage networks. He is proceeding to cell-building inside the administrations and thus is playing two cards: the regime such as de Gaulle desires it, and the fascist regime in case of need.
 
De Gaulle and the New Parliament
The Assembly elected does not correspond perhaps with the desires of de Gaulle, who wanted a “balanced” parliament, permitting him to play more easily the role of “arbiter.” But it would be erroneous to think that there will soon be a crisis in his relations with that parliament or that a crisis will soon be provoked in the UNR to make the parliament more tractable. Some people are making the comparison with the former RPF, with its 1951 parliamentary fraction which was not long in breaking away, to the
greater profit of the classic right. They forget that we are no longer in a regime of parliamentary democracy, but in a regime arising out of an intervention by the army. The Assembly has the role, not of choosing the government, but, in de Gaulle’s own terms, of giving it support. The “new men,” whether elected from France or from Algeria, are asked only to be “beni-oui-ouis” (North African equivalents of “Uncle Toms”). Besides, parliamentary sessions are reduced to the minimum. Those who lead, moreover, whether de Gaulle or Soustelle or some others, are all provided with a strong dose of cynicism toward men in general, and it is well-justified toward these “new men,” who will be seen to rush for the spoils-jobs, stipends, and other advantages that their election can obtain for them.
Divergences will not be lacking in the leading spheres. But it will be less than ever in parliament that questions will be settled. Yet at a later stage, in case of an exceptional aggravation of the situation, of a crisis of the de Gaulle regime, a parliament like the one the elections produced could considerably facilitate the “legal” manoeuvres of aspiring fascists.
 
Toward the End of Molletism in the SP
After the May crisis, Guy Mollet believed he had played everybody off against everybody: de Gaulle against the colonels and the ultras; Duchet and the Independents against Soustelle; Defferre against the minority who left his party; above all he envisioned that the working class’s “unpoisoning” from the CP would work out to his own advantage. On September 28th all his desires seemed to be fulfilled and he got up on a table in the town hall of Arras to announce the results of the referendum. It did not need two months to prove that he had worked for the King of Prussia, i.e., for Soustelle. The candidates of the SP got a sound beating, whether they were Lacoste, Moch, Defferre, or Tanguy-Prigent. Mollet himself got by only with the loudly trumpeted support of the UNR.
Forty deputies elected for the party that was the pivot of the Fourth Republic! It is necessary to go back to before 1900 to find so weak a Socialist parliamentary group.
Mollet, who, right after the May crisis, had manoeuvred to postpone sine die the congress of the party, in order to have time to rediscover a majority in the parliamentary group and in the party itself, this time hurried things: four days after the elections the congress was held. It was necessary to leave no time to the militants to reflect on the causes of the defeat. Mollet gave them as fodder the promise of a “constructive opposition” preparing a victory – for 1963. At that congress Mollet put forward the argument which can justify his presence once more in the government: he fears that the pendulum may swing too much to the right, which would later have as a consequence a counter-swing too much to the left.
However this may be, the November elections will be the point of departure for a rebound of the crisis in the SP, which will lead to the end of the leadership of Mollet. For these defeated deputies – and with them quite a number of cadres of this party – are also mayors, general councillors, etc. And the elections for those posts will take place soon. They can pardon Mollet for having held the stirrup for de Gaulle, but not for making them lose their electoral positions.
Let us say a few words on the autonomous SP and the UGS . Their association with the Mendesists in the Union des Forces Démocratiques has served only to emasculate their programme. In general the candidates of the autonomous SP obtained less bad results than those of the UGS. It is desirable that the autonomous SP draws as a lesson from these elections the necessity of engaging in a relentless offensive against the Mollet leadership, instead of apologizing, as it has done up to now, for having left his party.
 
The Immobilism of the Thorez Leadership
The CP lost 1,600,000 votes compared with 1956. It found itself back to a percentage of votes equal to that of 1936 (see table below).



Year


 


Votes


 


Percentage




1924


   875,000


  9.7




1928


1,063,000


11.4




1932


   796,000


  9.6




1936


1,502,000


18.3




1945 [1]


5,024,000


26.4




June 1946


5,199,000


26.4




November 1946


5,489,000


28.5




1951


4,910,000


25.6




1956


5,532,000


25.7




1958


3,882,000


18.9



The leadership, to minimize this profound defeat of the CP, insists that the CP remains the strongest party in France, it denounces the iniquity of the electoral law and does not fail to pick up everything that was written on this subject in the international press, it insists upon the gains (of less than 2%) of the Communist candidates between the first and the second ballots.
Above all, not the slightest political self-criticism should be counted on. On the contrary, the Political Bureau declaration of December 2nd stressed that “numerous Frenchmen, justly anxious about national greatness and the future,” entered the wrong house by voting UNR instead of voting PCF.
 
They Missed the Bus
The Thorez leadership will try to make the Communist militants believe that – as has been the case more than once before – it is just a bad moment to get through, but that afterwards the party will come back stronger than ever. This argument, we may be sure, will not go down easily. The leadership of the CP will beware of reproducing the table of Communist votes since 1924. For it clearly appears from it that in 1936, with the first big drive of the masses, the party had taken the road to the conquest of the working class; that in 1945 it had obtained the majority in the working class; that at that period there were committees in the plants, and armed militias; and that the leadership at that moment simply missed the bus. From 1952 up to the moment of the expulsion of Marty, this essential idea has manifested itself on several occasions.
 
The Idea of Democratically Revising the Gaullist Constitution
Thorez has reaffirmed that he is more than ever a partisan of “the broadening” of democracy. He is even for “the democratic revision of the Constitution,” the one of September 28th (see his answers to the five questions of the periodical Regards). If, with all the strength it had at its disposal in 1945, the PCF did not succeed in “broadening” democracy and peacefully passing over to socialism, how can it be imagined at present, with so minute a parliamentary group in a rump parliament, that a “democratic revision” of the Constitution can be obtained? And what would this revision give? A slightly re-cooked-up Fourth Republic? But nobody can be mobilized for that!
 
The Democratic Impasse; The Way Out Toward Socialism
It will not be easy to dislodge the de Gaulle regime. For the immediate future, there is above all to be organized a stubborn defense against the assaults – from the government, the bosses, and the fascists – that are going to multiply. But this defense will not get up strength unless the masses are suffused, not with hollow formulae on “democracy” and the “parliamentary ways,” but with a willingness to fight by revolutionary means for a workers’ government which will tackle the construction of socialism.
Forty years ago the Bolsheviks denounced the Mensheviks and the reformists of every kidney who were blocking the road of the socialist revolution in Europe and who were claiming that Russia was not ripe for socialism. Today we see pseudo-Bolsheviks, in fact the disciples of Stalin, the servants of the Soviet bureaucracy, claim that China is ripe for socialism, but not France, not Great Britain, not a single one of the economically developed countries of Europe !
In France, as in all countries of capitalist Europe, the workers’ movement – whether led by reformists or by Stalinists – is facing a major crisis. After the First World War the socialist revolution had miscarried, above all through the betrayal of the Socialist leaderships; its defeat ended in the victory of fascism, which covered almost the whole of Europe. After the Second World War, reformist and Stalinist
leaders got together to channel the mass movements and re-establish regimes of parliamentary democracy. These live in almost chronic crisis. France got rid of hers by Gaullism, and elsewhere they have been much weakened. To stay on the level of bourgeois democracy is to set out along the road that France has already traveled, toward the open dictatorship of capital.
Gaullism is not at all stabilized, notwithstanding the 80% of votes which it obtained. It can founder on Algeria, on economic difficulties, but in what way? There will be no real broadening of democracy for the benefit of the masses except as a result of a struggle that will overthrow the capitalist regime.
 
Guarantees, but to Whom and for What?
As to the question of the gains made by the CP between the first and second ballots, their numerical unimportance has great political significance. It is incontestable that, in a general way, the Socialist electors (even those of the autonomous SP or of the UGS) voted in the second round only to a very small degree for the best placed Communist candidates. Far more cases can be pointed out in which the votes were cast in favor of bourgeois candidates. In the Central Committee session which preceded the elections Thorez said that it was necessary to play on the “republican reflex.” We shall not explain at length here the confusion which this implies (the difference between classes has been replaced by a difference between “right” and “left” outside the classes); but there is no doubt that in France the “republican reflex” (no enemies to the left!) has strong traditions. If it did not operate, it was because there is not only a basic and comprehensible anti-communism in the reformist and bourgeois-democratic leaderships, but also an aversion in the Socialist masses toward the CP.
The reason is very simple. The leadership of the CP declares that it offers to the democratic and reformist leaders, to whom it proposes a political alliance, guarantees that it will be faithful to the contract and will not utilize the force of the workers to break out of the capitalist regime and set out on the road to socialism. That is not the problem for the broad working masses who distrust the leadership of the CP. It is not the coup of Prague against the bourgeoisie which they fear, but the coup of Budapest against the workers who do not share the “line” of the leadership. They acquired this distrust as a result of all their experiences in France itself, of manoeuvres, of the strangling of democracy, of slanderous and brutal methods within those workers’ organizations controlled by the Stalinists. If there were not that distrust in the ranks, all the venomous anti-communist campaigns of the reformists would fail and the CP would not be experiencing the isolation which its militants are feeling more and more.
Thorez, just like Mollet, is sustaining his party by saying that all will go well – tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow. But although he has at his disposal more possibilities of manoeuvre toward his party, he will not long be able to keep down a crisis which has been ripening for years now. For tomorrow all will not go better. The objective situation contains powerful contradictions which can permit a reversal of the situation, but it must be realized that those are not immediate and almost automatic possibilities. The momentum of Gaullism launched by the coup of May 13th is not at all exhausted; the figures of the referendum and the elections attest to its extent, but they do not at all mean that the bottom has already been reached. On the contrary, we are heading into extremely difficult periods. The worst of all aberrations would be to sow illusions and false hopes. Finally, even when the objective conditions have been transformed, we shall get out of this situation only if we get rid of the fatal policies that led to the defeat of 1958.

Footnote
1. Beginning with 1945, because of votes for women, the total number of voters has more than doubled.
 

 There Were No Moscow Trials! (Winter 1959/60)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
P.F.
There Were No Moscow Trials!
(Winter 1959/60)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 8, Winter 1959–60, pp. 58–59.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

History of the CPSU
Paris
During 1959 the manual promised by Khrushchev at the 20th Congress was published. The new History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is a fat volume of 740 pages which – like the Stalinist work – begins with the origins of the Marxist movement in Russia. Unlike its predecessor, which ends with the year 1938, it takes in not only the years of the Second World War but those following it, after the death of Stalin, and also treats the question of the elimination of the “anti-Party group” (Molotov, Kaganovich, etc.). This, then, is a very “Khrushchevite” handbook. But does it conform to Marxist scientific objectivity?
A rapid reading enables one to see that though many things bearing the imprint of Stalin himself have been suppressed, many lies and deformations still remain – but it would take more time to refute all these than this book will live in the USSR.
But this book is best characterized by what it leaves out: the Moscow trials!
Stalin’s History was written as a kind of mighty drama. The Party originated in Lenin’s struggles against his political adversaries. The struggle rises to a crescendo. Stalin assumes the mantle. His enemies are more and more unmasked: “The Bukharinites degenerate into two-faced politicians,” “the Trotskyites, from two-faced politicians, degenerate into a band of white guards, assassins and spies.” (French edition, p. 359) The trials reveal that “the Trotskyite and Bukharinite monsters, on the orders of their employers, the bourgeois espionage agencies, have set themselves the goal of destroying the Party and the Soviet state, of undermining the defense of the country, of facilitating foreign military intervention against the USSR, of preparing the defeat of the Red Army, of dismembering the USSR, of yielding to the Japanese the Soviet maritime province in the Far East, of yielding to the Poles Soviet Byelorussia, of yielding to the Germans the Soviet Ukraine, of annihilating the conquests of the workers and collective farmers, of restoring capitalist slavery in the USSR.” (French edition, pp. 384–385)
And now let us read and re-read the new History, Khrushchev’s. All that could be construed as an allusion to, not even a mention of, the infamous trials, comes after the affirmation that Stalin’s thesis according to which the advance of the Soviet state is accompanied by a sharpening of the class struggle was false, on pages 483–484, in the following terms:
In practice, this thesis served as the basis for mass repression of the enemies of the Party, already ideologically defeated. The repression fell on many honest Communists and non-Party elements. In this period there crept into a responsible position in the state the political adventurer Beria who, for criminal ends, did not shrink from misdeeds, exploited Stalin’s personal defects, slandered and destroyed many honest men faithful to the Party and to the people. During this same period, a contemptible role was played by Yezhov, who found himself in the post of People’s Commissar of the Interior.
The young Soviet student of this book – and all young people in the Soviet Union will in the coming years receive their instruction from this manual – will learn that the Berias and the Yezhovs exploited Stalin’s character to commit crimes not specifically designated, but he will not even know about the Moscow trials having taken place!
This alone is judgment enough on the new historical handbook. There are many species of the lie. Pascal in Les Provinciales showed how this was true of the Jesuits. But examples are rarely to be found so extreme as in these two bureaucratic manuals of history: in the one case, of the grossest and most fantastic lies to justify counter-revolutionary crimes; in the other, the application to these same crimes of the lie by omission.
 

 The Workers' Movement in World War One (Winter 1959/60)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
P.F.
Book Reviews
The Workers’ Movement in World War One
(Winter 1959/60)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 8, Winter 1959–60, p. 57.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The Workers’ Movement in the First World War, Vol. 2
by Alfred Rosmer
Paris
The working-class movement has a relatively short history; but the intensity which this history has acquired in recent years, to which must be added the acts of deformation of the working-class leaderships, has meant that as a result events which are known to generations still living are literally unknown to most of the rank and file.
Thus, the years of the First World War and the first years of the Russian revolution are still unknown not only to the youngest generations, but even to the main part of the rank-and-filers of thirty to forty years old. We cannot expect the present leaderships and the historians at their disposal to give a true account of this period, whether they be socialist or Stalinist. So the second volume of Alfred Rosmer’s book, The Workers’ Movement during the First World War, will fill a gap and educate new generations of working-class militants.
This second volume covers essentially the year 1916, and deals mainly with the repercussions of the Zimmerwald Conference on the working-class movement which was beginning, under the pressure of the growing misery provoked by the war, to awaken from the torpor into which it was plunged by the declaration of war and the passing to the side of “national unity” of the organizations – Parties and trade unions – which had existed before 1914. It ends on the eve of the outbreak of the Russian revolution, which opens a new period for which Rosmer promises a third volume.
An extremely rich account is to be found in the book which has just been published, mostly of that part of the working-class movement which was obliged to act in an underground or semi-clandestine manner, and which began to wage a struggle against the leaders of the Socialist party and the CGT, the Renaudels and the Jouhaux. Here are to be found not only the events and their unfolding, but also the essence of the ideas and arguments which clashed – both in the struggle against the corrupt leaderships and within the minority groups which, on the morrow of August 2, 1914, found themselves in an extremely confused ideological state.
It is not our intention to summarize this book, meant for study and reference. Every militant will have many occasions to refer to it, either in discussion or in preparing historical talks. This book prompts many reflections on the development of the working-class movement since that time.
First of all, the working-class movement was then mainly European, with certain extensions into the United States. All the discussions turned on Europe and the European peoples. At the time, nobody imagined that, 40 years later, the colonial peoples would surpass, in their revolutionary struggles, the workers of the advanced capitalist countries.
Apart from this, resistance to social-patriotism, although still rather weak in 1916, was nevertheless much more accentuated than it is at present. Who could have imagined that the founders of the Third International would be in the position later to be exploited by usurpers who would compete in social-patriotism.
One of the most interesting aspects of this book is its illustration of the ideological feebleness of the opposition to the war, more particularly in the French working-class movement. It is enough to see how the leadership of the Socialist party, for a long time was able to outmaneuver the oppositionists, thanks to the intervention of a wing which interposed itself between the leadership and the oppositionists. The gap is also noticeable between the vigor of the Kienthalians’ speeches in parliament, and their theoretical poverty. Without forecasting what is coming in the third volume of Rosmer’s work, one can easily understand, in the light of volume 2, what will be in effect the Communist party which will emerge, less than four years later, at the Tours Congress, and how far it was from being a really Communist party.
The question which, from Zimmerwald onwards, projects itself over the whole working-class movement of this period, is the question of the new International, the Third International to be created. The most patriotic of the old socialist leaders, those of France to begin with, did not wish even to hear talk of a meeting of the former Second International. Those among them most conscious of the new tendencies, which penetrated deeply into the masses, tried hard, like Camille Huysmans, by means of eleborate maneuvers, to isolate the revolutionary vanguard.
At Kienthal, as at Zimmerwald, it was the Russians who were the most determined partisans of the Third International, because they saw most clearly the reasons for the debacle of 1914 and the possibilities provided, after all, by the war. In his book Rosmer shows that Lenin, on this question also, combined the most implacable firmness of principle with a tactical suppleness, planning that no meeting of the old International should take place without the revolutionary minority being represented and heard. This political and theoretical superiority which he showed from the beginning of the war on a question concerning which there had been much discussion within the working-class movement in former years (though without much clarity or consequence), was very soon to find its expression in the capacity to lead the Russian revolution in a way which remains a model unparalleled in history.
 

e Frank-TROTSKY'S DIARY IN EXILE -- 1935



Pierre Frank
TROTSKY'S DIARY IN EXILE -- 1935




Published: Fourth International, Winter 1959



Trotsky's Diary in Exile - 1935. Translated from the Russian by Elena Zarudnaya. 218 pages, Cambridge (Harvard University Press), 1958, $ 4.

 As a revolutionary militant, Trotsky did not usually resort to the literary device of a diary; but at certain periods of his life, when he found himself in a sort of captivity, he set down notes on paper. This was the case in 1935 at a moment when -- the French government having just notified him of a new expulsion order, and there being no country that would grant an entry visa -- Trotsky was forced to live in a village in the Dauphinois, under a police surveillance that deprived him of normal conditions for work, without a secretary, and receiving his mail only at rare intervals, He noted down, more or less daily, remarks and observations, both on political events and on his reading, on the incidents of his life and that of his companion Natalia, the fate of his family in the USSR, etc. Soon after his arrival in Norway, he again found normal conditions for work, and... forgot this "diary," which was rediscovered in the archives deposited at Harvard University.
Before going on to this unpublished document of Trotsky, one cannot refrain from smiling at the preface by the university dons who edited it. Imbued with bookish knowledge, there gentry express an unusual incomprehension of men, events, and ideas. For them, the turn from the reform of the Third International to the struggle for the Fourth International is "the abstract political level of Trotsky's crisis in exile"; the general character of the man is that of the "revolutionary intellectual in politics, the 'outsider' with his ideologies." These Harvard gentlemen see politics only at the level of US bourgeois parties. Astonished to find in Trotsky a man of deep sensitivity, they cannot understand that in this diary there are to be found "no ideological doubts that in this diary there are to be found "no ideological doubts or even soul-searching." We can imagine into what a laugh Trotsky would have exploded on reading such lines about himself.
But let us leave these distinguished university scholars, and come to Trotsky's diary itself.
On all the purely political part there is no need to insist. The notes here relate above all to the events that were then occurring in France, between the reactionary coup de force of 6 February 1934 and the rise of the Popular Front: they have been worked up, in a much more finished form, in articles which the Fourth International reprinted a few months ago in French.
The interest of this diary lies in the fact that it gives an insight into the Trotsky of the last exile, of the Trotsky who, after having created and led the Red Army in the first years of the revolution, had been exiled and harried by Stalinism. In the literature about Trotsky, there are many remarkable pages written during the extraordinary years of the Russian revolution, describing either the pre-1917 militant, or "the sword of the Revolution" (Radek) ; but up till now it is at best only episodically that anything has been written on the last period of his life, from 1928 to 1940, on years such as none of the great revolutionaries ever experienced. After he had twice in his life been at the head of a revolutionary movement, after he had held second place in the leadership that removed one-sixth of the globe from capitalist domination, the state thus created had turned its forces against him, had driven him out, and had forced him to live a life alien to his temperament : he was everywhere under observation, he could not mix freely with people, his activity was inevitably limited to a small number of persons. He was cut off from his companions-in-arms, who were to be broken by Stalinist terror. Still more, in the workers' movement outside the USSR, he no longer had any comrade of his own generation; those who joined him were young people -- of whom many turned out to be migratory birds incapable of resisting the rigors of the climate caused by the parallel rises of fascism and Stalinism -- young people with whom, in spite of everything, he could not have as close relationships as with men of his own age. And lastly, though no great revolutionary has escaped the infamies and calumnies of those whose existence and petty interests he disturbed, nobody -- not even Blanqui -- experienced such an avalanche, such a downpour of muck and lies, backed by the authority of the first workers' state. And they are still far from having been wholly swept away.
Trotsky, whose personal life and revolutionary activity were one and the same, gave many details about him in his autobiography; but that ended practically at the beginning of the third exile. In addition, there were depths in his being that could be glimpsed by living close to him or by reading his works, but which he did not reveal: he was not "soul-searching," to use the expression of the Harvard university scholars, but his deep inner life can perhaps be appreciated, more than in any other of his writings, in the "diary" that has just been published.

 There are, in this diary, as one might expect, abundant reflections about literature and art. Though in many other fields there have not been lacking Marxists of uneven value in the field of aesthetics on the contrary, those who contributed something, can be counted singly. Marx, Engels, and Lenin, in this field, did not go beyond a few remarks, though these were worthy of their genius. Mehring and Plekhanov were the first to work in this field. Trotsky has, without any doubt, made a most considerable and eminent contribution. But at the very moment when "destalinization" has affected Communist intellectual circles, they not only do not dare look Trotsky's way in the matter of the analysis of Stalinism and the economic and political problems of transitional regimes (that would run the risk of leading them to revolutionary conclusions), but they are also unaware of Trotsky's work as a Marxist literary critic. Among the causes of this state of things, there is evidently the difficulty, the impossibility, of disassociating the two fields in an absolute way but there is also the fact that Trotsky, showing himself be an incomparable master, stimulating the thought of his readers in whatever field he treats, never resorts to the fashion of the professors, never pontificates, and his thought always concerns itself with the immediate present, yet without losing historical perspective. What has not been said of late about Soviet literature ? In any case, nothing as concise and profound as this note made in the diary under the date 9 March 1935:
Aleksey Tolstoy's novel,è is a work remarkable for the immediacy of its feeling for the remote Russian past. Of course this is not "proletarian literature": as a writer A. Tolstoy has his roots in old Russian literature -- and world literature as well, naturally. But undoubtedly it was the Revolution -- by the law of contrast -- that gave him (and not him alone) an especially keen feeling for the peculiar nature of Russian antiquity--immobile, wild and unwashed. It taught him something more: to look beneath the ideological conceptions; fantasies and superstitions for the simple vital interests of the various social groups and of the individuals belonging to them. With great artistic penetration A. Tolstoy k, lays bare the hidden material underpinnings of the ideological conflicts in peter's Russia. In this way individual psychological realism is elevated to social realism. This is undoubtedly an achievement of the Revolution as an immediate experience and of Marxism as a general doctrine.
Mauriac, a French novelist whom I do not know, an Academician (which is a poor recommendation), wrote or said recently: we shall recognize the USSR when it produces a new novel of the calibre of Tolstoy or Dostoievsky. Mauriac was apparently making a distinction between this artistic, idealistic criterion and a Marxist, materialist one, based on relations of production. Actually, there is no contradiction here. In the preface to my book Literature and Revolution I wrote about twelve years ago:
"But even a successful solution of the elementary problems of food, clothing, would in no way signify a shelter, and even of literacy, complete victory of the new historic principle, that is, of Socialism. Only a movement of scientific thought on a national scale and the development of a new art would signify that the historic seed has not only grown into a plant, but has even flowered. In this sense, the development of Art is the highest test of the vitality and significance of each epoch."
However, it is impossible in any sense to represent the novel of A. Tolstoy as a "flower" of the new epoch. It has already been stated why this is true. And the novels which are officially regarded as "proletarian art" (in a period of complete liquidation of classes!) are as yet totally lacking in artistic significance. Of course, there is nothing "alarming" in this. It takes some time for a complete overturn of serial foundations, customs and assumptions to product an artistic crystalization alone new axes. How much time? One cannot say offhand, but a long time. Art is always carried in the baggage train of a new epoch, and great art -- the novel -- is an especially heavy load. That there has been no great new art so far is quite natural and, as I have said, should not and cannot alarm anyone. What can be alarming, though, are the revolting imitations of a new art written on the order of the bureaucracy. The incongruities, falsity and ignorance of the present "Soviet" Bonapartism attempting to establish unlimited control over art -- these things make impossible any artistic creativity whatsoever, the first rendition for which is sincerity. An old engineer can perhaps build a turbine reluctantly; it would not be first-rate, because it had been built reluctantly, but it would serve its purpose. But one cannot, however, write a poem reluctantly.
It is not by accident that Aleksey Tolstoy retreated to the end of the seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth in order to gain the freedom essential to the artist.
In addition to general observations like the foregoing, how many remarks about a book or an author! In 1935, Jules Remains, the first volumes of whose Hommes de bonne volonlé had appeared, was setting out in politics. In a few lines Trotsky judges him as both politician and writer:
As a writer (and even more as a politician) he is evidently lacking in character. He is a spectator, not a participant. But only a participant can be a profound spectator. [...] A spectator like Romains can be a remarkable writer, but he cannot be a great writer.
One day chance caused Trotsky to read Frapie's La Marlernelle, a winner of the Goncourt Prize in a period when this distinction made less fuss. About the work of this of whom he knew nothing, Trotsky wrote :
[...] He shows very courageously the back yard -- and the darkest corner of the back yard -- of French civilisation, of Paris. The cruelty and meanness of life strike hardest at the children, at the smallest ones. Frapié, then, set himself a problem of looking at present-day civilisation through the frightened eyes of the hungry maltreated children with hereditary vices in their blood. The narrative is not sustained artistically; there are breakdowns and failures; the heroine's arguments are at times naive and even mannered; but the author succeeds in creating the necessary impression. He knows of no way out and does not even seem to be looking for one. The book is charged with hopelessness. But this hopelessness is immeasurably higher than the smug and cheap recipes of Victor Margueritte.
The same acuteness of observation, joined with the same superior ability to deduce general ideas and social conclusions, is to be found again when, leaving the field of literature, he notes the contacts he was having with people, inevitably forced contacts with various "authorities" and official figures, or inevitably brief and scarcely developed contacts with people who, more often than not, did not know who he was. Prosecuting attorneys, policemen, clerks of court, prefects, hotel or pension proprietors, barbers, etc. Little touches, graphic and full of irony, toward officials anxious not to get on his account into any trouble that might impede their careers. And these words that cannot be read without their evoking so many miserable memories:
There is no creature more disgusting than a petty-bourgeois engaged in primary accumulation. I have never had the opportunity to observe this type as closely as I do now.
Always extremely sensitive to the contrasts between human progress and knowledge and superstition and prejudices, and the combinations that result therefrom : the radio on the one hand, and, on the other, the manifestations at Lourdes or a royal ceremony in England. On the plane of intelligence, Trotsky does not fail to conclude:
There is a much greater distance between Baldwin and Lenin, as intellectual types, than between the Celtic druids and Baldwin.
He is on the level of Marx, Engels, and Lenin ; with them he breathes the fresh air of the mountains, which clears out lungs full of pettiness and insolence, obsequiousness and ignorance. From the pages of this diary, let us excerpt a few all-too-brief lines on Engels, "one of the finest, best integrated, and noblest personalities in the gallery of great men" :
Alongside the Olympian Marx, Engels is more "human,," more approachable. How well they complement one another ! Or rather, how consciously Engels endeavors to complement Marx; all his life he uses himself up in this task. He regards it as his mission and finds in it his gratification. And this is without a shadow of self-sacrifice -- always himself, always full of life, always superior to his environment and his age, with immense intellectual interests, with a true fire of genius always blazing in the forge of thought. Against the background of their everyday lives, Engels gains tremendously in stature by comparison with Marx -- though of course Marx's stature is not in the least diminished by this. I remember that after reading the Marx-Engels correspondence on my military train, I spoke to Lenin of my admiration for the figure of Engels. My point was just this, that when viewed in his relationship with the titan Marx, faithful Fred gains -- rather than diminishes -- in stature. Lenin expressed his approval of this idea with alacrity, even with delight. He love Engels very deeply, and particularly for his wholeness of character and all-round humanity. I remember how we examined a portrait of Engels as a young man, discovering in it the traits which became so prominent in his later life.

 At the moment that Trotsky was writing his diary, the Stalinist repression, which had already hit heavily at the oppositionals, was about to pass on to a new stage by striking at their families and friends: only a year later the first big "Moscow Trial" began. Trotsky, who had already been hit by Stalin through several members of his family, saw several others threatened. Trotsky and his companion Natalia were going to be painfully affected already in 1935 by the arrest of their youngest son, Sergei, who, having in his childhood turned away from politics, had become a teacher in an institute of technology and was devoting himself entirely to his technical work.
Anyone who was close to Trotsky and Natalia in these years of exile when they were to learn of the suicide of Zina, the disappearance of Sergei, and the death of Liova, cannot read many pages of this diary without reliving painful hours and without making the striking rediscovery of the incomparable example of these two beings, suffering deeply but showing to the entire world, to the few friends, and to powerful and shameless enemies, a firmness of character of the highest inspiration for young revolutionaries.
In this diary one learns of Trotsky's and Natalia's worry about the way that their son Sergei, lacking in political interest, would stand up to his executioners, inspired by an insatiable hatred. Some months ago an unimpeachable witness came to us to bring an account of a chance encounter in 1937, between a communist militant and Sergei, in a prison of the GPU; Sergei, he informed us, behaved in a way full of the dignity and courage whose example he had had before him in his parents.
Among the very moving lines in this diary, perhaps the most touching of all are those that Trotsky devotes to Natalia: they must be read; any commentary would be too poor.

 In this diary, Trotsky appears also to be concerned with the idea of death -- purely as a revolutionary conscious of the tasks he is accomplishing -- and seems to have felt certain premonitory signs in himself:
My high (and still rising) blood pressure is deceiving those near me about my actual condition. I am active and able to work but the outcome is evidently near.
What he feared was not sudden death but prolonged invalidism, and, in that case, he declared flatly that he intended a "suicide" like that of the Lafargues. But at the same time he could not fail to think that,under the conditions of the fierce slanders of the Stalinists against him, this would run the risk of giving rise to erroneous and malevolent interpretations; and so he considered it indispensable to reaffirm in a few lines his unshakable conviction in communism and in the future of humanity, in case he should have been led to take such a decision.
Many other passages give food for thought, whether it be his regret at not having had more time to devote to philosophy, or that dream in which he was talking with Lenin. But of this diary, which was not written for publication and which was forgotten by Trotsky among his papers, it is not possible to fail to reproduce this passage, where a Marxist treats of the role of personality in history, this personality being himself, with impressive objectivity:
Rakovsky was virtually my last contact with the old revolutionary generation. After his capitulation there is nobody left. Even though my correspondence with Rakovsky stopped, for reasons of censorship, at the time of my deportation, nevertheless the image of Rakovsky has remained a symbolic link with my old comrades-in-arms. Now nobody remains. For a long time now I have not been able to satisfy my need to exchange ideas and discuss problems with someone else. I am reduced to carrying on a dialogue with the newspapers, or rather through the newspapers with facts and opinions.
And still I think that the work in which I am engaged now, despite its extremely insufficient and fragmentary nature, is the most important work of my life -- more important than 1917, more important than the period of the Civil War or any other.
For the sake of clarity I would put it this way. Had I not been present in 1917 in Petersburg, the October Revolution would still have taken place -- on the condition that Lenin was present and in command. If neither Lenin nor I had been present in Petersburg, there would have been no October Revolution : the leadership of the Bolshevik Party would have prevented it from occurring -- of this I have not the slightest doubt ! If Lenin had not been in Petersburg, I doubt whether I could have managed to overcome the resistance of the Bolshevik leaders. The struggle with "Trotskyism" (i.e. with the proletarian revolution) would have commenced in May 1917, and the outcome would have been in question. But I repeat, granted the presence of Lenin the October Revolution would have been victorious anyway. The same could by and large be said of the Civil War, although in its first period, especially at the time of the fall of Simbirsk and Kazan, Lenin wavered and was beset by doubts. But this was undoubtedly a passing mood which he probably never even admitted to anyone but me.
Thus I cannot speak of the "indispensability" of my work, even about the period from 1917 to 1921. But now my work is "indispensable" in the full sense of the word. There is no arrogance in this claim at all. The collapse of the two Internationals has posed a problem which none of the leaders of these Internationals is at all equipped to solve. The vicissitudes of my personal fate have confronted me with this problem and armed me with important experience in dealing with it. Then is no one except me to carry out the mission of arming a new generation with the revolutionary method over the heads of the leaders of the Second and Third International. And I am in complete agreement with Lenin (or rather Turgenev) that the worst vice is to be more than 55 years old ! I need at least about five more years of uninterrupted work to ensure the succession.
To conclude these few reflections on this brief diary which evokes so many things in us, we cannot do better than to apply to Trotsky the diary's words on Engels, that fit Trotsky himself so well:
Engels' prognoses are always optimistic. Not infrequently they run ahead of the actual course of events. But is it possible in general to make historical prediction which -- to use a French expression -- would not burn some of the intermediate stages ?
In the last analysis E. is always right. What he say in his letter to Mme Wischnewetsky about the development of England and the United States was fully confirmed only in the postwar epoch, forty or fifty years later. But it certainly was confirmed ! Who among the great bourgeois statesmen had even an inkling of the present situation of the Anglo-Saxon powers ? The Lloyd Georges, the Baldwins, the Roosevelts, not to mention the MacDonalds, seem even today (in fact, today ever more than yesterday) like blind puppies alongside the farsighted old Engels.




Pierre Frank Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



Fourth International-ch8



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 9: The 'Long March' of the Trotskyists


Conclusive statements cannot be made about the history of a movement that is engaged in so long a march, begun so long ago a movement which has undergone so many trials and tribulations and which, although a new and much more promising stage lies ahead for it, still has big obstacles to overcome before reaching its goal. Our few closing remarks will, first of all, answer the question raised by those attracted to Trotskyist ideas but surprised by the numerical weakness of the organisation that defends those ideas, a question that every Trotskyist as well has inevitably asked, in their heart of hearts, at certain times: Is there a historical justification for the Fourth International? Was Trotsky right to found the Fourth International and to say that the work he was doing for it was 'the most important' in his life, 'more important than 1917, more important than the period of the civil war', irreplaceable 'in the full sense of the word'? [1] I do not think it necessary to answer those who attack the Fourth International by taking delight in stressing its difficulties; by failing to see its political strength, its vitality; by viewing its problems on a superficial level.
From the standpoint of historical perspective -- the only valid standpoint for a subject like this -- the long history of the Trotskyist movement, of the Fourth International, is in itself an objective verification of its historical justification. What has been the history of the international working class movement in the last fifty years -- a half-century that has seen the beginning of the disintegration of capitalist society and the advent of a socialist world? In every country where the working class movement had a long history, with Marxist traditions, one reality stands out: after several dozen years of wars, revolutions and counter-revolutions, fascism, and Stalinism, in the course of which numerous organisations claiming to be Marxist and claiming to stand for the working class came into existence -- after so many years, the only organisations that despite crises, splits, repression, alternating advances and retreats, have lasted are those connected with the Second International, or what was the Third International, or the Fourth International. A reality like this, which covers dozens of years (and what years!), can be attributed neither to chance nor to any specific militant qualities. All the organisations had dedicated and devoted militants with varied political and organisational talents, Such a phenomenon can only be explained by objective causes, profound historical causes. Here is really a case in which Hegel's thought can be applied correctly: Was ist wirklich ist rationell, was ist rationell ist wirklich (What is real is rational, what is rational is real). The underlying cause of this reality must extend throughout all these years and must have international validity, as we shall see.
At various times in the preceding pages, we have explained the difficulties that faced the Fourth International because of objective conditions. Above all, there was the eminently turbulent character of the world situation, with its sudden turns and its centrifugal forces -- a major difference from the earlier period of rising capitalism in the last third of the Nineteenth Century. The new world situation no longer permitted so gradual a building up of working class forces as had occurred in the earlier period, with the resultant formation of big parties organising the entire working class as well as the vanguard into vast networks. There was also the eruption of Stalinism, which destroyed the Bolshevik Party, pivot of the revolutionary International constructed around the October victory; the political convulsions and the cruelties of the Soviet bureaucracy more than once disoriented significant revolutionary forces and led them into blind alleys. The epoch of the gradual rise of capitalism had engendered the revisionism of Bernstein and the more insidious revisionism of Kautsky. The frightful history of the isolated first workers state engendered numerous 'revisionisms' (state capitalism in the USSR; the bureaucracy a new exploiting class) incapable of acknowledging the revolution disguised in so hideous a mask. Finally, there were the hundreds of millions of human beings in the colonial countries who stopped being pawns of history and tried to bridge the gap of centuries in a few leaps even in a single leap -- so that the revolution they made often assumed some strange aspects.
The arena of the workers movement, despite this situation or, more precisely, because of it, remained cluttered with the old formations -- because the working masses could not fall into disorganisation. There is no such thing in history as something born of nothing; it is only tremendous crises in the old organisations that will give birth to new revolutionary leaderships. If Marxism is history that becomes conscious of itself, under these conditions this consciousness could come about only with great difficulty, could be born only in hard labour.
The organisations that could bridge all these years, all these trials, did it because they were strongly rooted in the deepest reality of the . world of these fifty years.
On the one hand, the Second International's organisations are linked to the working class in the old European countries by the entire history of the class, when it sought successfully to organise itself on a mass scale to defend its day-to-day interests. On the other hand, these organisations are tied to capitalist society, which perpetuates itself as long as it has the means to accede to the workers' demands for reforms.[2]
The official Communist parties drew their basic strength from the fact that they were created around the October victory and the Soviet Union, and that they appeared to be an extension of these throughout the world. Because it was the first, and for a long time the only, workers state, the Soviet Union had been the pole of attraction for all who were awakening to the necessity of replacing capitalism with a new society. Trotskyists have frequently pointed out that for the broadest masses, particularly in the underdeveloped countries, the economic development of the Soviet Union had an infinitely greater significance than the total suppression of workers democracy under the bureaucratic regime, because these masses had no acquaintance whatsoever with the feeble advantages of bourgeois democracy. For the militants in those countries, the Soviet Union's material aid, no matter how slight, was indispensable and more tangible than the treacherous manoeuvres of Kremlin politics. In the capitalist countries, how many sincerely revolutionary militants remained members of the Communist Party for a long time, even though they had anxieties and fears about its policies, because during the ebb they could see no other organisation to belong to! It took the birth of other workers states and the rise of serious differences among them for layers broader than those of the extremely politicised militants to make a distinction between a workers state and its leadership of the moment, for these broader segments to understand the accommodations to world imperialism the Kremlin was seeking at the expense of the international socialist revolution -- so that, as a result, Moscow would no longer remain the 'guide', the pole of attraction; so that, this time, a mortal crisis would affect the Communist parties. Parties in the leadership of workers states are at the mercy of social crises in their countries. Reformist degeneration in the Communist parties of capitalist countries sooner or later will cause these parties to break up, their members having to choose between openly acknowledged reformism and the politics of rising new revolutionary formations. [3]
Obviously, the Fourth International has had no ties to capitalist society. At the hands of the first workers state, whose existence it never ceased to defend, both on the political plane against the capitalist world and on the theoretical plane against all the revisionist tendencies -- Stalinism being one of the latter [4] -- the Fourth International suffered the most implacable persecution, often more murderous than that imposed by capitalism. The Fourth International has nevertheless been able to live and grow, because throughout all these years it alone represented the fundamental, historical interests of the world proletariat. There is no mysterious, esoteric reason for this. At its foundation, the Fourth International received, through Leon Trotsky and the Soviet Left Opposition, the heritage of direct descent from the Bolshevik Party and the Communist International. The Fourth International is their legitimate heir, taking up and continuing their traditions. The Communist parties that succumbed to Stalinism, and the Communist International itself, which Stalin had to debase and dissolve, are no longer anything but usurpers.
By the very fact of its existence as an International, the Fourth International continued to represent the interests of the proletariat. While not rejecting a single conquest of the proletariat, the Fourth International refused to grant special status to any one of them before the triumph of the revolution on a world scale. Every organisation that claimed to be socialist but had only national objectives, or was not an integral part of an international organisation, has in the course of these years seen itself condemned either to disappear or to stagger and fall under the impact of decisive political problems.
This international plane, on which history has passed its inexorable judgement, should never for a moment be overlooked by those who really want to assure the world victory of socialism; because the world today is incomparably more unified -- and in a more complex fashion -- than ever before. In a preface written for the ninetieth anniversary of the Communist Manifesto, taking up the passage in which Marx wrote, 'United action, of the leading civilised countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat', Trotsky added:

 'The subsequent development of capitalism has so closely knit all sections of our planet, both "civilised" and "uncivilised", that the problem of the socialist revolution has completely and decisively assumed a world character. The Soviet bureaucracy attempted to liquidate the Manifesto with respect to this fundamental question. The Bonapartist degeneration of the Soviet state is an overwhelming illustration of the falseness of the theory of socialism in one country.'

 In the forty years that have passed since these lines were written, contrary to the opinions of supporters of'socialism in one country' and then 'national roads' (which is an adaptation of the first theory, brought to the fore during the period of the isolated state, to conditions in the 'socialist camp'), the international character of the socialist revolution is even more obvious. The war in Vietnam has demonstrated, better than anything else, the necessity for the revolutionary movement to have a global strategy against imperialism. The invasion of Czechoslovakia has demonstrated, again better than anything else, how the term socialism can be besmirched by the nationalist interest of a bureaucracy.
To act truly as an internationalist, it is not enough to follow world politics in the press. An international political line has to be elaborated, and this can only be done by being organically connected with forces in struggle throughout the entire world. What has given the Fourth International incomparable political strength, despite its numerical weakness; what has made it feared by the leaders of powers like the Soviet Union and China, who have a very clear understanding of their bureaucratic interests and who certainly do not engage in tilting at windmills -- is that the Fourth International is a unity that, by the actions of its members, forges connecting links among the guerrilla fighters and the rebelling peasants of Latin America, the blacks of the United States, the fighters of South Africa, the peoples of Black Africa and North Africa, the revolutionary militants of the Middle East, the militants in many Asian countries, the vanguards in the workers states of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the workers and the vanguard youth of Western Europe, etc. In both bourgeois and Stalinist counter-revolutionary campaigns against the Fourth International, a role is often attributed to it that it does not have, or a degree of influence is attributed to it that it does not possess. Nevertheless, no big struggle has taken place -- nor is taking place -- in which the militants of the Fourth International have not participated. The lessons drawn from these struggles by its militants become part of the political and theoretical analyses of the international movement. Since there can be no really valid knowledge unconnected with action, the Fourth International is today the only revolutionary organisation that integrates and unifies the lessons of the class struggle on all continents. That is why its analyses, the positions it takes on an international scale -- without any pretensions to infallibility -- have most often been superior to the analyses of individuals or groups, no matter how intelligent and sympathetic to the revolution and to socialism the latter may be.
On this subject, the Cuban leadership affords a striking example of what international limitations can do. The Cuban leadership distinguished itself from that of all the other workers states by proving itself truly internationalist when it tried to help organise the struggle for socialism throughout Latin America -- on a continental scale. Nevertheless, in 1968, it very much disappointed a number of its friends and supporters because of its silence on the French May and its position on the invasion of Czechoslovakia. Where do its political defaults come from, considering its good understanding of the problems of the colonial revolution? Its political deficiencies stem from the fact that its horizon has remained limited to Latin America and to the colonial countries. The problems of the European workers movements and the problems of the East European workers states and the Soviet Union escape it, because it is not connected internationally with formations that might enlarge its horizon and give it a profound, global grasp of these problems.
An argument that has been repeated many times since 1933 in connection with establishing the Fourth International maintains that we should start by building mass revolutionary parties on a national scale, that the founding of the International can only come about as a culmination of such a process. In other words, this question is posed as if we were building a house: first the walls (the national parties) must be raised before we can put the roof (the International) in place. This kind of thinking manifests a total misconception of the relationships between the International and its national sections in the Twentieth Century world. Let us recall that up to this day no specifically national organisation has acquired a programme that, in a truly complete fashion, answers the revolutionary needs of our epoch, including on a national scale. How, in an epoch characterised by constant wars, revolutions, and counter-revolutions, where everything which happens in the 'most remote' corners of the world has repercussions in the metropolitan countries, is it possible to envisage building a revolutionary party within national boundaries? Instead of allowing the revolutionary forces to prepare for the future, such a conception would return them to past periods whose possibilities have long been exhausted.
Because there is no such thing as 'socialism in one country', no such thing as 'national roads', the instrument of world revolution can only be a world party. It cannot be constructed evenly in all countries because of the uneven development of the revolution throughout the world. Creating a mass revolutionary International and creating revolutionary parties in each country do not constitute two tasks separate in time. It is a single process that takes place by constant interaction between the International and its national organisations. Finally, to understand the importance of this question, it is not without value to see to what point the bourgeoisie, throughout its history, has especially feared the existence of an International.
The question of the International was eclipsed during the years in which the world revolution resumed its momentum almost exclusively through the colonial revolution, while in Western and Eastern Europe the era was marked principally by reformism. It will not be long before the big turning point of 1968 makes the necessity of international coordination, on the level of a vanguard Marxist revolutionary organisation, the first item on the agenda. The idea of an International was born in Europe over a century ago. And it was in Europe that the idea became a reality several different times. A few decades of Stalinism have not destroyed this tradition. Moreover, Europe is the area of the world with the strongest concentration of productive forces. In Europe more than anywhere else these forces are coming into collision with the barriers of national states. The contradiction between the development of the productive forces and the superannuated national states in Europe was at the bottom of the two world wars. In the absence of victories for the socialist revolution, which would have created a socialist federation of European nations, for more than twenty years we have been witnessing the spectacle of a Europe cut in two, socially and geographically, by the division of Germany, accompanied by the establishing of two caricatures of 'unification' -- the European Economic Community on the one hand, and Comecon (Council for Mutual Economic Aid) on the other. The resumption of the revolutionary rise in Europe will not fail to place the socialist reunification of Europe on the agenda; as a consequence, the revolutionary International of the proletariat will also be placed on the order of the day.
Will the international revolutionary organisation of the future be simply an enlargement of the cadre organisation that constitutes the present Fourth International, or will it be achieved by other means? To pose the question in this fashion, like it or not, is to duck the problem as it exists today. No one can maintain that mass revolutionary Marxist organisations are going to spring up all of a sudden, like Athena from the head of Zeus, and miraculously create a mass revolutionary International. The organisations are what they are today, and to be able to change the situation, our struggle must use existing conditions as its point of departure.
We are the very first to regret the Fourth International's incapacity for so many years to mobilise and lead mass movements. Without denying the errors that have been committed, we think that these did not bear on the essential problems, so that even if these errors had been avoided, changes of a qualitative nature in the relationships between the Fourth International and the mass workers movement would not have resulted. It is difficult to imagine that during fifty years, had there been objective possibilities for so doing, a team capable of solving the problem of a mass revolutionary Marxist leadership could not have been found what with all the numerous attempts that were made. None of the Fourth International's manifold critics have demonstrated how to do better -- and none have done better. On the contrary, when the socialist revolution made a new advance in the European countries, it was the Fourth International that was to be found in the forefront of the battle, and it was the members of the Fourth International who began to activate the mass movements in many of these countries.
The Fourth International is not one of a number of sects. Its history is that of the international revolutionary Marxist party in the most tumultuous epoch of the socialist revolution. The expansion of the working class movement over and beyond organisations struggling in the framework of capitalist society -- as a result of the creation of states rejecting the capitalist system -- has given rise to an extraordinary phenomenon of combined development. Actually this expansion of the working class movement has for years been combined with a considerable setback on the organisational level for the revolutionary Marxist vanguard. We have had to lose ground as far as political action is concerned. But not for one moment has the Fourth International yielded an inch as far as theory is concerned. In addition, it has made available to new generations a rich theoretical and political contribution on numerous questions: bureaucracies in working class organisations and bureaucracies in workers states; Stalinism; political revolution; permanent development in the colonial revolution; theories relating to fascism and the Bonapartist strong state, etc. Those who have participated in the Fourth International have a legitimate right to be proud of its history. The theoretical and political conquests of the Fourth International as an organisation of vanguard cadres will enable it to go beyond the stage it has had to traverse for so long.
Joining the Fourth International today means becoming part of the battle being fought in many countries, on every continent; it means developing a global strategy against capitalism, along with the other militants of the Fourth International, and applying that strategy wherever possible; it means, across the years, raising aloft the banner of October, of Bolshevism, of the Communist International, and bearing it to victory in the battle of today.

Footnotes
[1] From Diary in Exile. The third volume of Isaac Deutscher's remarkable biography of Trotsky, The Prophet Outcast (1929-40) (Oxford University Press, London), while factually correct, does not give an effective account of Trotsky's work and activity in this period, more especially for the last six years devoted principally to organising the International. Deutscher, who agreed in substance with Trotsky's ideas, felt that Trotsky should have devoted most of his time to writing works such as the History of the Russian Revolution rather than participating in the life, difficulties, and crises of the Trotskyist movement, which, for Deutscher, was really a waste of time. But like Marx, who for several years abandoned his theoretical work on economics in order to devote his time to the First International and its internal difficulties (often reminiscent of the Fourth International), Trotsky was first and foremost a revolutionary fighter. And above all, he had given profound thought to the error he had committed before 1917, in comparison with Lenin, on the question of the party. To struggle for the Fourth International was, for Trotsky, to continue Lenin's struggle for a Leninist party on a world scale.
[2] The question can be raised: If the existence of social-democracy is linked to the existence of capitalism, isn't its disappearance in the workers states to be explained independently of the Stalinist terror? Couldn't the 'single party' theory be justified in that way? This question would call for a thorough going, in-depth study, which is hardly within the scope of this book. Let it suffice here to say: (a) the revolutionary upsurge and victory of the revolution historically imply a considerable weakening, though not necessarily the disappearance, of the proletariat's reformist and centrist formations; (b) in the society in transition between capitalism and socialism, the working class will still remain differentiated for an entire period, to the extent that various layers retain differing views on the relationship between their everyday needs and their long-range interests. There will thus be room for different parties -- some more reformist, some more revolutionary -- in the transitional society. For a full discussion of this problem see Socialist Democracy and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat, theses adopted in 1977 by the United Secretariat of the Fourth International (Vanguard Publications, Toronto).
[3] In the early days of Stalinism, Trotsky had pointed out that if it were not rejected, it would drag the Communist parties onto a path halfway between communism and reformism, and that such a position could not be held for any length of time. It has been held much longer than Trotsky foresaw, but he had discerned the basic tendency with a great deal of acuity.
[4] Numerous works have been written, vainly attempting to prove that Stalinism was the legitimate offspring of Bolshevism. It is easy to show the theoretical affinities between Stalinism's political concepts and those of various left currents in Social Democracy immediately after the First World War: Menshevism, Austro-Marxism, Italian Maximalism, the Bracke-Zyromsky tendency in the SFIO, etc.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-appendix2



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Appendix II: Trotskyists and the Resistance in World War Two


By Ernest Mandel, United Secretariat of the Fourth International
The following is excerpted from the transcript of a school on the history of the Fourth International organised by the International Marxist Group in London in 1976.
I want to go into the question of the resistance movement in Europe between 1940 and 1944 in detail. I want to do so especially because some comrades for whom I have respect, and whom I hope to see back in the Fourth International, the comrades of the Lutte Ouvriere group in France, have made it their special point of honour to raise this question against the Fourth International.
From the foundation of the Communist International, communists were educated in a principled rejection of the idea of 'national defence' or 'defence of the fatherland' in the imperialist countries. This meant a total refusal to have anything to do with imperialist wars. The Trotskyist movement was educated in the same spirit. This was all the more necessary with the right-wing turn of the Comintern and the Stalin-Laval pact in 1935, which turned the Stalinists in the West European countries, and in some colonial countries, into the worst advocates of pro-imperialist chauvinism.
In India, for instance, this led to the disastrous betrayal by the Stalinists of the national uprising in 1942. When the uprising took place, the British colonialists opened the jails for the leaders of the Indian Communist Party in order to transform them into agitators against the uprising and for the imperialist war. This tremendous betrayal laid the basis for the continuous mass influence of the bourgeois nationalist Congress Party in the following decades.
Our movement was inoculated against nationalism in imperialist countries, against the idea of supporting imperialist war efforts in any form whatsoever. That was a good education, and I do not propose to revise that tradition. But what it left out of account were elements of the much more complex Leninist position in the First World War. It is simply not true that Lenin's position then can be reduced to the formula:'This is a reactionary imperialist war. We have nothing to do with it.' Lenin's position was much more sophisticated. He said: 'There are at least two wars, and we want to introduce a third one.' (The third one was the proletarian civil war against the bourgeoisie which in actual fact came out of the war in Russia.)
Lenin fought a determined struggle against sectarian currents inside the internationalist tendency who did not recognise the distinction between these two wars. He pointed out: 'There is an inter-imperialist war. With that war we have nothing to do. But there are also wars of national uprising by oppressed nationalities. The Irish uprising is 100 per cent justified. Even if German imperialism tries to profit from it, even if leaders of the national movement link up with German submarines, this does not change the just nature of the Irish war of independence against British imperialism. The same thing is true for the national movement in the colonies and the semi-colonies, the Indian movement, the Turkish movement, the Persian movement.' And he added:'The same thing is true for the oppressed nationalities in Russia and Austro-Hungary. The Polish national movement is a just movement, the Czech national movement is a just movement. A movement by any oppressed nationality against the imperialist oppressor is a just movement. And the fact that the leadership of these movements could betray by linking these movements politically and organisationally to imperialism is a reason to denounce these leaders, not a reason to condemn these movements.'
Now if we look at the problem of World War II from that more dialectical, more correct Leninist point of view, we have to say that it was a very complicated business indeed. I would say, at the risk of putting it a bit too strongly, that the Second World War was in reality a combination of five different wars. That may seem an outrageous proposition at first sight, but I think closer examination will bear it out.
First, there was an inter-imperialist war, a war between the Nazi, Italian, and Japanese imperialists on the one hand, and the Anglo-American-French imperialists on the other hand. That was a reactionary war, a war between different groups of imperialist powers. We had nothing to do with that war, we were totally against it.
Second, there was a just war of self-defence by the people of China, an oppressed semi-colonial country, against Japanese imperialism. At no moment was Chiang Kai-shek's alliance with American imperialism a justification for any revolutionary to change their judgement on the nature of the Chinese war. It was a war of national liberation against a robber gang, the Japanese imperialists, who wanted to enslave the Chinese people. Trotsky was absolutely clear and unambiguous on this. That war of independence started before the Second World War, in 1937; in a certain sense, it started in 1931 with the Japanese Manchurian adventure. It became intertwined with the Second World War, but it remained a separate and autonomous ingredient of it.
Third, there was a just war of national defence of the Soviet Union, a workers state, against an imperialist power. The fact that the Soviet leadership allied itself not only in a military way which was absolutely justified -- but also politically with the Western imperialists in no way changed the just nature of that war. The war of the Soviet workers and peasants, of the Soviet peoples and the Soviet state, to defend the Soviet Union against German imperialism was a just war from any Marxist-Leninist point of view. In that war we were 100 per cent for the victory of one camp, without any reservations or question marks. We were for absolute victory of the Soviet people against the murderous robbers of German imperialism.
Fourth, there was a just war of national liberation of the oppressed colonial peoples of Africa and Asia (in Latin America there was no such war), launched by the masses against British and French imperialism, sometimes against Japanese imperialism, and sometimes against both in succession, one after the other. Again, these were absolutely justified wars of national liberation, regardless of the particular character of the imperialist power. We were just as much for the victory of the Indian people's uprising against British imperialism, and the small beginnings of the uprising in Ceylon, as we were in favour of the victory of the Burmese, Indochinese, and Indonesian guerrillas against Japanese, French, and Dutch imperialism successively. In the Philippines the situation was even more complex. I do not want to go into all the details, but the basic point is that all these wars of national liberation were just wars, regardless of the nature of their political leadership. You do not have to place any political confidence in or give any political support to the leaders of a particular struggle in order to recognise the justness of that struggle. When a strike is led by treacherous trade union bureaucrats you do not put any trust in them -- but nor do you stop supporting the strike.
Now I come to the fifth war, which is the most complex. I would not say that it was going on in the whole of Europe occupied by Nazi imperialism, but more especially in two countries, Yugoslavia and Greece, to a great extent in Poland, and incipiently in France and Italy. That was a war of liberation by the oppressed workers, peasants, and urban petty bourgeoisie against the German Nazi imperialists and their stooges. To deny the autonomous nature of that war means saying in reality that the workers and peasants of Western Europe had no right to fight against those who were enslaving them at that moment unless their minds were set clearly against bringing in other enslavers in place of the existing ones. That is an unacceptable position.
It is true that if the leadership of that mass resistance remained in the hands of bourgeois nationalists, of Stalinists or social-democrats, it could eventually be sold out to the Western imperialists. It was the duty of the revolutionaries to prevent this from happening by trying to oust these fakers from the leadership of the movement. But it was impossible to prevent such a betrayal by abstaining from participating in that movement.
What lay behind that fifth war? It was the inhuman conditions which existed in the occupied countries. How can anyone doubt that? How can anyone tell us that the real reason for the uprising was some ideological framework -- such as the chauvinism of the French people or of the CP leadership? Such an explanation is nonsense. People did not fight because they were chauvinists. People were fighting because they were hungry, because they were over-exploited, because there were mass deportations of slave labour to Germany, because there was mass slaughter, because there were concentration camps, because there was no right to strike, because unions were banned, because communists, socialists and trade unionists were being put in prison.
That's why people were rising, and not because they were chauvinists. They were often chauvinists too, but that was not the main reason. The main reason was their inhuman material living conditions, their social, political, and national oppression, which was so intolerable that it pushed millions onto the road of struggle. And you have to answer the question: was it a just struggle, or was it wrong to rise against this over-exploitation and oppression? Who can seriously argue that the working class of Western or Eastern Europe should have abstained or remained passive towards the horrors of Nazi oppression and Nazi occupation? That position is indefensible.
So the only correct position was to say that there was a fifth war which was also an autonomous aspect of what was going on between 1939 and 1945. The correct revolutionary Marxist position (I say this with a certain apologetic tendency, because it was the one defended from the beginning by the Belgian Trotskyists against what I would call both the right wing and the ultra-left wing of the European Trotskyist movement at that time) should have been as follows: to support fully all mass struggles and uprisings, whether armed or unarmed, against Nazi imperialism in occupied Europe, in order to fight to transform them into a victorious socialist revolution -- that is, to fight to oust from the leadership of the struggles those who were linking them up with the Western imperialists, and who wanted in reality to maintain capitalism at the end of the war, as in fact happened.
We have to understand that what started in Europe in 1941 was a genuine new variant of a process of permanent revolution, which could transform that resistance movement into a socialist revolution. I say 'could', but in at least one example that was what actually happened. It happened in Yugoslavia. That's exactly what the Yugoslav Communists did.
Whatever our criticisms of the bureaucratic way in which they did it, the crimes they committed in the course of it, or the political and ideological deviations which accompanied that process, fundamentally that is what they did. We have no intention of being apologists for Tito, but we have to understand what he did. It was an amazing thing. At the start of the uprising in 1941 the Yugoslav CP had a mere 5,000 active participants. Yet in 1945 they took power at the head of an army of half a million workers and peasants. That was no small feat. They saw the possibility and the opportunity. They behaved as revolutionaries -- bureaucratic-centrist revolutionaries of Stalinist origin, if you like, but you cannot call that counter-revolutionary . They destroyed capitalism. It was not the Soviet army, it was not Stalin, as a result of the 'cold war', who destroyed capitalism in Yugoslavia. It was the Yugoslav CP which led this struggle, accompanied by a big fight against Stalin.
All the proofs are there -- all the letters sent by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to the Yugoslavs, saying: 'Do not attack private property. Do not push the Americans into hostility to the Soviet Union by attacking private property.' And Tito and the leaders of the Communist Party did not give a damn about what Stalin told them to do or not to do. They led a genuine process of permanent revolution in the historical sense of the word, transformed a mass uprising against foreign imperialist occupation an uprising which started on an inter-class basis, but under a bureaucratic proletarian leadership -- into a genuine socialist revolution.
At the end of 1945, Yugoslavia became a workers state. There was a tremendous mass uprising in 1944-45, the workers took over the factories, the land was taken over by the peasants (and later by the state, in an exaggerated and over-centralised manner). Private property was largely destroyed. Nobody can really deny that the Yugoslav Communist Party destroyed capitalism, even if it was through its own bureaucratic methods, repressing workers democracy, even shooting some people whom it accused of being Trotskyists (which was not true -- there was no Trotskyist section in Yugoslavia then or at any time previously). And it did not destroy capitalism through some bureaucratic moves with a foreign army, as in Eastern Europe, but through a genuine popular revolution, a huge mass mobilisation, one of the hugest ever seen in Europe. You should study the history of what happened in Yugoslavia -- how, as bourgeois writers say, in every single village there was a civil war. That's the truth of it. The only comparison you can make is with Vietnam.
So I think that revolutionaries should basically have tried to do in the other occupied countries what the Yugoslav Communists did in Yugoslavia -- of course with better methods and better results, leading to workers democracy and workers power directly exercised by workers councils, and not by a bureaucratised workers party and a privileged bureaucracy.
That is not to say at all that it was our fault if the proletarian revolution failed in Europe in 1945, because we did not apply the correct line in the resistance movement. That would be ridiculous. Even with the best of lines, the relationship of forces was such that we would not have succeeded. The relationship of forces between the Communist parties and us, the prestige of the CPs, the links of the CPs with the Soviet Union, the low level of working class consciousness as a result of a long period of defeats -- all that made it impossible for the Trotskyists really to compete with the Stalinists for the leadership of the mass movement. So the mistakes which were made, both in a right-wing sense and in an ultra-left sense, actually had very little effect on history. They are simply lessons from which we have to draw a political conclusion in order not to repeat these mistakes in future. We cannot say that we failed to influence history as a result of these mistakes.
These lessons were of a dual nature. The leading comrades of one of the two French Trotskyist organisations, the POI (which was the official section), made right-wing mistakes in 1940-41. There is no doubt about that. They started from a correct line essentially, the one I have just outlined, but they took it one step too far. In the implementation of that line they included temporary blocs with what they called the 'national bourgeoisie'.
I should add they were able to use one sentence by Trotsky in support of their position. Remember that before arriving too hastily at a judgement on these questions. This sentence came at the beginning of one of Trotsky's last articles: 'France is being transformed into an oppressed nation.' In an oppressed nation there is no principled reason to reject temporary, tactical agreements with the 'national bourgeoisie' against imperialism. There are conditions: we do not make a political bloc with the bourgeoisie. But purely tactical agreements with the national bourgeoisie are acceptable. We should, for instance, have made such an agreement in the 1942 uprising in India. It is a question of tactics, not of principle.
What was wrong in the position of the POI leadership was to make an extrapolation from a temporary, conjunctural situation. If France had permanently become a semi-colonial country, that would have been another story. But it was a temporary situation, just an episode in the war. France remained an imperialist power, with imperialist structures, which continued through the Gaullist operation to exploit many colonial peoples and maintain its empire in Africa intact. To change one's attitude towards the bourgeoisie simply in the light of what happened over a couple of years on the territory of France was a premature move which contained within it the seed of major political mistakes.
In fact it did not lead to anything in practice. Those who say that the French Trotskyists 'betrayed' by making a bloc with the bourgeoisie in 1940-41 do not understand the difference between the beginning of a theoretical mistake and an actual treacherous intervention in the class struggle. There was never any agreement with the bourgeoisie, never any support for them when it came to the point. Whenever strikes took place the French Trotskyists were 100 per cent on the side of the workers. Whether it was a strike against French capitalists, German capitalists, or a combination of both, they were on the side of the workers every time. So where was the betrayal? It just confuses a possible political mistake and an actual theoretical one -- which eventually could perhaps have had grave consequences, but in actual fact never did. That it was a mistake I naturally do not deny. But I think the comrades of the POI minority who fought against it did a good job, and by 1942 it was reversed and did not come up again.
The sectarian mistake, however, was in my opinion much graver. Here the ultra-left wing of the Trotskyist movement denied any progressive ingredient in the resistance movement and refused to make any distinction between the mass resistance, the armed mass struggle, and the manoeuvres and plans of the bourgeois nationalist, social-democratic or Stalinist misleaders of the masses. That mistake was much worse because it led to abstention on what were important living struggles of the masses. Those comrades (such as the Lutte Ouvriere group) who persist even today in identifying the mass movements in the occupied countries with imperialism -- saying that the war in Yugoslavia was an imperialist war because it was conducted by nationalists -- are completely revising the Marxist method. Instead of defining the class nature of a mass movement by its objective roots and significance, they try to do so on the basis of its ideology. This is an unacceptable backward step towards historical idealism. When workers rise against exploitation and oppression with nationalist slogans, you say: 'The rising is correct; please change the slogans. You do not say: 'The rising is bad because the slogans are bad.' It does not become bourgeois because the slogans are bourgeois -- that is a wrong and absolutely unmaterialist approach.
Trotsky warned the Trotskyist movement against precisely such mistakes in his last basic document, the Manifesto of the 1940 emergency conference. He pointed out that they should be careful not to judge workers in the same way as the bourgeoisie even when they talked about national defence. It was necessary to distinguish between what they said and what they meant -- to judge the objective historical nature of their intervention rather than the words they used. And the fact that sectarian sections of the Trotskyist movement did not understand that, and took an abstentionist position on big clashes involving hundreds of thousands or even millions of people, was very dangerous for the future of the Fourth International.
To abstain from such clashes on ideological grounds would have been absolutely suicidal for a living revolutionary movement. But we had no section in Yugoslavia. And had we had one, it would happily not have been sectarian. Otherwise we could not address the Yugoslav Communists and workers with the authority which we have today. Our first intervention in Yugoslavia was only in 1948; it was a good one, and so now we can speak with an unblemished banner and considerable moral authority in Yugoslavia. But if the Lutte Ouvriere line had been applied in practice between 1941 and 1944 in Yugoslavia, and if Yugoslav Trotskyists had been neutral in that civil war, we would not be very proud today and we would certainly not be in a strong position to defend the programme of the Fourth International. As it is, some of the Yugoslav Commuists who later became Trotskyists were heroes in the civil war, which gives them a certain standing and moral authority. It makes it easier for them and for us to discuss Trotskyism in Yugoslavia today. If we had to carry the moral blemish of passivity and abstention in a huge civil war, we would, to say the least, be in a very bad position today.

Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch6



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 6: From the Second World Congress to the 1953 Split


At the Second World Congress, held in April-May 1948, several sections, especially in Europe, found themselves replenished and strengthened by new forces acquired in the aftermath of the war. In some cases, these sections began to be a factor in the political life of their countries. Thus, despite the growth of the old parties (especially the Communist parties) during that period, the perspective of a further development of the Fourth International's sections was adopted by the congress, which raised the slogan,'Forward to building mass Trotskyist parties!'
But the situation was in the process of developing in a totally unexpected direction. The few signs pointing to this development were still too weak at the time of the congress to permit a correct evaluation -- too weak even to give us an inkling of where it was going. The post-war revolutionary wave in Western Europe seemed to be momentarily halted, but actually it had begun to subside. The 'cold war' had only just started. The Soviet blockade of West Berlin would start several weeks later. The'Prague coup', i.e., the seizure of power by the Czechoslovak Communist Party, was only a few weeks old. The social changes within the so-called people's democracies were only beginning to take shape. There was no way to foresee the break that was to take place two months later between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
Important events and totally unexpected developments occurred immediately after the Second Congress and for some years thereafter. Their results were unpredictable; the world was assuming a shape that had never been envisaged or even imagined by the most eminent, the most perspicacious, the most farsighted Marxists. These upheavals raised extremely complicated theoretical and political problems. Moreover, we were confronted, not with a single event that could have been judged per se, but with numerous events spread out over several years and not necessarily connected with each other. These events finally, after several years, resulted in a world picture totally different from what had previously been seen, even since the First World War and the October Revolution.
Certain Marxist tenets seemed to be placed in doubt by some aspects of the situation. As a result, a multiplicity of assessments and theories proclaiming the bankruptcy of Marxism appeared. Marxists could not answer these arguments with a pure and simple repetition of basic tenets, treating the latter as eternal truths independent of time and space. Such an approach would not have been worthy of Marxists. The primary task of the Fourth International was to place the basic teachings of revolutionary Marxism in Juxtaposition with the new world picture, to redefine the situation, to re-evaluate perspectives and tasks. Neglecting such a task would have meant leaving the field free both for the apologists of the Communist parties and for the innumerable revisionists on the left and on the right.
For the sake of clarity, this exposition will not treat events in chronological order but will first point out the major changes that took place as a whole -- in order to arrive at the overall picture that emerged at the end of a few years. In this way, theoretical problems that were raised and difficulties that had to be resolved will stand out. The actions of the Fourth International can thus be set forth in context, making it possible to judge them on an objective basis.
Post-war upheavals


Let us first review the main events and the basic changes that occurred from 1947-48 to about 1960.
The'cold war' began in 1947. Soon -- after the breach in the American monopoly on atomic energy in 1949 -- the development of nuclear weapons and the atomic arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union would begin. The problem of world war was thenceforth posed in new terms, not new on a social level, but new because of the availability of vast powers of destruction, so huge that they were in a completely different dimension from so-called conventional weapons.
In 1947 the Communist Information Bureau (Cominform) was created. At the same time, the 'cold war' led the Soviet Union (in order to protect its buffer states) to effect a social change -- by military-bureaucratic means -- in the East European countries its armies had entered during the war. Despite a few measures aimed at those members of the propertied classes who had collaborated with the Germans, the army had left the bourgeois social structures of these countries intact. The'cold war' forced the Kremlin to liquidate the bases of capitalism in those countries and to transform them into workers states.
In June of 1948 the first great crisis of Stalinism erupted, in the shape of the Soviet-Yugoslav split. The Yugoslav Communist Party was expelled from the Cominform on charges reminiscent of the pre-war Moscow trials -- the Yugoslavs were fascists, spies, etc. But, for the first time, the Kremlin's hegemony over the workers states and the Communist parties as a whole was challenged by a party that had led the armed struggle during the war and had, against Stalin's advice, pursued that struggle until it had established a workers state. Stalin extended his repression in the East European workers states in order to prevent any spreading of the Yugoslav split. But the Yugoslav affair was his first big setback, at the very moment that the Soviet Union was at the peak of the glory reaped from its resistance during the war and its victory over Hitler's armies.
October 1949 saw the victory of the Chinese revolution -- that too despite the advice Stalin gave the Chinese Communist Party's leadership, namely, to make a deal with Chiang Kai-shek. The collapsing Kuomintang regime took refuge on the island of Taiwan (Formosa), where it would thenceforth survive only by grace of US military aid. The victory of the Chinese revolution had immense repercussions, which have developed through the years and which we shall summarise as follows:
1. A huge shift in the overall relationship of forces on an international scale, to the advantage of socialism.
2. A tremendous impetus to the colonial revolution, which thenceforth would spread from one colonised continent to another; outbreak of the Korean war in 1950; continuation of the Vietnamese revolution, first against French imperialism, later against American imperialism; extension of the colonial revolution to Latin America and victory of the socialist revolution in Cuba in 1959; extension of the colonial revolution to the Middle East, to North Africa in the 1950s, then to Black Africa from 1960 on.
3. Extension of the crisis of Stalinism.
In the course of the post-war period, enormous upheavals also occurred in the economically developed capitalist countries, in the capitalist countries based on a colonial structure, and in the workers states. Let us review them.
In a great many colonial countries, we witnessed a quasi-withdrawal by the imperialist nations (principally Britain; others, to a lesser extent), in which these colonies acquired formal political independence while at the same time an economic hold on them was maintained. These new -- and indirect -- forms of domination constitute what has been called neo-colonialism. In several cases, American imperialism has supplanted the colonising imperialism in its function of economic hegemony. Indigenous bourgeois leaderships of a special type appeared (Peronism, Nasserism, Sukarnoism, etc.). Sometimes they played along with mass movements -- a dangerous game. In the case of Cuba, the revolution won victory under a leadership which, although it did not originate in the working class movement -- and certainly not in the official Communist movement -- made the revolution a socialist one. Finally, in the colonial movements there are a number of leaderships that either try to seesaw between West and East, or gravitate for a time around the workers states without, however, effecting their countries' social transformation into workers states.
The growth and development of colonial revolutionary movements persisted. But receiving neither sufficient solidarity from the working class in the imperialist centres, nor a correct political line from the workers states, it was difficult for them -- with the exception of Cuba in Latin America -- to find a political orientation that would permit them to resolve, in the least costly way, the problems posed by the economic and social backwardness of their countries.
The Soviet Union's isolation, unbroken since 1917, had come to an end -- in the West (the 'people's democracies' of Eastern Europe) as well as in the East (China and the Democratic Republics of Vietnam and Korea). Then, on the American continent, socialist Cuba was born.
To the Soviet Union were added workers states which, with the exception of Czechoslovakia and East Germany, were less developed economically than the first workers state. Following a rocky period of post-war reconstruction in which Stalinism, faithful to its concept of'socialism in one country', shamelessly pillaged the neighbouring countries, the Soviet Union's progress was so tremendous that it became the world's second greatest economic power. In the new workers states of Eastern Europe, the new forms of property ownership also, generally speaking, brought about great economic progress. This, however, did not serve to improve the living standard of the masses to any considerable extent. In their initial period, these states had the same internal regime that the Soviet Union had experienced under Stalin. But the growth of the new relationships of production did not entail the growth of Stalinism. The Latter proved incompatible with the former. The crisis of Stalinism thus began to become evident under the impact of various factors -- the police state's ever greater brake on the Soviet Union's economic progress; the contradiction between the needs of the other workers states and the Kremlin's policies; the rising revolutionary tide throughout the world. The Communist parties were no longer inevitably and automatically aligning themselves with Moscow. China was to play a very special role in the crisis of Stalinism.
In Western Europe, the Communist parties, which had generally increased in size at the war's end, did not succeed (with exceptions such as France, Italy, etc.) in becoming rooted in the working class. The social-democratic parties remained, or again became, the majority working class parties.
As noted above, the crisis of Stalinism began with the Yugoslav events in 1948. The crisis, for all practical purposes, has never since stopped growing (onset of 'de-Stalinisation' after Stalin's death in 1953; East Berlin events in June 1953; Twentieth Congress [of the CPSU] and events in Poland and Hungary in 1956; Sine-Soviet conflict; Czechoslovak crisis; etc.).
The absence of a revolutionary victory in the economically developed countries was not without influence, for a time, on the 'de-Stalinisation' process. Among other things, it determined the protracted nature of this process and the fact that it was largely kept under control by the Kremlin bureaucracy. For the most part, the 'socialist camp' remained under Moscow's hegemony. China's break with Moscow shook the Kremlin's authority in the Communist world to a tremendous extent, without contributing to any decisive advance for revolutionary Marxism.
In the highly developed capitalist countries, some very surprising phenomena occurred. There was a general agreement among economists -- both bourgeois economists and those in the labour movement, Marxist or not -- that following a post-war period of reactivation and reconstruction, a serious economic crisis would occur. Marxists, basing themselves more particularly on Lenin's concepts of imperialism, believed that the loss of the colonies would contribute to the disintegration of the imperialist centres. Yet, far from disintegrating, for about fifteen years the capitalist world experienced boom, an unprecedented economic prosperity interrupted not by crises but only by 'recessions' of varying but always limited size and duration. This led to what was called the 'consumer society' or 'neo-capitalism', which on the surface seemed no longer to correspond with the capitalism that Marx had analysed. In this unparalleled prosperity, the European workers movement, the oldest organised movement with the oldest Marxist tradition, experienced stagnation and even a pronounced political decline. The social-democratic parties tended, even formally, to renounce socialism in order to become 'people's parties'; the Communist parties 'social-democratised' themselves; the left social-democratic tendencies dissolved; the revolutionary vanguard steadily dwindled. The socialist movement, born in Europe more than a century ago, raised in the perspective that a socialist revolution in Europe would precede the economic, political, and social development of other areas of the world, no longer corresponded to this image of yesteryear.
In the course of the First World War and in the early years of the October Revolution, Lenin and Trotsky had foreseen the possibility of victorious socialist revolutions in the colonial countries, paralleling those in Europe. But from 1948 onward, revolution was in full swing on capitalism's periphery, while in the imperialist centres the workers movement was, or appeared to be, at a lower ebb than ever before in its entire history. And finally, in the countries where capitalism had been overthrown, the bureaucracy seemed to be entrenched, with the working class passively submitting to its domination.
A capitalism deprived of its colonies yet flourishing more than ever, with a working class shorn of political aspirations and almost exclusively preoccupied with its standard of living; in the workers states an extension of the new relationships of production, with bureaucratic domination maintained and without any workers' mobilisations; in the colonial countries a revolutionary upsurge, based essentially on the peasantry -- all this largely explains the proliferation of theories denying, in one way or another, the historical mission of the proletariat as formulated by Marx, whether in classically capitalist countries, colonial countries, or workers states (the class nature of the last-named also gave rise to a multiplicity of theories). It was not possible to grasp the totality of the process immediately. In the midst of the tremendous pressures brought to bear on the entire world, and inevitably on the Trotskyist movement, delay was unavoidable.
The crises in the Trotskyist movement


It was impossible to deny these contradictory events and to cite, in lieu of explanation, all the great classics of revolutionary Marxism on the revolutionary mission of the proletariat, etc. In order to answer pertinently the profusion of theories successfully and to be able to act, it was necessary to proceed to an examination of the situation with the help of revolutionary Marxism, to seek therein the key that would permit an explanation of this new situation, to see what adjustments, rectifications, and enrichment had to be brought to revolutionary Marxism. This was possible only while participating in the class struggle at the same time, testing the evaluations of the new situation in the fire of battle. And this is what the Fourth International tried to do, in a situation rendered all the more difficult by the fact that it was operating in a political scene such as no revolutionary tendency had ever before encountered. In addition to the enormously complex picture of the world that has been sketched here, the International was faced with the obstacle of two old, organised workers movements, which came to life only when fighting revolutionary currents. The 'workers state' factor, which from 1917 on had given a new dimension to working class politics and which, in the form of Stalinism, had for so many years influenced the working class movement, introduced -- together with the existence of several workers states in the underdeveloped areas of the world -- increasingly complex effects.
In order to understand the problems and tasks with which the Fourth International was faced, in order to understand the positions it took during the years in which these changes occurred, in order to judge its activity as objectively as possible -- it is quite necessary to grasp the size and scope of the changes produced in the aftermath of the Second World War. It is quite necessary to grasp this state of affairs in order to have a Marxist explanation of the internal difficulties the Fourth International experienced, especially its crises and its splits.
A detailed history of the Fourth International will not fail to examine each of the crises and splits, to study their various stages, the primary and secondary positions defended by this or that current or faction, the role of individuals, etc. But such a historical study can have value only if it is written from a Marxist view of the total picture, with a correct appreciation of the general causes at the root of these crises and splits, and of the main orientations which, aside from any specific position, conflicted with each other. It is this philosophy of crises, as it might be termed, that we will indicate here as an indispensable prerequisite. A number of our adversaries, incapable of doing this, find themselves reduced to mumbo-jumbo in describing this period of crises and splits, embellishing their account with more or less inane bits of gossip.
Let us start with a point that is not without significance. A big to-do has been made, and is still being made, about the crises the Trotskyist movement has gone through. 'What, another crisis! Another split!', invariably exclaimed those who were often more content to fight the Fourth International on that basis than to discuss its ideas. We have no need to deny the oft-times painful nature of the crises in our movement. Nevertheless, this characteristic, which for a long time seemed peculiar to the Trotskyist movement and which could be looked down on with cynical amusement from the lofty seats of the big organisations, is today prevalent in all kinds of movement organisations, big and small. Actually, what was really abnormal in the working class movement was monolithism -- that 'unity' achieved by smothering all independent political thought within organisations laying claim to Marxism, the most critical school of thought in the world. The history of the working class movement proves that, more often than not, it has been racked by struggles between divergent theoretical and political tendencies and currents. This was normal, because without continually testing theories, positions, and orientations, by measuring them against reality, no progress in revolutionary thought and action can be envisaged. There was all the more reason for the movement to undergo such struggles, faced as it was with a world in constant upheaval, in which 'something new' appeared, as it still does, each day. Although differences are a perfectly normal phenomenon, it does not follow that discussing them must necessarily and frequently end in splitting the movement. It is therefore necessary to look into the objective or subjective reasons that contributed to this state of affairs. In the history of the Trotskyist movement, both objective and subjective factors played their role.
Objectively, the splits were caused in large measure by the fact that differences on analyses or on the orientations to follow in order to build the revolutionary party were rendered all the more acute because the organisation was numerically weak, with very weak roots in the masses. Most often the differences boiled down to opposition on the tactics to adopt to overcome that precise situation. The entire world is more than ever subject to the pressure of colossal forces that tear up not only tiny vanguards, but bourgeois and petty-bourgeois groups, workers' mass organisations, etc., as well (it would be easy to draw up an impressive list). The international Trotskyist movement's theoretical base is an invaluable instrument for resisting the divisions that antagonistic forces tend to produce. But a theoretical base, no matter how powerful, is not without limits, especially in face of material forces that can at certain times assume considerable size in a few countries or groups of countries. As we shall see, in every crisis and split it is easy enough to uncover which factor (in the given circumstances) assumed undue proportions for a group of members -- to the point where they left the International.
Subjectively, the situation was aggravated in numerous cases by the fact that since the organisation was tiny, it was viewed by some as a secondary factor, to which too much importance should not be attached. Cutting it in half did not seem to matter much, numerically speaking, especially for those who believed that they had found the orientation which would lead to rapid growth. These feelings were rendered all the stronger in view of the disproportion between the objectively revolutionary character of the situation the important tasks this set -- and the clearly inadequate forces and means at our disposal, a disproportion that continually weighed (and still does) on our movement. Such feelings are the exact opposite of those that prevail in mass organisations, where the members, responsible to large masses and aware of the role of the organisation per se, are loath to initiate splits -- even when serious differences arise within these organisations.
We are not saying that crises and splits can be explained solely by the above-mentioned factors. Factors of a personal nature, for example, also played a role. But in order to have a clear understanding of history, the most general elements have to be placed in the forefront; without them the actions of other factors could not acquire significant weight. Within a period of about fifteen years, the most important changes in history took place; changes embodying the transition from capitalism to socialism while the major revolutionary forces were still under reformist or Stalinist leadership; changes, moreover, affecting essentially the most backward, not the most economically advanced, countries in the world. This situation favoured the rise of multitudinous theories denying the validity of Marxism. It also gave rise to tendencies and currents in the Trotskyist movement that to a certain degree held a distorted view of the situation; believed they could bank essentially on one or another aspect of the situation; and did not believe they had to consider the Fourth International, as constituted, a political force. As is always the case, those who broke away were not aware of the process they were part of -- nor where it would lead them.
It is also worth noting that, with rare exceptions, those who broke with the Fourth International and did not take part in the 1963 reunification soon found themselves -- if not politically nonexistent -- with reduced forces, despite any expectations they might have had or the forces at their disposal when they left. Nor should we view this as an accidental result. Rather must we examine the causes of this phenomenon -- not causes of a personal nature, because there was no lack of determination or capability on the part of the individuals involved. This situation must be attributed to:
1. The fact that they embarked on a politically incorrect course.
2. Their separation from the international movement, which, by its very international nature, was best able to resist the colossal forces at work in the world and to correct its own errors when they occurred.
The International is not a fetish; it does not generate miracles. But, despite its numerical weakness, the very nature of the organisation, centralised and democratic at the same time, makes it a force that can best prevent any national distortion and resist the pressures exerted throughout the world by all kinds of forces (state powers, mass movements with all kinds of leaderships, etc.).
The Third World Congress (1951)


As already mentioned, the break between the Kremlin and the Yugoslav leadership occurred right after our Second World Congress. In vain were Moscow's efforts to isolate the Yugoslav leadership, to find a substantial opposition to Tito, even to attempt a coup against that leadership. In his famous report to the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU in 1956, Khrushchev described Stalin's state of mind when he decided publicly to announce Tito's excommunication. Said Khrushchev:'I remember when the conflict between the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia first began to be artificially blown up. One day, upon arriving in Moscow from Kiev, I was invited to see Stalin. Showing me a copy of a letter recently sent to Tito, Stalin asked: "Have you read this?" Without waiting for a reply, he added: "All I have to do is lift one little finger and there'll be no more Tito. He will go down." ' But this was the first time since he had got rid of all the political currents within the Communist parties that Stalin, now at the very height of his authority, underwent defeat and witnessed a Communist Party and a workers state rising against him.
As soon as this split became public knowledge, the leadership of the Fourth International understood that the international crisis of Stalinism would for the most part thenceforth be out in the open; that the Kremlin's incompatibility with a living revolution was clearly evident; that it was necessary to help the Yugoslavs resist the Stalinist attacks; and that the Yugoslav conflict would sooner or later have big repercussions -- which should be utilised to build new revolutionary leaderships -- inside the Communist parties and the workers states.
The Trotskyist organisations very quickly mobilised to help the Yugoslav revolution answer the torrent of slander emanating from Moscow and the Communist parties. Campaigns were launched in numerous countries. Leaflets, pamphlets, meetings were used in the fight against Stalinism. In several countries it was the Fourth International's organisations that initiated the youth brigades that went to Yugoslavia -- brigades of inquiry, support and work in the service of the Yugoslav revolution. These brigades were relatively successful, with an enrollment of several thousand young people. For Stalinism, the Yugoslav affair was a wound that never healed.
For a short period, the sections of the Fourth International, profiting from the Yugoslav crisis, became stronger. But this process was interrupted during 1950 when, at the beginning of the Korean war, the Yugoslav leadership -- which until then had made progress in many areas of domestic policy (self-management, etc.) and in its criticism of part of the Stalinist past -- took a disgraceful position on the international scene. In the United Nations General Assembly, Yugoslavia voted for UN military intervention against North Korea. This position succeeded in alienating many of Yugoslavia's defenders. The hopes of recruiting a larger revolutionary vanguard because of the Soviet-Yugoslav dispute were thus destroyed, until such time as the crisis of Stalinism would erupt elsewhere.
While the crisis between Yugoslavia and the Kremlin was taking this turn, the victory of the Chinese revolution was becoming an international factor requiring a reassessment of the situation. It could be stated, and correctly so, that this victory would inevitably entail a much bigger crisis of Stalinism than did the Yugoslav affair, for somewhat similar reasons. But there was no reason to believe that the crisis would erupt in the immediate future.
China had just got rid of the Chiang Kai-shek government on the mainland; it found itself threatened on its Korean frontier, while American imperialism was turning Taiwan into a fortress against the new republic. The new Chinese government could not get along without Soviet aid, for a time at least. The 'cold war', the Korean war, Yugoslavia's international policy, the Sine-Soviet cooperation -- all showed that the perspectives of the Second World Congress were no longer satisfactory. A re-evaluation of the situation was called for. Moreover, the sections, no longer making the progress they had made during the post-war period, were meeting with mounting difficulties. This also necessitated a re-examination of the orientation of our activity.
A plenum of the International Executive Committee held in November 1950 decided to convoke the Third World Congress. This plenum adopted theses on the international perspectives of the Fourth International to be submitted for discussion prior to the Congress, which was held in August 1951. These theses were adopted without any serious opposition, except for that of the majority of the French section.
Seventy-four delegates from twenty-five different countries attended the Third Congress. The main document the congress adopted, by a vote of 39 to 3 with one abstention, consisted of 'Theses on the International Perspectives and the Orientation of the Fourth International'. These theses were devoted to an examination of the international situation where, with the victory of the Chinese revolution, the global relationship of forces had developed to the disadvantage of world capitalism and in favour of the socialist cause. They began by stressing the increasing preparations of various kinds being made at that time for a new world war: the creation and delineation of alliances, the 'cold war', the armaments race, etc. The theses did not dismiss the possibility of temporary compromises between the United States and the Soviet Union, above all because of the Kremlin's conservative policy, but they projected such a new world war in the relatively near future. They added that, by its nature, this war would be a 'war-revolution', in which an imperialist victory would be problematical. Linked to this perspective on the war was the point of view that the arms race economy would have catastrophic consequences on the economic situation: inflation, lowering of the workers' standard of living, etc.
In addition, these theses underlined the economic progress beginning to be made in the Soviet Union and in the so-called people's democracies once post-war reconstruction had been achieved. The theses did not foresee any expansion of Stalinism, despite the economic progress, and ruled out any historical future for Stalinism, i.e. the Soviet bureaucracy. From what had happened in Yugoslavia and China, these theses concluded that the Communist parties, even when they had a reformist policy, were not exactly classical reformist parties; that they were not as yet mere instruments of the Kremlin under any and all circumstances; that, under certain conditions of exceptional mass movement, they could even be drawn into going beyond orientations corresponding to the policies of the Kremlin and beyond their strictly reformist objectives. These theses insistently stressed the concrete, contradictory relationships in operation between the masses, the Communist parties, and the Soviet bureaucracy; and they stated that the Trotskyists had to take advantage of these contradictions, and, in order to do so, had to become part of the real mass movement, especially where Communist parties were mass organisations.
In addition to these theses and to a political resolution applying them to the immediate situation, the Third Congress adopted three other important resolutions. The first dealt with the 'people's democracies'. Restating a document adopted by a session of the International Executive Committee held in April 1949, the resolution characterised the East European states as 'bureaucratically deformed workers states'. Unlike the Soviet Union, a workers state born of a proletarian revolution but which had bureaucratically degenerated, these states were essentially a result of the Kremlin's military-bureaucratic intervention, supported at best by a limited and bureaucratic mobilisation of the masses. These 'people's democracies' had never experienced a true revolution and were born with bureaucratic deformations.
For the particular case of Yugoslavia, which had gone through a genuine revolution, a special resolution was adopted that traced the various phases of the revolution from the time of the partisan struggle. This resolution noted the contradiction between Yugoslavia's progressive development in numerous respects and its rightist international policy. It exposed the dangers this policy might hold for the country domestically, including the opportunities it afforded the forces of capitalist restoration. But the resolution went on to indicate that the restoration of capitalism could never be accomplished in a 'cold' way. This 1951 resolution shows that the Fourth international's response to Chinese and Cuban charges that capitalism has been 'restored' in Yugoslavia, in Czechoslovakia, etc., was not improvised for the occasion.
The last resolution, on Latin America, had as its main feature the first Marxist explanation of the nature of Peronist-type governments. Thanks to the Second World War, these governments of the 'nationalist bourgeoisie' had developed -- at the particular expense of foreign imperialism and the oligarchy (landholders and comprador bourgeoisie)-- by involving large sectors of the working class (to different degrees in different countries, and in exchange for minimal concessions) in the anti-imperialist struggle under the leadership of this nationalist bourgeoisie.
A tactical turn in building revolutionary parties


Complementing the analysis and the perspectives projected by the Third World Congress, at a subsequent plenum (February 1952) the International Executive Committee adopted a resolution on tactics for building Marxist revolutionary parties, for the first time generalising and enlarging on the concept of 'entryism' in a certain number of mass Communist or Socialist parties. This new entryist tactic took its inspiration from examples or tactics previously advocated by Lenin and Trotsky, as well as from the line followed by Marx in 1848 in the German revolution and later during the formation of the First International.
In Left- Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Lenin expressed no definite opinion because he lacked sufficient data, but he warned against a single answer to the question, 'Should we join the Labour Party?' -- an answer that would follow from principles such as,'The Communist Party must keep its doctrine pure and its independence of reformism inviolate'. He indicated that in this area it was necessary to 'know, study, seek, discover' each country's peculiarities in order to apply the general and fundamental principles of communism in each case.
As explained in an earlier chapter, in 1934 Trotsky had made clear that for an organisation whose limited numbers made it essentially a propaganda group, constructing a revolutionary party capable of independent action and capable of mobilising the working class in action could necessitate temporarily entering a reformist or centrist group -- in order to win, through adequate work, forces among the currents moving to the left by helping them in their political experiences. The entryism of the pre-war period resembled a raid in the Socialist parties.
After the war, the International had come out in favour of the British Trotskyists entering the Labour Party. This was not the same kind of'entryism' that was practised before the war in the SFIO, or the Belgian Workers Party (Parti Ouvrier Belge), or the Socialist Party in the United States. The tactic for Great Britain rested on the structure of the labour movement of the country, above all on the close link between the political party and the trade unions, which means that, for the British workers, the Labour Party is their party and the Conservative Party is their bosses' party. The workers are faithful to their party even when they do not agree with its leaders or the policies of its leaders.
The new entryist tactic rested both on long-term and conjunctural perspectives.
At the time the Third World Congress was being held, Bevan's left opposition had appeared in the Labour Party, after Labour had been in office a few years. The international and national situation was then favourable to the formation and development in Britain of a mass centrist tendency moving towards the left. Considerations of a conjunctural type flowed from the general theses of the Third World Congress. The prospect of a new world war and the growing economic difficulties in store for capitalism would, we thought, favour the growth of Bevanist-type tendencies within the social-democratic parties on an international scale -- and also give rise to mass left-wing tendencies within the Communist parties. Thus we had to help such tendencies in an experience that would lead them, through phases unforeseeable at that time, to the formation of revolutionary Marxist parties.
The long-range considerations were based on a premise relating to the European workers movement, namely the persistence of the old, reformist workers parties and the lack of growth of the Communist parties after the First World War -- with some exceptions. It could be deduced from this premise that the bond between the working class and these parties was not due primarily to their programme or policy, but to the length of time these parties had been embedded among the workers, to the fact that they constituted for the workers a more or less valuable instrument but at least an instrument available to them on a day-to-day basis in capitalist society; that the workers were not inclined to leave these parties for new formations untested in action.
This organisational inertia on the part of the working class in the European countries would also be evident, to a lesser degree, during revolutionary periods -- the political development of the class proceeding at a faster pace than its development on the organisational plane. No major social crisis in a European country could fail to involve a major crisis for the mass workers parties in that country, especially the dominant workers party. Sustained activity in the mass parties, more especially in the main mass party in each country, was thus placed on the order of the day. [1]
The Leninist theory of the revolutionary party defines the essential features that such a party must have. But it cannot define the precise methods of building the party, because these will depend on general historical conditions and the specific circumstances in each country. The revolutionary party can develop itself only on the basis of class struggles in which there emerges a political vanguard capable of leading the working class in overthrowing the capitalist regime.
In the case of small groups created on a programmatic basis (as has generally been the case for the sections of the Trotskyist movement), it is not conceivable that they can transform themselves into vanguard parties really linked to the masses solely through individual recruitment. No party has ever been built in this way. All parties have been formed not merely through individual recruitment but also by a process involving fusions, the evolution of mass currents, splits, etc., which took place in response to important political events. Thus most of the Communist parties were created as a result of developments inside the old Socialist parties in response to the policies they followed during the First World War and to the victory of the October Revolution.
The Fourth International has never envisaged that it will become a mass International through a gradual, linear development of its sections. Thus in recent years these sections have adopted tactics corresponding to the particular conditions created by the very uneven political maturation inside the youth and the bulk of the working class in many countries of Europe.
The 'entryist' tactic was elaborated precisely because of a combination of circumstances never experienced by revolutionary Marxists in the past: they existed in extremely small numbers, had very limited means of propaganda, and faced parties which encompassed the overwhelming majority of the class, depriving them almost of the right to exist. Where could potential currents arise in a new situation? Our intention was to reject any ultra-left idea that the unorganised workers were in their mass more politically advanced than the organised ones. We concluded that, without renouncing one iota of our programme, we must at all costs participate in the mass organisations. The 'entryist' tactic as it was tried was undoubtedly risky, but revolutionary Marxist politics is not like a recipe book in which all dangers have been eliminated. All those who accused us at that time of capitulation have been shown to be wrong; indeed, with the changes in the political situation, many of them have in fact ended up in the political camp of these old parties, unlike the sections of the Fourth International. In its entryist tactic, the International made a distinction, then, between the Socialist parties, where at that time relative internal democracy allowed for the organisation of tendencies, and the Communist parties, which did not tolerate the least manifestation of divergent points of view. In the former, entryism was envisaged as being total; while in the latter, where it was necessary to use 'trickery and lies' (as Lenin had advised in connection with remaining in the reactionary and reformist mass trade union organisations), the tactic provided for maintaining an independent sector that would publicly explain the positions of the Fourth International in full.
Critique of the Third World Congress


The theses and resolutions of the Third World Congress represented an initial attempt to answer questions raised by the post-war upheavals mentioned earlier -- upheavals that continued to occur. It would thus be useful to see what aspects of the theses were subsequently confirmed and what invalidated. For the verdict to be relevant, we should not overlook the fact that any analysis inevitably includes gaps and errors, life itself bringing into being trends that were only embryonic at the time the analysis was being made or that emerged from the struggle of social forces. The important thing to see is whether the line of action stemming from the analysis was, on the whole, valid for the situation at a given moment; whether it enabled the organisation to react correctly to events while keeping up with each change in the situation in order to take into account the emergence of new factors and new trends -- not to mention correcting any errors in the analysis. Because of the limited scope of this work, only the major political lines will be examined.
The Third World Congress had correctly evaluated the shift in the global relationship of forces at the expense of world capitalism. The congress had even accurately demonstrated that this did not prevent capitalism from maintaining its superiority at that time on the economic plane per se (a superiority it still possesses) and on the military level. Strictly speaking, capitalism's military superiority probably no longer exists on an overall world scale (which obviously does not mean that there is parity in each particular area: army, navy, air force, conventional weapons, nuclear weapons, etc.).
Our understanding of the regroupment around the Soviet Union on the one hand and around the United States on the other was proved correct. The situation began to change in this respect only about fifteen years later, when centrifugal forces assumed increasing weight in each alliance. Nevertheless, even taking into consideration the new factors, we cannot say that new alliances, new constellations are henceforth foreseeable or delimitable and that the former division may not reappear in the event of a considerable deterioration in international relations.
What the theses stated about the dual role of the Soviet bureaucracy, about the Communist parties, and about the contradictory relationships between the masses, the Communist parties and the Kremlin, was essentially right. Without these considerations, it would have been impossible for us, amid the welter of post-war events, to find an orientation. The explanation of what had occurred in Yugoslavia and China was absolutely valid; moreover, it had been indicated as a possible eventuality by Trotsky in The Transitional Programme, in the following terms:

 'Of all parties and organisations which base themselves on the workers and peasants and speak in their name, we demand that they break politically from the bourgeoisie and enter upon the road of struggle for the workers' and farmers' government. On this road we promise them full support against capitalist reaction. At the same time, we indefatigably develop agitation around those transitional demands which should, in our opinion, form the programme of the "workers' and farmers' government".
'Is the creation of such a government by the traditional workers organisations possible? Past experience shows, as has already been stated, that this is, to say the least, highly improbable. However, one cannot categorically deny in advance the theoretical possibility that, under the influence of completely exceptional circumstances (war, defeat, financial crash, mass revolutionary pressure, etc.), the petty-bourgeois parties, including the Stalinists, may go further than they themselves wish along the road to a break with the bourgeoisie. In any case, one thing is not to be doubted: even if this highly improbable variant somewhere at some time becomes a reality and a "workers' and farmers' government" in the above-mentioned sense is established in fact, it would represent merely a short episode on the road to the actual dictatorship of the proletariat.

 In these lines, Trotsky shows that while fighting as hard as possible to build revolutionary Marxist parties defending the Fourth International, he did not exclude the possibility of exceptional cases in which, because of extraordinary objective conditions, the revolution could win even under a leadership that might not be revolutionary Marxist.
The post-war period has produced a few cases of this type which Trotsky estimated as scarcely probable but not impossible. They cannot be denied except at the risk of complete disorientation on the world arena. But we must also uncover the conditions surrounding these cases, in order to demonstrate their exceptional nature. In that way it will be clearly seen that these are not examples from which we can generalise nor from which we can deduce that the construction of revolutionary parties is not necessary.
Among the sectarian tendencies that appeared in the Trotskyist movement after the war have been groups that have denied the existence of workers states created by exceptional circumstances, under the leadership of a mass movement that was not revolutionary Marxist. Underlying this has been a fear of having to conclude -- by using very formal logic -- that the task of building revolutionary parties was superfluous. But denying facts can only lead to incorrect positions.
On the other hand, the theses of the Third Congress were in error on the prospects for war and on the economic situation. The prospect of a new world war was then brought to the fore by the series of nuclear explosions carried out by the United States and the Soviet Union in order to perfect more and more destructive weapons. All the states, all the political formations in the world, based themselves on such a perspective. The American Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, even boasted about carrying out a foreign policy 'on the brink of the abyss'.
Nobody at the time imagined that we were about to enter a period of economic prosperity in the capitalist world, the like of which had never before been seen in scope or in duration, a prosperity interrupted only by short, mild recessions. We know of no writer who had even entertained such a notion. The main results of this unforeseen reversal in the economic conjuncture were that the perspectives on the crisis of capitalism and the world war became much more remote than anticipated by the congress's theses, for capitalism is not driven to war as long as the economy is not in dire straits.[2]
On the contrary, the perspectives of the document on the crisis of Stalinism, which the theses postulated as coming to a head not before but during a world war, proved to be wrong because this crisis was much closer than anticipated. As for the opponents of the Third Congress's theses, they generally had no real perspective whatsoever on the crisis of Stalinism, even for the long run. In other words, the main error of the theses lay in the relative tempo of the crises of capitalism and Stalinism, the congress having seen the crisis of capitalism as preceding that of Stalinism, while the opposite was to happen.

Footnotes
[1] In the discussion on entering the Labour Party, the emphasis was on the structural aspects of the workers movement. In the Third Congress discussion, the emphasis was placed on conjunctural aspects; structural conditions were taken up again only towards 1954-55.
[2] The discussion for the Third Congress barely dealt with the proximity of the war. but with the idea of the 'war-revolution'.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch1



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter I: Historical Continuity


The Trotskyist movement, born in 1923 at the onset of the Stalinist degeneration, has taken part ever since in all the great events of our age, thus assuring the continuity of revolutionary Marxism on a world scale. Between the Communist League and the First International, there was a lapse in time of a dozen years in the field of organisation -- although political continuity was assured by Marx and Engels personally. Between the First and Second International, there was also a gap of almost fifteen years -- the political continuity being assured by Engels, who established a kind of international centre by corresponding with leaders of parties in the most important countries. The years of World War I fell between the Second and the Third International. This time it was the Bolshevik Party and Zimmerwald that assured the maintenance of the Marxist movement.
Our movement was born within the Third International. From 1923 to 1933 we fought -- within its ranks or outside -- as a faction of the Communist International, trying to wrest its leadership from the hands of the centrists and place it once again on the path of revolutionary Marxism. When objective conditions no longer made it possible to pursue this aim, we proceeded directly to the building of new parties and a new revolutionary International, taking as our point of departure the first four congresses of the Communist International. There was no break, no gap in the continuity of the revolutionary movement, and that despite the enormous ebb in the labour movement starting in 1923, despite the degeneration of the October Revolution, despite the infamous role exercised by Stalinism within the working class.
Congresses and resolutions of a revolutionary organisation are not mere matters of form. They do a good deal more than define policy for the immediate period. They record, for the collectivity constituted by the party, its experience, its rules of action, the framework in which -- while renewing its membership with the passage of time -- it continues to evolve. Should the organisation cease to exist, all this remains as historical data that will certainly be used by those who, at some later date, will want to rebuild the revolutionary party. But only as historical data! They would inevitably have to grope about, sometimes for a very long time, to re-establish, to re-create, an adequate framework for the organisation. The degeneration of the Third International and the resulting dispersion of forces have enormously hindered the progress of our movement, which has experienced numerous crises. But it is enough to imagine for a moment what would have happened if the thread had been broken -- if there had no longer been, at a given moment , an international Marxist centre -- to realise by how much the difficulties would have been multiplied, to have an idea of the even greater obstacles revolutionists would have had to overcome in order to re-establish a firm political movement and to rebuild an international leadership.
History will not fail to point out that it was Trotsky, through the sum total of his works, who made the greatest contribution to this task of maintaining historical continuity. Although the names Communist-Internationalist and Bolshevik-Leninist have been borne by our various organisations, the name Trotskyist will most probably be -- and correctly so -- the one that history will give us.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-intro



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Introduction


Up to the present, no study has been written on the history of the Trotskyist movement. Some work is presently being done in the universities, but it bears only on certain periods or on very limited aspects of the movement. The principal aim of this book is therefore to give today's young militants some knowledge of the past of the Trotskyist movement. The first part of this work served as material for a course at a school conducted by the French section of the Fourth International in 1948, and was published at that time. It appears here without any appreciable changes, with additional material to cover the ensuing period.
Within the limits of a work of this size, we wanted to give what seemed to us the most essential aspects of the history of the Fourth International. Until now the Trotskyist movement, for reasons connected with the size of its forces, has exercised its influence on the class struggle principally in the domain of ideas, by its analyses and its elaborations of perspectives and programmes. Generally speaking, it has not been able to lead mass mobilisations and mass actions based on its programme and its slogans; the objective reasons for this are given in this book. Thus a history of the Fourth International has to describe above all the positions taken by the organisation in the gigantic social struggles that have characterised the world in the course of the half century of the Trotskyist movement's existence. In addition, such a history has to show how the Trotskyist movement, in the course of these struggles, defended and enriched the formulations of revolutionary Marxism, as developed from the time of Marx down to the early congresses of the Communist International. We have done our utmost to illuminate the most important stages in the life of the Fourth International, the problems it had to resolve, the debates that took place, and the positions that were reached.
We have limited this book to the history of the international movement and have not treated the history of its sections, except where a particular section at a particular time played an especially significant role in the history of the International.
The history of the Trotskyist movement scarcely poses any problem in connection with what historians call 'periodisation'. The transition from capitalism to the world-wide victory of socialism, inaugurated by the October Revolution, is turning out to be much longer and more complex than anyone had imagined in 1917; no other political movement has followed this transitional period as closely as has the Trotskyist movement, whose successive stages coincide with the very stages of that history itself since 1923.
The Trotskyist movement was born in the USSR at the close of the revolutionary wave that followed the First World War, when a period of relative stabilisation of capitalism began. It expanded internationally during the great economic crisis that began in 1929. It moved towards the construction of a new revolutionary International after the debacle of the German working class movement in 1933, and founded the Fourth International on the eve of the Second World War. It reoriented itself in accordance with the tremendous upheavals of the post-war period. And today the Trotskyist movement has entered a new phase in line with the turn inaugurated on a world scale in 1968.
In this book we have done no more than mention the mountains of slander heaped on Trotsky and the Trotskyist movement. We have never yet dealt with this question in depth. Because of the vast proportions the calumny assumed, and the after-effects that still remain, this question will no doubt constitute an important subject for future historians. A century ago Karl Vogt and others furiously slandered Marx and his supporters, calling them the Schwefelbande (devil's gang) within the movements for emancipation. How tiny and pale were those vilifications compared to those underwritten by powerful states, heaped high in an effort to make the Fourth International appear the Schwefelbande of the Twentieth Century.
This work leaves aside a good number of questions. Given the aim and the size we had set for this book, we could not go into numerous details. There was no possibility of using extensive quotations without requiring three to four times the number of pages. We had to stick to essentials. We hope that we have succeeded in correctly setting forth how the Trotskyists advanced internationally in the domain of theory and practice, in the defence of positions previously taken, and in the elaboration -- difficult in every epoch, and rendered still more arduous by the conditions under which the movement has fought -- of new positions in the face of new problems posed by the changes taking place all over the world.
The author of this book has participated in this 'long march' of the Trotskyists for more than forty years, first becoming part of the international leadership of the Trotskyist movement in 1931. Although this work very largely expresses the views of numerous leading members of the International, it cannot be considered an 'official' history of the Fourth International. We do not think that for Marxists there can be an 'official' history, even of their own organisation. The organisation is an instrument of political combat, which inevitably necessitates a line of action determined according to the rules of democratic centralism. History, to a great extent, serves to determine politics; its determination cannot be placed at the service of politics. For having abandoned Marxism on this question, as on others, Stalinism has obliged the historians under its thumb to write 'official' histories, forcing them in fact periodically to rewrite history as a function of the line of the moment. They have succeeded only in accumulating historical falsifications as well as in proving their growing incapacity to draw objective lessons from history.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch3



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 3: From 1929 to 1933 Formation of the International Left Opposition


The years 1929-33 marked the greatest economic crisis in the history of capitalism. Tens of millions of people were thrown out of work -- or never even got a job after leaving school. The social crisis thus brought on ended not in a gain for socialism but in the victory of fascism in Germany. Colonial revolts and revolutions were on the increase; the Chinese Communists set out on their 'long march '. In the Soviet Union the period of the five-year plans began under the leadership of Stalin, who succeeded in strangling the Bolshevik Party. In this period, despite their policy of class collaboration (the theory of the 'lesser evil'), the Socialist parties were generally not in government. The Communist parties followed an ultra-left sectarian policy (the 'third period'). The combination of the two policies -- Socialist and Communist -- paralysed the proletariat.
Stalin expelled Trotsky from the Soviet Union early in 1929. Even at that time he would have got rid of Trotsky in a more permanent way, except that -- as Zinoviev and Kamenev revealed after the troika broke up -- he feared an assassination might boomerang against him; his position was still far from secure, while Trotsky still had considerable authority in the USSR. Inside the USSR itself, Trotsky would never have discontinued his activity. He had refused to make an agreement to that effect when Stalin had demanded it. It was after this refusal that Stalin saw only one solution -- to forbid any relationship, any contact, between Trotsky and the USSR. That was the purpose Trotsky's exile was intended to serve. Let us not forget that in the past Stalin had considered the pre-1917 revolutionary emigration as something of little importance. Later Stalin was to admit that he had made a mistake in exiling Trotsky. It was probably from that moment on that Stalin started the preparations for Trotsky's assassination.
Upon his arrival in Turkey, Trotsky set himself the task of creating an international Bolshevik-Leninist faction to fight against the disintegration of the international revolutionary movement. As early as 1924, centrifugal currents had been appearing in the Communist International and in most of its sections, but, except in the USSR, practically no group (apart perhaps from the Bordigists in Italy) had developed distinct political positions of its own -- its own well-rounded programme. On the contrary, during the 1924-29 period a series of numerically tiny groups had been formed, generally without solid ties to the working class, quarrelling amongst themselves, and without any real political cohesiveness. This can very well be explained by the fact that the Communist parties had arisen from currents of very diverse origin in the working class movement, and there had not been enough time before the onset of the degeneration to re-educate and unify these parties on the basis of the theoretical, political, and organisational experience of Bolshevism. As soon as the ebb in the revolutionary movement appeared, as soon as the impact of the Bolshevik Party's degeneration was felt in the Communist International, reactions on the most diverse political bases occurred amongst those who avoided getting caught up in the Stalinist corruption. Thus in France, between 1924 and 1929, half-a-dozen different oppositions appeared, all of them very heterogeneous.
Immediately upon his arrival in Turkey, Trotsky addressed a letter to all of the groups and individuals who found themselves in opposition to Stalinist policy. Signed 'Gurov', the letter projected an international regroupment and asked each of them what their positions were on the three basic questions: the USSR, the Anglo-Russian Committee, and the Chinese revolution. In this letter and in other documents that followed shortly thereafter, Trotsky distinguished three fundamental currents in the Communist International around which the different groups were, or would be, gathered -- in a more or less clear-cut fashion:
(a) The Left Opposition, which defended the fundamental political and organisational policies of Leninism advocated by the Bolshevik-Leninists in the Soviet Union.
(b) The right opposition, oriented by the right wing of the Bolshevik Party (Bukharin) and composed of groups opposed to Stalinism, not because of its fundamental policy, not on the question of 'socialism in one country', but more particularly because of its 'ultra-left' errors. These groups, the most important of which was that of Brandler in Germany, each tried to have an independent national policy, with the result that they found themselves moving towards the social-democratic left.
(c) In the centre, the Stalinist faction, the bureaucratic wing in the service of the Kremlin.
In his letters, Trotsky also specified that the problem of the internal regime of the party, no matter how important it was, nevertheless had to be considered subordinate to fundamental political problems, and there could be no question of entering into a bloc with the right (Brandlerites) because, while we had the same criticism of the party regime that they did, there was complete and total disagreement between us and them on the essential political problems, on the general political orientation.
The 1929-33 period of our international movement was essentially a period of principled delimitation and formation of cadres. That was the period in which a large number of our sections were formed and in the course of which we learned, if such an expression can be used, to 'talk Trotskyist'. It was during this period in France that the group which published La Vérité (The Truth) was established (September 1929) and organised the Ligue Communiste (Communist League) in 1930. It was in April 1930 in Paris that the first International Conference of Bolshevik-Leninists took place, which was to give birth to an international centre, very weak at the time, that would become the International Secretariat. The development of our movement led to the Copenhagen Conference of 1932, attended by Trotsky, and to a 1933 conference that adopted the 'eleven points' summarising our basic programme. Let us take a look at the principal problems confronting the Trotskyist movement at that time.
Defence of the USSR


Beginning in 1929, the opponents of Stalinism were faced with the problem of defence of the Soviet Union, occasioned by incidents that occurred during the summer of 1929 on the East China railroad.
At that time, the Trans-Siberian Railway included a section that passed through Chinese territory. [1] Agreements did exist between the USSR and China on the management of the railroad on Chinese territory. These agreements had been established by the two countries on an equal footing, after Lenin's government had voluntarily repudiated all treaties concluded by Tsarism that were of the 'unequal treaty' type between the imperialist powers and China. After the victory of the counter-revolution in China, Chiang Kai-shek wanted forcibly to expel the Soviet managers of that part of the railroad. From the strategic point of view, that constituted a great danger for the USSR, since the Pacific port of Vladivostok would thus be cut off from all of Siberia. In answer to Chiang, the Soviet government sent the Red Army to enforce the rights of the Soviet state, at which point denunciations of 'Soviet imperialism', and other arguments we have often heard since, took place among a number of opponents of Stalinism. It was more or less at this time that Hugo Urbahns, leader of the Hamburg insurrection of 1923, began to expound theories on the existence of 'state capitalism' in the USSR.[2] It was at this time that Trotsky wrote The Defence of the Soviet Union and the Left Opposition, the first fairly complete examination of a question that was to be raised many times thereafter.
In this pamphlet Trotsky defines the class nature of the Soviet state, product of the October Revolution. The aim of any war against the USSR would be to destroy the bases of the society (collective ownership of the means of production, etc.) rather than its repressive regime. The defeat of the USSR would also bring in its wake colonisation of the country by imperialism, which would thus be assured a new lease of life. This defeat would result in profound demoralisation of the masses throughout the entire world. But defence of the Soviet Union does not at all consist in accepting or supporting Stalin's policy. On the contrary, the latter is one of the greatest dangers threatening the USSR -- Stalin hunting around the world for 'allies', to the detriment of the world revolution. This policy must be bitterly denounced, even in time of war. 'For the defence of the Soviet Union, always! For the defence of Stalinism, never!' The only real defence of the Soviet Union in the event of world conflict is the revolutionary struggle of the international proletariat in all the capitalist countries, 'allies' or not of the USSR.
The united front against the Hitler danger


The main struggle waged by the Left Opposition from 1930 on was the struggle for the united front in Germany against the rise of fascism. The Left Opposition's policy was radically opposed to the Stalinist policy of the 'third period', which can be summarised as follows: capitalism has entered a period of final crisis; consequently (by virtue of Stalinist logic), the entire bourgeoisie is turning fascist, and along with it its party in the working class, the social-democratic party, which is becoming a social-fascist party; consequently, the danger of war against the USSR is becoming imminent; and consequently the masses are becoming radicalised, placing on the agenda general strikes, revolutionary days, leading to armed insurrection. The political consequence of this 'logic', of this theory of'social fascism', was that there could be no possible question of entering a united front with a social-fascist party; on the contrary, it was necessary to fight this social-fascist party, to cut right through it, in order to get at the bourgeoisie and at fascism, the 'twin of social fascism'.
This international policy of Stalinism had its most dreadful repercussions and its most horrible results in Germany, where the workers, faced with the Hitlerite gangs, found themselves divided. Still worse, in certain cases (the plebiscite in Prussia) the Stalinists voted together with the Nazis against the Social Democrats. Another fact: following the assassination of some thirty Berlin workers on 1 May 1929 by police led by the Social Democratic prefect Zoergiebel, the Communist Party declared that all Social Democrats were also Zoergiebels who had to be struck down. Children of Social Democrats were then 'little Zoergiebels', and the order was given to Communist children's organisations to beat up Social Democratic children at school. Shortly before Hitler came to power, members of the German CP and the Nazis had common picket lines during the strike of the Berlin public transport system, which was run by a Social Democratic municipality. This 'third period' policy created a rift between Social Democratic workers and Communist workers and rendered the German proletariat helpless in the face of the rise of the Nazis.
The Left Opposition led an international struggle against the line of 'social fascism' and in favour of a united front of the German Communist and Social Democratic parties in order to stop Hitler. That campaign was based on a series of pamphlets by Trotsky: What Next?, The Only Road, Letter to a German Communist Worker, Germany: The Key to the international Situation. The development of the situation and our intervention led the Stalinists, who had wanted to avoid the issue, to take a position on the Nazi danger. In France the CP leadership called an information conference of the Paris region, at which the then secretary, Semard, branded the German question 'the Trotskyite hobbyhorse'. A public meeting of the CP at Bullier Hall was the scene of violent fist-fights between Stalinists and Trotskyists.
Later, forced to respond to the workers' anxiety about the fascist threat, as well as to serve the Kremlin's diplomatic manoeuvring between the democratic countries and Hitlerite Germany, the Communist International organised the 'Amsterdam Committees' for the fight against fascism. It was one of the first experiments with a 'mass'-type organisation controlled by the Stalinists. Our organisation 'participated' in these Amsterdam and Paris (Pleyel Hall) Congresses in order to expose them as subterfuges. They were just that -- on many counts. The Stalinists separated the fight against war and fascism from the revolutionary struggle for power. [3] In that way, they spread the idea that the rise of fascism could be stopped and imperialist war prevented within the capitalist system. Even at that time the policy of 'peaceful coexistence' was already taking its toll. This policy was not invented by Khrushchev, as many bourgeois, social-democratic and pro-Chinese observers pretend. In the Criticism of the Programme of the Communist International, written by Trotsky in 1928, there is a denunciation of this policy of 'peaceful coexistence'. The differences between Khrushchev and Stalin related not to the basis of this policy -- that is, obtaining a global agreement with the capitalists in order that the Soviet Union might quietly build 'socialism in one country' but to the different conditions under which they attempted to implement this policy. In both cases the interests of the revolutionary struggles of the masses were subordinated and even sacrificed to the needs of the Kremlin's diplomacy. It must be noted that the same leaders of the Chinese CP who so strongly denounced this policy when carried out by the Soviet leaders are, for the same reasons of 'socialism in one country', now proceeding along the same lines with regard to Chile, Iran, Sri Lanka, Sudan, etc.
Under the banner of Leninism and the October Revolution, Stalinism reintroduced social-democratic and opportunistic ideas. The door was opened to collaboration with the 'anti-fascist' bourgeoisie or bourgeois 'friends of peace', and the Kremlin took its first steps on the road to the Popular Front in France and Spain. In their attempts to build 'mass'-type class collaborationist bodies like the 'Amsterdam Committees', the bureaucracy perpetrated a massive confusion in the working class. They claimed they were building a united front through this method of organisation, whereas they were in fact only regrouping people who had accepted their leadership in advance. Thus did they distort -- in the minds of revolutionary workers and in the masses -- the concept of a united front among working class organisations.
The fight to reform the Communist International


As we said, a great number of our sections originated in this period, which was also marked by numerous internal crises in our movement. Since there were no large-scale workers' struggles taking place in many countries and since our movement did not have much of a mass base, personal aspects of our internal discussions often assumed undue importance. But the personal elements of these fights were closely bound to, were grafted onto, political and organisational problems. All these crises were phases of the struggle to establish connections with the masses and to build revolutionary leaderships. Only philistines, only centrists, can sneer at these fights instead of trying to understand them. In this period, an attempt at collaborating with the Bordigists, in the same international organisation, proved fruitless. The Copenhagen Conference registered the impossibility of our being in the same movement, under the given circumstances.
During this entire period, we were opposed to building a new International and new revolutionary parties. The essence of our political line was to struggle to reform, to regenerate, the Communist International and its sections. Although expelled, we considered ourselves a faction of the Communist International and of the Communist parties, a faction struggling to put these organisations back on the correct revolutionary road. In that period we came up against tendencies that wanted to form a new International, that said there was no longer anything that could be done with the Communist International and its sections. Our answer was that our attitude towards working class organisations could not be dictated by subjective considerations such as our expulsion, nor even solely by the policy followed by the leadership of those organisations. The birth and continued existence of revolutionary parties and of a revolutionary International correspond to a historical situation, to given objective conditions that cannot arbitrarily be dismissed with a few strokes of the pen. The Communist International and its sections had at their command the historic capital rising out of their origin, their connection with the Russian Revolution, their years of struggle in working class movements. These organisations had deep roots in the masses. Stalinism was squandering the historic capital of the Third International, but only great historic events could show whether it was definitively finished, doomed from a revolutionary point of view, despite our efforts to regenerate it.
From 1923 on, we had seen the Left Opposition in the Communist parties grow, with (and by means of) every revolutionary upsurge of the workers. We had no grounds for saying that the bureaucratisation of these parties was irreversible. It should not be forgotten that the CPs of that era, although already led by Stalinists, were quite different from the political machines of today. They were still revolutionary formations. Finally, in our struggle against the policies of the 'third period', we had warned that a defeat of the German proletariat and a victory for Hitler could constitute precisely the historic event likely to change our course with regard to the Communist International. We must bear in mind the world situation at that time. The European working class constituted the majority of the world working class; the colonial movements had only just begun.
For Trotskyists, the International cannot be an arbitrarily created organisation; it must be the concretisation, the embodiment of all the principles of revolutionary Marxism and of the vanguard of a historical epoch. The First International marked the epoch when the working class movement for the first time disengaged itself from bourgeois and petty-bourgeois republican currents and organised itself independently on a class basis, even if it lacked clarity on a theoretical level. The Second International before 1914 marked the epoch of capitalist ascendancy and the expansion of bourgeois democracy in various countries, in which the working class movement in these countries organised itself in mass parties and mass trade unions. In this epoch Marxism became the dominant political current in the working class movement.
The Third International -- in its first five years, the only ones when it was truly the Communist International -- marked the epoch of the October victory, the first assaults of the socialist revolution in the whole world. As long as the Third International contained revolutionary forces potentially capable of throwing off the bureaucratic yoke and regenerating it, the Trotskyist opposition was totally hostile to the building of another pole. It considered that to do so would be to divert and dissipate revolutionary forces in a project divorced from what was still the international centre of the socialist revolution. But when the German proletariat was defeated by Nazism, when the Communist International unhesitatingly underwrote Stalin's policy -- which bore such a heavy responsibility for this defeat -- then it became useless to attempt to revive a body which had been shown to be lifeless. The epoch had arrived for a new revolutionary International. How long its gestation would last could not be predicted. But in any case it was necessary to start work immediately.
It should be noted that later on, when we turned towards the construction of a Fourth International and new revolutionary parties, practically none of the people who had condemned our policy of reforming the Third International and had taken a position against us in favour of creating a Fourth International practically none of these people joined us in this task. Most of them continued to form ultra-left groupings. This proves that there were much deeper differences between us and those who criticised us at that time than the possible reform of the Communist International. Actually, these divergences stemmed from totally different concepts of the party and its relationship to the working class.

Footnotes
[1] Since then, a line has been built that goes only through Soviet territory.
[2] The theory of 'state capitalism' was really not new. It had been created right after the October Revolution by Social Democrats like Otto Bauer. Karl Kautsky, etc.
[3] It is obvious that a revolutionary party must conduct specific campaigns and actions against fascism and imperialist war, but these actions must be anti-capitalist in character.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch5



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 5: From the Founding of the Fourth International to the Second World Congress (1938-48)


Munich 1938 was only a short prelude to a new world war. For six years millions of men were mobilised, shoved into regiments, armed, shipped from continent to continent, and hurled against one another in murderous combat. The contradictions among the capitalist powers prevailed over the contradictions between capitalism as a whole and the Soviet Union, so that at the beginning of the war the Kremlin was allied with Nazi Germany in a pact that would give way, in two years' time, to agreements with the imperialist democracies. This collaboration would contribute to giving the Resistance an ambiguous class character. In the course of the war, mass movements began to get beyond the control of the major powers. Taking advantage of defeats suffered by the metropolitan countries, colonies began to revolt. Towards the end of the war, the Soviet Union had a sphere of influence in East Europe, the social character of which would only be definitively determined in the following period. The Socialist International succeeded in committing suicide at the beginning of the war; the Communist International was dissolved by Stalin in 1943. The old working class parties, Socialist and Communist, tightly regimented during the war, emerged from the conflict with an increasingly right-wing political line.
Founding of the Fourth International (the Transitional Programme)


In 1938, with the world darkened by the monstrous shadow of war and fascism, the International Conference met again. The meeting took place at the same time that the temporary capitalist compromise was signed in Munich. Again Trotsky raised the question of founding the Fourth International. It was to this conference that Trotsky submitted the Transitional Programme -- which was to serve, for an entire historical period, as the basis for the Fourth International's activities. The conference also adopted a resolution, 'Class Struggle and the War in the Far East', characterising China's struggleagainst Japan as a war of national liberation and supporting China in its struggle.
At this conference the objection could ·gain be heard that it was too early to announce the formation of the Fourth International, that such a decision would not be understood by the masses, etc. in short, all the arguments that had led to the unfavourable decision in 1936 were still being used on this occasion.
These objections were similar to those expressed at other moments when decisive steps had to be made by the working class movement. At the time of the break with the Second International and the founding of the Third International, for instance, the objection was raised that there was no mass Communist Party other than the Bolshevik Party which was in government. Against the founding of the Fourth International, the considerable ebb of the working class movement and the absence of Trotskyist organisations with a mass base were invoked as reasons. But what is to be done to transform circumstances in order that they should become favourable and create organisations with a mass base? It is impossible to renounce the programme and the organisation until the objective conditions are transformed in a favourable way. Indeed, these objections only serve to conceal an opposition to the programme and a refusal to fight for it in extremely difficult conditions.
That is why Trotsky was so very insistent on this question. That is why he pushed it right to the point of including an undisguised polemic against those who were opposed to announcing the establishment of the Fourth International in the final chapter of his Transitional Programme. [1] He did so because, for him, the most important consideration was not the numerical size of our forces, nor the readiness of a more or less large sector of the workers to understand our decision; but above and beyond all, it was a question of political perspective and political continuity. Trotsky was acutely aware that the workers movement in general, and our movement in particular, was about to enter an extremely difficult Period -- the imperialist war -- in the course of which we would be subjected to extraordinary pressures by the class enemy and by powerful centrifugal forces. These pressures could well disintegrate and destroy an organisation as weak in numbers as our own. Looking back, in examining what happened in our movement during the war, it can be seen that entering the war period without having proclaimed the founding of the Fourth International would have allowed all the outside pressures and all the centrifugal forces which appeared during that time to operate a thousand times more intensively.
In face of the difficulties stemming from national isolation and clandestinity, how many members, subject to all kinds of pressures, might have failed to use as the point of departure in making political analyses the necessity of defending and maintaining the organisation and the programme it outlined before the war? How many would have had a tendency to work up a new programme, to wonder what might be the new ideas they should adopt! At the beginning of this work, we mentioned the importance of historical continuity in the revolutionary movement. In announcing the founding of the Fourth International, Trotsky was essentially aiming at assuring this continuity during a perilous period. It was not at all 'too soon', but rather in the nick of time, that the Fourth International was founded, at the 1938 conference. The decision to create The World Party of Socialist Revolution -- the name the Fourth International adopted -- rendered an inestimable service to the working class movement.
The importance of the Transitional Programme has often been stressed. It answers these crucial questions: How can humanity be extricated from this nightmare of crises, of world wars, of continuous chaos in which it has been floundering for some forty years? How can the transition to socialism be assured?
The Transitional Programme is, at one and the same time, a programme for organising the workers in the struggle to win power and a programme to be put into operation immediately after the workers take power.9 At the end of the Nineteenth and the beginning of the Twentieth Century, when capitalism was in its ascendancy, the socialist parties had a two-part programme: the maximum programme, which expressed the demand for a socialist society in some vague future period; and the minimum programme of immediate demands, a programme of reforms that did not pose the question of the conquest of power. As early as its Third Congress, the Communist International had put forward the idea of a transitional programme: 'Instead of the minimum programme of the reformists and centrists, the Communist International struggles for the concrete needs of the proletariat, for a set of demands which, in their entirety, organise the proletariat and constitute the stages of the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat; each of these demands expresses an urgent need of the broad masses, even if these masses do not as yet consciously stand for the dictatorship of the proletariat' (Theses on Tactics).
The Transitional Programme is not what can be called the fundamental programme of the Fourth International. The latter comprises the sum total of the teachings of the struggle for socialism, from the very beginning of the working class movement. This programme does not appear in any single printed document, but is found in several basic texts (the Marxist classics, the first four Congresses of the Communist International, basic documents of the Left Opposition and of the Fourth International, etc.). In this historical context, the Transitional Programme is its most important political part, the part which, proceeding from the basic teachings, formulates a programme for mobilising the masses in actions appropriate to their level of class consciousness, in order to lead them, through the education they receive by means of these actions, to the highest level -- the conquest of power. This programme comprises a series of immediate, democratic and transitional demands corresponding to the needs of the broadest sectors of the toiling masses, and to the logic of the development of the class struggle. Its key item is the slogan of workers government. As was the case at the Third and Fourth Congresses of the Communist International, this slogan is used in the Transitional Programme not as a synonym for the dictatorship of the proletariat, but as a transitional government formulation, which has to be adapted to the masses' organisational situation and degree of class consciousness at a given moment. A programme lacking any perspective for a government of the toiling masses taking anti-capitalist measures is not a transitional programme.
In the years since the Transitional Programme was written, its validity was particularly demonstrated in the immediate post-war period, when circumstances obliged the traditional organisations to advance certain of its slogans, although they were careful to avoid moving on to anti-capitalist slogans and to calling for a workers government. For some years now, its validity has also been evidenced in the fact that the idea has been picked up by reformists and centrists, but with the purpose of emasculating it. They use it to offer the masses a so-called new road -- basically reformist -- by which society can be moved from capitalism to socialism without revolutionary upheavals.
Given its nature, the Transitional Programme cannot and should not be considered holy writ. The foundation on which it stands, however -- the principle of a mobilisation of the masses towards the conquest of power, on a programme of combined demands remains unalterable. But the demands and the way they follow on from each other must in each instance be adapted to the particular conditions of time and place.
As early as 1938, the Transitional Programme illustrated the characteristics of the three areas in which the socialist revolution would be continued after the war: the advanced capitalist states, the colonial and semi-colonial countries, and the workers states (at that time there was but one, the Soviet Union).
The ordeal of the world war


Shortly before the war, the International Secretariat was transferred to America. The war brought considerable losses to our movement -- first and foremost, the assassination of Trotsky several weeks after he had written the Manifesto of the Emergency Conference (May 1940). There was also a wholesale slaughter of our comrades in the European countries: in France, Marcel Hic and Pierre Tresso (Blasco), former member of the Political Bureau of the Italian CP; in Belgium, Leon Lesoil and A. Leon.; in Greece, Pouliopoulos; the German comrade Widelin -- to ate only the names of a few leading comrades. But our dead in the Second World War can be counted by the hundreds. Our European sections, for the most part, were changed from top to bottom, and their leaderships almost wholly replenished by youthful elements. To this must be added the organisational break-up resulting from measures taken by the bourgeois states (censorship, travel restrictions, etc.) which confined most of our sections to a narrow national life in an atmosphere of enormous, reactionary political pressure, of biased news accounts, without an international centre capable of functioning normally -- even to the slightest extent.
The International Secretariat in America could keep in contact with only a few countries in the 'Allied' camp (and even that with great difficulty). Several years were to pass before a European Secretariat could be established among sections in countries occupied by Germany. Despite these extraordinarily great difficulties, we were able to ascertain, when international connections were re-established in 1946, that most of the sections, beyond frontiers and fronts, had followed a common general line on essential questions. This, of course, did not happen without a certain number of internal struggles and crises in several Trotskyist organisations, principal among which were the following:
1. In the United States. At the beginning of the war, Shachtman and Burnham, under the pressure of a petty bourgeoisie indignant over the Nazi-Soviet Pact, questioned our position on the USSR. Discussion on the point was begun and lasted seven months, covering all the fundamental questions, from problems of Marxist philosophy to problems of building a proletarian party. A petty bourgeois tendency grouped around Shachtman broke with the Socialist Workers Party [2] to form an organisation that continued to move farther and farther from our programme before disappearing completely. Following this split, a special international conference was held in America in May 1940, which condemned the political line and activity of the splitters and adopted a manifesto drawn up by Trotsky -- The Proletarian Revolution and the Second Imperialist War. This manifesto was written at the time when Hitler's offensive was driving into Holland, Belgium, and France. Stalin was then in a de facto alliance with Hitler. It was also at that time that the first attempt was made by Stalin's agents to assassinate Trotsky.
This document recalls the immediate causes of the war. It denounces the positions defended by the big powers, and the lies of 'fatherland' and'democracy' being used to fool the masses. It also unmasks the 'peace offensive' being conducted by Hitler and, whilst exposing the fatal policy and role of Stalin, it calls for the defence of the Soviet Union. Many chapters are devoted to the problems of the colonial countries (China, India, Latin America). The role of the social-democratic, Stalinist and centrist leaderships of every ilk are unveiled at length. Finally the manifesto concludes with an appeal for the Fourth International, for a struggle in which two alternatives are at stake: socialism or slavery.
About a month later, on 30 June, Trotsky wrote an article about the fact that the German troops occupied the whole European continent up to the Atlantic. This article,'We Do Not Change Our Course'", contained in particular the following lines:

 'In the wake of a number of other and smaller European states, France is being transformed into an oppressed nation...(Imperialist democracy) cannot be "saved" from fascism. It can only be replaced by proletarian democracy. Should the working class tie up its fate in the present war with the fate of imperialist democracy, it would only assure itself a new series of defeats... True enough, Hitler boastfully promises to establish the domination of the German people at the expense of all Europe and even of the whole world "for one thousand years". But in all likelihood this splendour will not endure even for ten years... Consequently the task of the revolutionary proletariat does not consist of helping the imperialist armies to create a "revolutionary situation" but of preparing, fusing and tempering its international ranks for revolutionary situations of which there will be no lack. The new war map of Europe does not invalidate the principle of revolutionary class struggle. The Fourth International does not change its course.

 2. In the case of the German section (more exactly, the emigre committee leading that section), we witnessed a truly tragic degeneration of a group demoralised by years of exile. The first document to reveal this degeneration was called the 'Three Theses' (1941). The basic concept embodied in this document is that fascism constitutes a new historical period succeeding imperialism, one in which humanity is dragged so far backwards that, instead of remaining in the era of world wars and proletarian revolution, it finds itself thrown back into the era of wars for national liberation and of democratic revolutions of the 1848 type!
3. In France we saw the two Trotskyist groups, the POI (Parti Ouvrier Internationaliste -- Internationalist Workers Party) and the CCI (Comite Communiste Internationaliste -- Internationalist Communist Committee), both start off by going off the track -- in opposite directions -- under pressure from the class enemy. After a political struggle in both groups had enabled them to overcome their respective deviations, unification could take place through the founding, early in 1944, of the PCI (Parti Communiste Internationaliste -- Internationalist Communist Party), the French section of the Fourth International.
In a pamphlet entitled 'Problems of the World Party of Revolution and Reconstruction of the Fourth International', dated 28 February 1966, the group 'Voix Ouvriere' (Workers Voice) whose views are now defended by the 'Lutte Ouvriere' (Workers Struggle) group -- categorically condemned the Fourth International for the patriotic attitude adopted by one of the Trotskyist groups during the war, and for the fact that the Fourth International supposedly did not move to criticise this policy when the reunification of the French movement and the founding of the PCI took place in 1944. Here is what this pamphlet says: 'The unification of the different Trotskyist groups (POI, CCI, October Group) took place in the beginning of 1944. The chauvinist policy of 1940 was blithely passed over, everything was forgiven and forgotten, and, better yet, they had always been right'(p.8). It adds:'...And when after the war the Fourth International ratified the policy of the French section, it became clear that it, too, was opportunistic' (P· 10).
Unfortunately for these comrades, their statements are not correct. In February 1944, under the German occupation, a European conference of the Fourth International was held. One of the items on its agenda was the French reunification and the formation of the PCI. This conference did not 'blithely pass over' but proceeded seriously to criticise the positions previously taken. The positions adopted at this European conference served as the basis for reunification in France. The documents of the European conference were published in a clandestine issue of Quatrième Internationale (Fourth International). We cite below Point XXIX of 'Theses on the Condition of the Working Class Movement and Perspectives for the Development of the Fourth International', which deals with this question and which explains as completely as anyone could desire what happened at that time. We are very sorry that these comrades did not verify their statements before making them.

'XXIX. Above all else the present war has subjected the Fourth International movement to the most difficult and decisive ordeals. On the one hand, we had to defend ourselves, on the basis of internationalist principles, against the danger of catching the nationalistic and patriotic fever that, at the beginning, was epidemic among the masses; on the other hand, we had to defend ourselves against the terrorism of the bourgeoisie. Under pressure of the conditions created in France and elsewhere after the defeat of French imperialism, a certain weakening in the internationalist behaviour of some sections became apparent. The French section primarily -- in its day-to-day policies often expressed the nationalistic influence of the petty-bourgeois masses who were exasperated by the defeat of their imperialist masters.
'The position taken by the French section on the national question, the theses issued in the name of the European Secretariat of the Fourth International, at that time exclusively controlled by the French comrades, represent a social-patriotic deviation that must once and for all be openly condemned and rejected as incompatible with the programme and general ideology of the Fourth International.
'Instead of making a distinction between the nationalism of the defeated bourgeoisie (which is an expression of its imperialist interests) and the "nationalism" of the masses (which is only an expression of their reaction to, and resistance against, exploitation by the imperialist occupiers), the POI leadership deemed progressive the struggle of its own bourgeoisie; did not, right from the start, separate itself from Gaullism; and was satisfied to clothe the latter in more "revolutionary" terminology. By placing the French bourgeoisie -- a defeated imperialist power -- on the same plane as the bourgeoisie of colonial countries, the POI leadership acquired a completely false concept of the national question. It spread dangerous illusions about the character of nationalist organisations, which, far from being able to serve as hypothetical "allies" for the revolutionary proletariat, will prove to be the counter-revolutionary vanguard of imperialism.
'In the same way, starting out with the entirely correct premise that it was necessary to take part in the mass struggle and to win large layers of the working class away from the baneful influence of nationalism, the POI leadership permitted itself to be drawn into making dangerous ideological and tactical concessions. It did not understand that the most important consideration in winning the masses lay in the crystal-clear and revolutionary language of the international class struggle, as opposed to the confused and treacherous language of social patriotism.
'It should be added, however, that just as this condemnation of a right-centrist deviation is called for, so also must the Fourth International vehemently condemn the sectarian "left" deviation as evidenced, for example, in the policies of the French CCI on the national question. Under guise of safeguarding the heritage of Marxism-Leninism, the CCI obstinately refused to make any distinction between the nationalism of the bourgeoisie and the mass resistance movement.
'In dismissing as "reactionary and nationalist" the struggle for their everyday interests waged by the proletariat and petty-bourgeois masses when this struggle is directed against the imperialist occupiers and uses petty-bourgeois slogans, sectarianism paralyses the precise revolutionary efforts needed to combat nationalist ideology, and automatically isolates itself from real mass struggles.
'The social-patriotic deviation was, nevertheless, energetically opposed from the beginning by the healthy resistance of the revolutionary rank-and-file of the French section, as well as by the rest of the international organisation.' (Quatrième Internationale, No. 6-7, April-May 1944, pp. 8-9)

 The errors made at this time are explained by the huge pressures of a totally different order to those of peace time -- which were weighing upon militants who carried on the struggle, a struggle which was far from being simply a verbal one with the possibility of only extremely limited errors. Serious as these errors may have been, however, they remained at the level of errors and never became betrayals. They were corrected by the movement itself, which -- one should never forget -- defended the banner of the Fourth International at the cost of immense sacrifices.
The Second World Congress


As soon as international relationships had been re-established, the International Secretariat in America and the European Secretariat jointly organised an International Conference. Held in the spring of 1946 with a dozen sections participating, this conference assumed the powers of a congress, electing a new International Executive Committee and a new International Secretariat. It set a political orientation and assigned the new leadership bodies the task of preparing a world congress. These decisions were ratified by the sections that had not been able to attend the conference. The new orientation, resulting from the new world situation, consisted in the task of changing our sections, which until then had been propaganda groups, into parties linked to mass struggles -- and aiming to lead these struggles.
Preparation for the Second World Congress took almost two years. It entailed a lively struggle to maintain fundamental positions, especially against tendencies that wanted to revise our position on the question of the USSR. Twenty-two organisations from nineteen different countries were represented at the Second World Congress. It showed that, generally speaking, our movement had emerged from the war with increased strength although as yet unable to make a breakthrough in any particular place. It also showed that our movement had especially broad possibilities in those countries with relatively young working class movements in the Far East and in Latin America, for example. New statutes presented by Sherry Mangan were adopted.
Three main political points, in addition to an evaluation of the organisation's progress since its founding congress, were on the agenda of the Second World Congress. The first point was the international situation in the three years following the end of the Second World War, for which the report was presented by Michel Pablo. The congress noted the preponderant strength of the United States compared with the rest of the world; the difficult problems of reconstruction, both in Europe and in the Soviet Union; and the onset of the 'cold war'. It assessed the situation of the working class movement, the sharpening of the class struggle, and assigned the sections of the Fourth International the task of strengthening themselves in order to form mass parties.
A document on 'The Struggle of the Colonial Peoples and the World Revolution', presented by Pierre Frank, stressed the point that because of the new relationship of forces among capitalist states, we were witnessing a new division of the colonial world, with the United States taking over from the former imperialist countries, now weakened and unable to maintain their former domination. But the document also noted the policy of strategic retreat adopted by the imperialists in a large number of colonial countries, whereby they moved from the old forms of direct rule to new forms of indirect domination, with the help of layers of the indigenous bourgeoisie. Thus the congress clearly saw from the very beginning the new orientation that imperialism would follow, in the direction of what was later called neo-colonialism, while at the same time conducting colonial wars wherever it deemed it had absolutely vital strategic interests to defend.
The congress devoted a very large part of its work -- in fact, the major part -- to the discussion of a document entitled 'The USSR and Stalinism', presented by Ernest Mandel. The Soviet Union's expansion on the heels of its victory over German fascism, the occupation by Soviet troops of several East European countries, the enormous abuses and crimes committed in the course of this occupation, without the bourgeois social structure of these countries having been changed -- all this had caused innumerable debates everywhere on the class nature of the Soviet Union. The document approved by the delegates at the congress reaffirmed Trotsky's definition of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers state, but it showed the stage which that degeneration had reached. It pointed out that the contradictions within the Soviet Union were sharper than ever; it dissected the Stalinist political line, indicating that the bureaucracy was more and more acting as an absolute brake on economic progress; and it concluded that the task before us, now that the war was over, was to overthrow the bureaucratic regime. A good part of the document was devoted to a study of the 'Soviet buffer states', i.e., those East European countries occupied by Soviet troops, and it concluded that these countries had retained the structure and function of a bourgeois state. Several pages of the document dealt with the Communist parties, stressing the slide towards reformism they had taken -- a very steep slide compared to the pre-war period. In conclusion, this document examined the significance of the world discussion on the question of the Soviet Union, and replied to the 'state capitalist' or 'bureaucratic collectivist' theories.
The question of the class nature of the Soviet Union and the question of the defence of the Soviet Union had been continuously raised inside the Trotskyist movement and had provoked many splits. The Second World Congress marked the end of the great debates on these questions inside the Fourth International. Afterwards, on the basis of the definition of the Soviet Union as a 'degenerated workers state', the debates took place on the transformations which took place there, their significance, and their consequences in relation to political tasks. In all the debates on the class nature of the Soviet Union, deep divergences of methodology were in the background concerning the way to analyse states, movements, and political formations. Out of these developed no less deep divergences on the political level. Thus most of those who fought the Trotskyist positions on these questions found themselves more or less frankly in the camp of imperialism against the Soviet Union during the 'cold war', in the name of the struggle of 'democracy' against 'totalitarianism'. The most monstrous example in this field was, 1 think, Shachtman himself, who eventually joined the American Socialist Party and defended US imperialism in the Vietnam War.
In retrospect, it can be seen that the main function of the Second Congress had been to reaffirm the fundamental principles of Trotskyism as opposed to the various centrifugal tendencies that had appeared during the war and immediately thereafter. It was an absolutely indispensable task, but that was as far as the congress could go. Coming events would confront the International with problems and tasks not touched on there.

Footnotes
[1] But the sceptics don't keep quiet: "Has the time to announce its birth arrived as yet?" "The Fourth International", will be our reply, "doesn't need to be 'announced'. It is alive and in battle. " '
[2] At that time the Socialist Workers Party was the American section of the Fourth International. Passage of the Voorhis Act in 1940, forbidding labour organisations to belong to an International, resulted in the formal disaffiliation of the SWP. but it has never ceased to remain rigorously faithful to the Trotskyist programme.

Read next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-appendix1



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Appendix I: 'For Early Reunification of the World Trotskyist Movement' (1963)


The following resolution, adopted by the American Socialist Workers Party on I March 1963, provided the political basis for the reunification of the Fourth International later that year.
The world Trotskyist movement has been split since 1954. Various efforts in the past to heal the rupture proved unsuccessful. On both sides, however, it has been felt for some time that a new and more vigorous effort for reunification should be made in view of encouraging opportunities that now exist to further the growth and influence of the Fourth International, the World Party of Socialist Revolution.
The Socialist Workers Party has stressed that a principled basis exists for uniting the main currents of the world Trotskyist movement. During the past year the International Secretariat took the initiative in urging the necessity and practicality of ending the split. For its side the International Committee proposed that a Parity Committee be set up. Although some of the comrades in the IC viewed this as involving no more than a practical step to facilitate common discussion and united work in areas of mutual interest, the majority, it appears clear, welcomed the formation of the committee as an important step towards early reunification.
While substantial differences still remain, especially over the causes of the 1954 split, the area of disagreement appears of secondary importance in view of the common basic programme and common analysis of major current events in world developments which unite the two sides. With good will it should be possible to contain the recognised remaining differences within a united organisation, subject to further discussion and clarification, thus making possible the great advantages that would come through combining the forces, skills, and resources of all those now adhering to one side or the other.
The main fact is that the majority on both sides are now in solid agreement on the fundamental positions of the world Trotskyist movement. As briefly as possible we will indicate the points of common outlook:
1. The present agonising world crisis reflects at bottom a prolonged crisis in revolutionary leadership. The development of the productive forces on a global scale has made the world overripe for socialism. Only a socialist planned world economy can rapidly overcome the economic under-development of the colonial and semi-colonial countries, deliver mankind from the threat of nuclear extinction, and assure a world society of enduring peace, of boundless plenty, the unlimited expansion of culture and the achievement of full freedom for all. Without the international victory of socialism, decaying capitalism will continue to waste enormous resources, to hold two-thirds of the earth's population in abject poverty, to maintain social and racial inequality, and to support dictatorial regimes. To complete this grim perspective of hunger, insecurity, inequality and oppressive rule, capitalism offers the permanent threat of nuclear destruction.
2. The delay of the world socialist revolution beyond the expectations of all the great Marxists before our time is due basically to the lack of capacity of the traditional leaderships of the working class movement and to their cynical service as labour lieutenants of the capitalist class or the Kremlin bureaucracy. They are responsible for preventing the main revolutionary post-war crises of 1918-23 and of 1943-47, as well as the lesser crisis of 1932-37, from ending as they should have ended with the proletariat coming to power in the advanced capitalist countries.
3. Only by building new revolutionary Marxist mass parties capable of leading the working class and working farmers to power can the world crisis be met successfully and a third world war prevented. To build such parties is the aim and purpose of the world Trotskyist movement. A programme of transitional slogans and measures plays a key role in party-building work inasmuch as the principal problem in overcoming the crisis of leadership is to bridge the gap between the present consciousness of the masses which is centred around immediate problems and preoccupations -and the level of consciousness required to meet the objective necessity of overthrowing capitalism and building workers states based upon democratically elected and democratically functioning councils of the working people. Leninist methods must be used to construct revolutionary socialist parties. These include patient, persistent recruitment of workers to the nuclei of revolutionary socialist parties already established; but also, where necessity or opportunity dictates, flexible advances towards various tendencies in mass organisations which may eventually be brought to the programme of revolutionary Marxism. Individual recruitment and tactical moves of wide scope are complementary ways of party construction, but each carries its own problems and special dangers. In the one instance a tendency towards sectarianism can arise out of converting enforced isolation into a virtue; in the other, adaptation to a reformist environment can lead to rightist opportunism. In the tactic known as 'entryism', where unusually difficult and complicated situations can occur, it should be the norm for those engaging in it to maintain a sector of public work, including their own Trotskyist publication. Departure from this norm must be weighed with full consciousness of the heavy risks involved.
4. The Fourth International as an international organisation, and its sections as national parties, must adhere to the principles of democratic centralism. Both theory and historic experience have demonstrated the correctness of these principles. Democratic centralism corresponds to the need for quick, disciplined action in meeting revolutionary tasks while at the same time assuring the freedom of discussion and the right to form tendencies without which genuine political life is denied to the ranks. In its adherence to internal democracy, the world Trotskyist movement stands at the opposite pole from the stifling regimes imposed on working class organisations controlled by bureaucrats trained in the schools of Stalinism, social-democracy or reformist unionism.
5. The bureaucratic reformist and Stalinist machines do not use the organised strength of the working class to overthrow capitalism where this is possible. They are primarily interested in their own privileges and power instead of the long-range interests of the working class. Because of inertia, an anti-socialist outlook, or recognition that an upsurge can sweep over their heads, they undertake struggles in the interests of the proletariat only with great reluctance and under great pressure. While condemning and opposing the twin evils of reformism and Stalinism, Trotskyists refuse to identify the genuinely socialist or communist workers of these mass organisations with their treacherous leaderships. The Trotskyist movement recognises that the main task is not simply to wage literary war on reformism and Stalinism, but actually to win these socialist- and communist-minded workers to the programme and organisation of revolutionary Marxism. Under the pressure of long years of prosperity in the advanced capitalist countries and in reaction to the crimes of Stalinism, petty-bourgeois intellectuals have opened a wide assault on the fundamentals of Marxism. It is necessary to wage a firm ideological struggle against this revisionist current.
6. The Soviet Union is still a workers state despite the usurpation of power by a privileged bureaucracy. The mode of production is non-capitalist, having emerged from the destruction of capitalism by the socialist October Revolution; and, whatever its deficiencies, lapses and even evils, it is progressive compared to capitalism. The tremendous expansion of Soviet productive forces through a colossal industrial and cultural revolution transformed a backward peasant country into the second industrial power of the world, actually challenging imperialism's lead in many fields of technology. This great new fact of world history bears witness to the mighty force inherent in planned economy and demonstrates the correctness of the Trotskyist position of unconditional defence of the degenerated workers state against imperialism.
7. In the wake of World War II, the Soviet bureaucracy was able to extend its power and its parasitism into the so-called 'people's democracies' of Eastern Europe and North Korea. But to maintain its position of special privilege, it had to destroy capitalism in these countries, doing so by bureaucratic-military means. That such means could succeed was due to the abnormal circumstances of temporary collapse of the local capitalist-landlord rule coupled with extreme weakness of the working class following the carnage of war and occupation. In this way deformed workers states came into existence. These are defended by the Trotskyist movement against imperialist attempts to reintroduce capitalism.
8. In the workers states where proletarian democracy was smashed by Stalinism, or where it never came into existence because of Stalinist influence, it is necessary to struggle for its restoration or construction, for democratic administration of the state and of the planned economy by the toiling masses. Through a political counter-revolution, Stalin destroyed the proletarian democracy of the time of Lenin and Trotsky. The Leninist forces are therefore faced with the need to organise revolutionary Marxist parties to provide leadership for the working class in exercising its right to overthrow the dictatorial rule of the bureaucratic caste and to replace it with forms of proletarian democracy. This signifies a political revolution. With the rebirth of proletarian democracy on a higher level, the workers states -- the Soviet Union above all -- will regain the attractive power enjoyed before the days of Stalin, and this will give fresh impetus to the struggle for socialism in the advanced capitalist countries.
9. The appearance of a workers state in Cuba -- the exact form of which is yet to be settled -- is of special interest since the revolution there was carried out under a leadership completely independent from the school of Stalinism. In its evolution towards revolutionary Marxism, the July 26 Movement set a pattern that now stands as an example for a number of other countries.
10. As a result of the new upsurge of the world revolution, above all the tremendous victory in China which changed the relationship of class forces on an international scale, the Soviet proletariat already strengthened and made self-confident through the victory over German imperialism in World War II and the great economic, technological and cultural progress of the Soviet Union -- has exerted increasingly strong pressure on the bureaucratic dictatorship, especially since Stalin's death. In hope of easing this pressure, the ruling caste has granted concessions of considerable scope, abolishing the extreme forms of police dictatorship (dissolution of the forced labour camps and modification of Stalin's brutal labour code, destroying the cult of Stalin, rehabilitating many victims of Stalin's purges, granting a significant rise in the standard of living of the people, even easing the strictures against freedom of thought and discussion in various fields). The Khrushchev regime has no intention of dismantling the bureaucratic dictatorship a piece at a time; its aim is not 'self-reform' but maintenance of the rule of the caste in face of mounting popular pressures. But the masses accept the concessions as partial payment on what is due and seek to convert the gains into new points of support in pressing for the ultimate objective of restoring democratic proletarian controls over the economy and the state. This slow but solid strengthening of the position of the proletariat in the European workers states is one of the basic causes of the world crisis of Stalinism.
11. The differences which finally shattered the monolithic structure of Stalinism began in a spectacular way with ideological and political conflict between the Yugoslav and Soviet Communist party leaderships. This conflict was widened by the attempted political revolution undertaken by the Hungarian workers. The Cuban Revolution deepened the crisis still further. With the Chinese-Soviet rift it has become one of the most important questions of world politics. While expressing in an immediate sense the conflict of interests among the various national bureaucratic groups, and between the Soviet bureaucracy and the working classes of countries under its influence, the crisis reflects fundamentally the incompatibility of Stalinism with living victorious revolutions in which the militant vanguard seeks a return to the doctrines of Lenin. The crisis is thus highly progressive in character, marking an important stage in the rebuilding of a revolutionary Marxist world mass movement.
12. In conjunction with the world crisis of Stalinism, the colonial revolution is now playing a key role in the world revolutionary process. Within little more than a decade, it has forced imperialism to abolish direct colonial rule almost completely and to turn to indirect rule as a substitute; i.e., form a new 'partnership' with the colonial bourgeoisie, even though this bourgeoisie in some places may be only embryonic. But this attempt to prevent the countries awakened by the colonial revolution from breaking out of the world capitalist system runs into an insuperable obstacle. It is impossible in these countries to solve the historic problems of social, economic, and cultural liberation and development without overthrowing capitalism as well as breaking the grip of imperialism. The colonial revolution therefore tends to flow into the channel of permanent revolution, beginning with a radical agrarian reform and heading towards the expropriation of imperialist holdings and 'national' capitalist property, the establishment of a workers state and a planned economy.
13. Along the road of a revolution beginning with simple democratic demands and ending in the rupture of capitalist property relations, guerrilla warfare conducted by landless peasant and semi-proletarian forces, under a leadership that becomes committed to carrying the revolution through to a conclusion, can play a decisive role in undermining and precipitating the downfall of a colonial or semi-colonial power. This is one of the main lessons to be drawn from experience since the Second World War. It must be consciously incorporated into the strategy of building revolutionary Marxist parties in colonial countries.
14. Capitalism succeeded in winning temporary stability again in Western Europe after the Second World War. This setback for the working class was due primarily to the treacherous role played by the Stalinist and social-democratic leaderships, which prevented the masses from taking the road of socialist revolution during the big post-war revolutionary crisis. However, this temporary stabilisation of capitalism and the subsequent upsurge of productive forces gave rise to more extensive, and ultimately more explosive, contradictions. These involve the other imperialist powers, above all the USA and Japan. They include sharpening competition in a geographically contracting world market; increasing incompatibility between the need to fight inflation and the need to transform potential major economic crises into more limited recessions; mounting conflict between the desirability of maintaining'social peace' and the necessity to attack the workers' standard of living, job conditions, and employment opportunities in order to strengthen competitive efficiency. These contradictions point to increasingly fierce class battles which could become lifted from the economic to the political level in acute form and, under favourable conditions of leadership, arouse the labour movement to a new upsurge in the imperialist countries, challenging capitalism in its last citadels.
15. Socialist victory in the advanced capitalist countries constitutes the only certain guarantee of enduring peace. Since the close of World War II, imperialism has methodically prepared for another conflict, one in which the capitalist world as a whole would be mobilised against the workers states, with the Soviet Union as the main target. Rearmament has become the principal permanent prop of capitalist economy today, an economic necessity that dovetails with the political aims of the American capitalist class at the head of the world alliance of capitalism. American imperialism has stationed counter-revolutionary forces in a vast perimeter around China and the Soviet Union. Its first reaction to new liberating struggles is to seek to drown them in blood. Its armed interventions have become increasingly dangerous. In the crisis over Cuba's efforts to strengthen its military defence, the billionaire capitalist families who rule America demonstrated that they were prepared to launch a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union and even risk the very existence of civilisation and of mankind. This unimaginable destructive power can be torn from the madmen of Wall Street only by the American working class. The European socialist revolution will play a decisive role in helping to bring the American proletariat up to the level of the great historic task which it faces -- responsibility for the final and decisive victory of world socialism.
16. While participating wholeheartedly in all popular mass movements for unilateral nuclear disarmament, while fighting for an immediate end to all nuclear tests, the world Trotskyist movement everywhere clearly emphasises the fundamental dilemma facing humanity: world socialism or nuclear annihilation. A clear understanding of this dilemma does not demoralise the masses. On the contrary, it constitutes the strongest incentive to end capitalism and build socialism. It is a suicidal illusion to believe that peace can be assured through 'peaceful coexistence' without ending capitalism. Above all in America. The best way to fight against the threat of nuclear war is to fight for socialism through class-struggle means.
In view of the agreement on these basic positions, the world Trotskyist movement is duty bound to press for reunification. It is unprincipled to seek to maintain the split. Reunification has also become an urgent practical question. On all sides, opportunities for growth are opening up for the revolutionary movement. The Cuban Revolution dealt a blow to the class-collaborationist policy of Stalinism in Latin America and other colonial countries. New currents, developing under the influence of the victory in Cuba, are groping their way to revolutionary socialism and seeking to apply the main lessons of the colonial revolution to their own situation. The Algerian Revolution has had a similar effect on the vanguard of the African revolutionary nationalist movement. To meet these leftward-moving currents, to work with them, even to combine with them without giving up any principles, has become an imperious necessity. Reunification will greatly facilitate success in this task by strengthening our own forces and bringing the attractiveness of Trotskyism into sharp organisational focus. The immediate corollaries will be increased effectiveness of our defence of the colonial revolutions within the imperialist countries and the added weight which the principled programme of Trotskyism will gain among all serious revolutionists who seek the fundamental economic, social and political transformation of their countries. On the other hand, it is self-evident that the continued division of the world Trotskyist movement in factions wrangling over obscure issues will vitiate its capacity to attract these new forces on a considerable scale.
Similarly, the crisis of Stalinism, which has led to the great differentiation visible in the Chinese-Soviet rift, has unlocked tremendous forces within the Communist parties throughout the world. Attracted by our Leninist programme and traditions, by the vindication of our decades of struggle against Stalinism, and by our insistence on internal democracy, many militants are puzzled and repelled by our lack of unity, by our seeming incapacity to mobilise our forces into a single cohesive organisation. The reunification of the world Trotskyist movement would contribute powerfully towards re-educating Communist militants in the genuine spirit of Leninism, its real tradition of international solidarity and proletarian democracy. Obviously a united world Trotskyist movement would prove much more attractive to all those forces within the world Communist movement who are increasingly critical of Stalinism and its offshoots, and who are ready to examine the views of a movement which appears serious not only in its theory but in its organisational capacity.
Finally, we should consider with utmost attentiveness the problem of appealing to the youth, both workers and students, who are playing an increasingly decisive role in demonstrations, uprisings, and the leadership of revolutionary upheavals. The Cuban Revolution was essentially fought by the youth. Similar young people overthrew the corrupt dictatorial regimes of Menderes in Turkey and Syngman Rhee in South Korea. In the struggle for Negro equality in the USA, for solidarity with the Algerian Revolution in France, against rearmament in Japan and Western Germany and against unemployment in Britain, the shock forces are provided by the youth. Youth stand in the forefront of the fight to deepen and extend de-Stalinisation in the USSR and the East European workers states. Throughout the world they are the banner bearers of the struggles for unilateral nuclear disarmament. We can attract the best layers of this new generation of rebels by our bold programme, our fighting spirit and militant activity; we can only repel them by refusing to close ranks because of differences over past disputes of little interest to young revolutionists of action, who are primarily concerned about the great political issues and burning problems of today.
Early reunification, in short, has become a necessity for the world Trotskyist movement. Naturally, difficult problems will remain in various countries where the faction fight has been long and bitter. But these problems, too, can best be worked out under the conditions of general international reunification, so that it is possible for the outstanding leaders of both sides to begin the job of establishing a new comradely atmosphere and of removing fears which have no real basis in the situation in the world Trotskyist movement today. After a period of common fraternal activity in an Increasing number of areas, we are convinced that what may appear at the outset to be insuperable local problems will be solved by the comrades themselves through democratic means.
We think that it should also be possible for a reunified organisation to bring in recommendations for subsequent consideration and adoption which, without breaching the centralist side of democratic centralism, would remove any doubts that might still remain as to the guarantee of democratic rights contained in the statutes.
Our movement is faced with a responsibility as great and grave as the one it faced at the founding of the Fourth International in 1938. We ask both sides to decide at their international gatherings in the next months that the time has come to reunify the world Trotskyist movement, and that they will do this at a World Congress of Reunification to be held as rapidly as possible after these gatherings.
1 March 1963

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch10



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 10: Those Who Died So That the International Might Live


We have intentionally devoted this work, above all, to the Trotskyist movement's activity in the area of theory, politics, and organisation relative to half a century of great events -- and to the problems these events have raised in the course of constructing a revolutionary Marxist leadership and revolutionary Marxist parties in every country. We have seen how difficult it is to make progress on the theoretical and political level, how this is possible only at the price of incessant internal debate and discussion, of analysis and re-analysis. But ideas, programmes, and organisations are created by people and kept alive by people. Only in passing have we mentioned the names of the Trotskyist movement's militants.
What books could be written on such a subject! Conditions have been far harsher for Trotskyists than for any other working class tendency -- bourgeois repression being generally a stimulus, while the repression exercised against Trotskyists within their own class, very often by sincerely revolutionary workers misled by bureaucrats who were backed by a powerful workers state, has pushed many able revolutionists into situations where they could not give the best of themselves.
Trotsky's name, to which is inseparably linked that of his companion Natalia, towers over the names of all those who joined the movement he created, and is again beginning to be as celebrated as it was in the heroic days of the revolution. But how many others are there whose names remain stained in the eyes of the workers by the Stalinist slanders, or who remain unknown to the new generations! The Trotskyist movement itself has generally not been very forthcoming about those who fought for the victory of its programme. History will little by little, internationally and in every country, give them their due.
Another result of Stalinism's implacable persecution of the Trotskyists was the confusion and intimidation it sowed in many people over a long period. This drastically reduced the movement's periphery of friends and sympathisers -- a periphery that all vanguard movements need. Thus we also pay homage to those who were our friends in such adversity, as well as to the revolutionary leaders who came out of the Communist International and its parties who, although they did not march with us all the way, or had differences with us, remained faithful to the cause of world revolution to the end of their days.
Among them are:
Alfred and Marguerite Rosmer, in whose home the founding congress of the Fourth International was held.
Maurice Spector, founder of the Canadian Trotskyist movement.
Isaac Deutscher, historian and essayist. He joined the Polish Communist Party in 1926, but was expelled in 1932 for his activities as leader and spokesperson of the anti-Stalinists. In 1939 he came to Britain, where he lived until his death in 1967. Although he opposed the foundation of the Fourth International in 1938, his writings, especially his trilogy on the life of Trotsky -- The Prophet Armed, The Prophet Unarmed, and The Prophet Outcast -- have had an incalculable effect in drawing people to the basic ideas of our movement.
H. Stockfisch (Hersch Mendel), fighter in the 1905 and 1917 Russian revolutions, who founded the Polish Trotskyist movement, to which he won Isaac Deutscher.
Andres Nin, assassinated by the GPU during the Spanish revolution.
Paul Frölich, Arkadi Maslow, Hugo Urbahns, former leaders of the German Communist Party.
André Marty, who established fraternal contacts with us after his expulsion from the French Communist Party.
John Baird, Labour Party MP, who was always on our side.
Roman Rosdolsky, the eminent Ukrainian Marxist.
Elsa Reiss, barely escaped Stalin's assassins in 1937 when they had orders to kill her and her son as well as her companion Ignace (see below). Her book Our Own People (published under the name Elisabeth K. Poretsky) relives the drama of that terrible period of the 'Yezhov terror', during which Stalin exterminated more revolutionary militants than did the capitalist world, including Hitler.
Louis Polk, member of the Central Committee of the Belgian Communist Party, who participated in founding the Opposition in Belgium and who died in the Neuengamme concentration camp.
Tan Malakka who in 1914 was, with Sneevliet, a founder of the revolutionary socialist movement in Indonesia, missing in action during the guerrilla fighting following the war.
Mario Roberro Santucho, leader of the Argentinian PRT/ERP, murdered by security forces in 1976. A genuine revolutionary internationalist, he joined the Fourth International in 1967 through fusion of his group with the section; our failure to convince him of the correctness of the Trotskyist programme, leading to his break with the International in 1973, was a real defeat for our movement.
Sara (Weber) Jacobs, who served as Trotsky's secretary for almost three years from 1931, and again in 1939.
There follows a very incomplete list of those who carried aloft the banner of Trotskyism, and who died in battle:
Nicola di Bartolomeo (Fosco), Italian Communist worker, in exile in France during the fascist regime, participated in the war in Spain. On his return to France, he was turned over to the Italian authorities, who deported him to a concentration camp. Liberated at the end of the war, he rebuilt the Trotskyist organisation in Italy. He died in 1946, at the age of forty-four.
Angel Amado Bengochea (1926- 1964), a leader of the first student revolts in Argentina in the 1940s, leader of the Socialist Youth. A student at the Faculty of Law in La Plata, he organised a Marxist opposition in the Socialist Party, and joined the Trotskyist movement in 1946. In the 1950s he worked in a factory and became a leader in the Peronist unions. Imprisoned for six months in 1957. Linked to the struggle in other Latin American countries, in 1963 he formed a political-military group and was killed during an explosion.
Edith Beauvais, joined the Trotskyist movement in Canada in the early 1960s, then moved to France. Active in building the JCR and the Ligue Communists; but her most important work was in strengthening the international commissions of the Fourth International. She died in a car accident in 1972.
Fernando Bravo, leader of the Bolivian teachers, representative of the Bolivian FOR (Partido Obrero Revolucionario) to congresses of the International, died in the line of duty.
Antoinette Bucholz-Konikow (1869-1946), became a revolutionary socialist at the age of seventeen and joined Russia's first Marxist organisation, the Emancipation of Labour group, led by Plekhanov. Exiled to the USA, she worked in the Socialist Labour Party and later helped to found the Socialist Party with Debs and others, becoming a member of its Women's Commission. She was a founder of the Second International but broke with it after its capitulation to chauvinism in 1914, helping to launch the Communist Party and the Third International. Among the first to rebel against the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy, she participated in the ten years of activity that culminated in 1938 with the founding of the US Socialist Workers Party and the Fourth International. She was also an early advocate of birth control; as a doctor, she wrote two handbooks on the subject, and in 1928 was arrested for exhibiting contraceptives.
James P. Cannon (1890-1974), joined the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) in 1910. As a supporter of the October Revolution, he joined the Socialist Party in 1918 and was a founder of the CP in 1919. Sent as its president to Moscow in 1922, he participated for eight months in the work of the Executive Committee of the Comintern. At this time he played a leading role in the International Labour Defence, notably in the campaign to save Sacco and Vanzetti.
A delegate to the Sixth Congress of the Comintern, and made a member of its programme commission, he came to hear of the exiled Trotsky's criticisms of the congress programme presented by Bukharin. Won to Trotsky's arguments, Cannon and Maurice Spector (a member of the Canadian delegation) secretly took his text back to North America and published it. Following his expulsion from the CP for Trotskyism, Cannon -- together with Max Shachtman and Martin Abern -- founded the Communist League (Opposition) in May 1929. He was to remain the central leader of the American Trotskyist movement until ill-health reduced him to an advisory capacity in the 1960s.
In 1934 he played a prominent role in the famous Teamster strikes in Minneapolis. Then in the next years he was instrumental in an important expansion of the American Trotskyist forces, first through a fusion with the Workers Party and then through a short spell of entry into the Socialist Party in 1936-37. The expulsion of the Trotskyists from the SP led to the formation of the Socialist Workers Party. In 1938 Cannon participated in the founding congress of the Fourth International, and in 1939-40 he collaborated with Trotsky in the famous struggle against the petty-bourgeois opposition in the SWP led by Shachtman and Burnham. During the Second World War he was imprisoned for sixteen months along with other members of the SWP under the Smith Act.
Cannon was a prolific writer, particularly for the party press (some of his best articles are collected in Notebook of an Agitator). He also wrote several books. Indeed, as a propagandist and agitator he was perhaps the most prominent figure of the American labour movement in the generation which followed Eugene Debs and Bill Haywood.
Tomas Chambi, member of the Central Committee of the FOR in Bolivia, imprisoned during the Barrientos-Ovando dictatorship, freed when the dictatorship ended; he fell in combat in 1971 while leading a column of poor peasants from the La Pat region in the battle against the Banter coup d'etat. On his body was found a note written in his own hand, a kind of testament by this militant whose sole possession was his revolutionary conviction:'I am a member of the Partido Obrero Revolucionario, which taught me to be brave and to fight for a just cause. For national liberation, and forward to the final victory!'
Emile Decoux (1910-1970), Belgian miner and exemplary militant for thirty-seven years. Joined the Jeune Garde Socialiste (Socialist Young Guard) in 1934, then the Belgian section of the Fourth International. Fulfilled important functions during the period of clandestinity.
Vincent Raymond Dunne (1889-1970), joined the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) at the age of 17; a founder of the US Communist Party in 1919 and, in 1928, participated in the founding of the US Trotskyist movement. At the head of the great Minneapolis Teamster strikes in 1934, which were a forerunner of the mighty trade union upsurge of the following years. In 1938 participated in discussions with Trotsky preparatory to the founding congress of the Fourth International. Imprisoned in 1941 for sixteen months.
Heinz Epe ( Waiter Held), joined the German Left Opposition in 1931 as a student. Forced into exile in March 1933, he organised the first German publication in the emigration, Unser Wort. In 1934 he was one of the secretaries -- along with Willy Brandt -- of the 'International Bureau of Revolutionary Youth Organisations', until the Trotskyists were expelled at Brandt's instigation. In 1934 he organised Trotsky's arrival and stay in Norway. Moving to Sweden after the occupation of Norway, he tried to travel to the US via the Soviet Union in 1941 but disappeared with his wife and child.
Ezio Ferrero (Ettore Salvini) (1938-1976), joined the Italian CP and went to Moscow in 1956 to attend the university. As a result of his stay he developed positions critical of the bureaucracy, and joined the Fourth International in 1962. He was a member of the national leadership of the Italian section, the Gruppi Comunisti Rivoluzionari (GCR), and a delegate to the Eighth World Congress; but was best known as a frequent contributor to our press, especially on the Soviet economy and Italian political and economic problems.
Josef Frey (1882-1957), prior to 1914 journalist on the Vienna Arbeiterzeitung, president of the Vienna Council of Soldiers in the 1918 revolution, broke with Otto Bauer and Fritz Adler to join the CP, expelled from the latter in 1927 as a Trotskyist.
José Aguirre Gainsborg, Bolivian revolutionist in exile, leading member of the Chilean CP. Founder of the Bolivian FOR in 1934 -- which he armed theoretically. For many years lived in exile and in prison; died at the age of thirty-four.
Renzo Gambino (1922-1972), a member of the Socialist Party when fascism was overthrown, joined the Italian section of the Fourth International in 1949 and was a member of its national leadership until his death. He was a delegate to many world congresses and for a long time a member of the International Control Commission, becoming its secretary in 1969.
Peter Graham (1945-1971), young Irish revolutionary, started out as a member of the Connolly Youth, rapidly developed towards Trotskyism, became a member of the Irish Workers Group, and then participated in founding the League for a Workers Republic and the Young Socialists in Dublin. He came to London where he joined the International Marxist Group (IMG -- British section of the Fourth International) and was a member of the editorial staff of The Red Mole. Barely returned to Dublin for the purpose of building an Irish section, he was assassinated under circumstances that have never been clarified. The IRA and all the militant organisations of the Irish socialist movement paid homage to his memory.
Arturo Gomes, joined the Trotskyist movement in Argentina as a student leader in the midst of the mass mobilisations in 1958-59. Played a central role in winning a base for Trotskyism in the La Plata region. A member of the Executive Committee and Secretariat of the Partido Socialista de los Trabajadores (PST), and a delegate to the Tenth World Congress of the International, he was elected to the IEC with consultative status. Died of a heart attack in 1976 as he was preparing the underground struggle after the military coup.
Jules Henin (1882-1964), miner, member of the Parti Ouvrier Belge (Belgian Workers Party) from 1905. One of the first Belgian Communists in 1919, founder of the Trotskyist organisation in 1927, one of the leaders of the Charleroi miners' strike (1932), as a result of which he was imprisoned. Conducted underground activity during the war. Member of the Control Commission of the Fourth International for many years.
Marcel Hic, joined the French Trotskyist movement (POI and Jeunesses Léninistes) in 1933 at the age of eighteen. He rebuilt the French organisation and published La Vérité starting in August 1940. Secretary of the French section during the occupation, he participated in the founding of the European Secretariat of the Fourth International. Arrested in 1943, he was distinguished by his courageous attitude in the Dora concentration camp, where he died.
Joseph Jakobovic (1915-1943), leader of the Austrian group 'Gegen den Strom' (Against the Stream) during the Hitler occupation. He was tried in October 1943 for high treason and for encouraging disaffection in the armed forces, condemned to death and executed.
Georg Jungclas (1902-1975), joined at the age of fourteen the Socialist Youth of Altona (near Hamburg), which opposed the war and the betrayals of the Social Democracy. Became a member of the Spartakusbund and then of the German Communist Party (KPD), and participated in the revolutionary struggles, notably the Hamburg insurrection in October 1923. A supporter of the left in the KPD, he was expelled in 1928, becoming a member of the Leninbund founded by Urbahns. However he defended Trotsky's positions against Urbahns and in 1930 participated in the creation of the German Left Opposition.
He moved to Denmark after Hitler's rise to power, and participated in the Danish Resistance until his arrest by the Gestapo in 1944. Saved from death only by the collapse of the Nazis, he struggled almost alone after the war to rebuild the German section in the choking atmosphere of the Federal Republic. From 1948 he participated in all the world congresses of the International and was elected to its International Executive Committee and its Secretariat. Among the first to begin organising the immigrant workers in Germany, he was also at the centre of activity in support of the Algerian revolution.
Zavis Kalandra, communist historian, denounced the Moscow trials in 1936; secretary of the Czechoslovakian section of the Fourth International, he was arrested and executed in 1950 by the Stalinists as a 'spy'; was rehabilitated during the 'Prague Spring'.
Rose Karsner (1890-1968), joined the US Socialist Party at the age of eighteen. In 1909 she became secretary of the magazine The Masses. She participated in the founding congress of the unified US Communist Party in 1921, and devoted herself to the defence and aid of the victims of repression (notably the Sacco-Vanzetti case). In 1928 she participated in founding the Trotskyist organisation in the United States, to which she was completely committed until the end of her life.
Franz Kascha (1909-1943), leader of the Austrian group 'Gegen den Strom' during the Hitler occupation. He was tried in October 1943 for high treason and for encouraging disaffection in the armed forces, condemned to death and executed.
Rudolf Klement, young German Trotskyist, secretary to Trotsky, assassinated in France by the GPU in 1938 on the eve of the founding congress of the Fourth International, to the preparation of which he had devoted himself.
Robert Langston (1933-1977), a true internationalist and revolutionary intellectual, won to our movement from the chauvinist American Socialist Party on the question of Cuba. After joining the SWP he worked as a staff writer for The Militant from 1968-70 and also devoted himself to the education of cadres. His unstinting financial contribution was an invaluable aid to our work.
Rafael Lasala (Nestor), participated in the student struggles in Argentina in 1958-59, joined the Trotskyist movement in 1967. In 1971 he helped to form the Grupo Obrero Revolucionario (GOR), a sympathising group of the International, and was its representative at the Tenth World Congress. Arrested in August 1974, he was tortured and finally murdered in cold blood at the La Plata prison in August 1976.
Abraham Leon (1918- 1944), born in Warsaw, broke with Zionism and wrote The Jewish Question: A Marxist Interpretation. At the beginning of the war he joined the Belgian Trotskyist organisation, of which he became the main organiser, and participated in founding the European Secretariat. Arrested in June 1944, he died in the Auschwitz concentration camp in September 1944.
Leon Lesoil (11(92-1942), soldier in the Belgian Mission in Russia during the First World War, he came out for the October Revolution and was one of the founders of the Belgian Communist Party. He became a member of its Central Committee in 1923, and then was prosecuted for 'plotting against the security of the state'. He was a founder of the Belgian Trotskyist organisation in 1927; leader of the miners' strike in the Charleroi Basin in 1932; and delegate to the founding congress of the Fourth International. Arrested in 1941, he died in the Neuengamme concentration camp in 1942.
Cesar Lora, leader of the Bolivian miners at the Siglo XX mine; was assassinated on 19 July 1965 by Barrientos's troops.
Sherry Mangan (Patrice), American author and journalist, was a Trotskyist from 1934. He participated in the activity of the French Trotskyist organisation under the occupation and though expelled from France by Petain he maintained liaison among the underground groups during the war. Reduced to very difficult living conditions by McCarthyism, he again participated in clandestine work in France to help the Algerian revolution. A member of the International's leadership for many years, he died in 1961 at the age of 57.
Charles Marie (1915-1971), railroad worker, joined the Trotskyist movement shortly after the end of the war. Impassioned and indefatigable militant, for a long time he was practically alone in defending Trotskyism in Rouen. During the Algerian war, in legal and extra-legal activities, he began to build a resurgence of the movement, recruited young people who, in the aftermath of May 1968, were to make Rouen the largest provincial branch of the Ligue Communiste. A cell of railroad workers in Rouen bears his name. He was named honorary chairman of the second national congress of the Ligue Communiste, held in Rouen.
Jean Meichler, was one of the founders of La Vérité in 1929. Editor of Unser Wort, organ of the German Trotskyists in exile, he was arrested for this and held hostage at the time that France was occupied. He was one of the first hostages executed, dying at the age of 45.
Fernando Lozano Menendez, a 22-year-old student and member of the national leadership of the Frente de Izquierda Revolucionaria (FIR), murdered by the Peruvian police in November 1976.
Luiz Eduardo Merlino (Nicolau) (1947-1971), Brazilian journalist assassinated in July 1971 by the repressive forces in his country. Began his activity as a militant in the student organisations in Santos, then in newspaper circles in Sao Paulo, constantly filling the role of inspirer and leader. In 1968 joined the Partido Operario Comunista (POC -- Communist Workers Party), in which he rapidly rose to a leading position. His experiences led him to the positions of the Fourth International. He organised an opposition for which he wrote theses on national and international questions. Shortly after his clandestine return to Sao Paulo from a visit of several months in France, he was arrested, tortured, and murdered.
Chitta Mitra (1929-1976), a leading member of our Indian section, chiefly responsible for establishing a Trotskyist press in Bengali. He also translated a number of Trotsky's works, and wrote a biography of Trotsky, Tomader Trotsky (Your Trotsky), for young people in very simple Bengali.
Henri Molinier (More Laurent) (1898-1944), was an engineer who participated in the founding of La Vérité and carried out many missions with great discretion. In charge of military matters for the PCI during the war, he was killed by a shell in the course of the fighting for the liberation of Paris.
Georg Moltved (1881-1971), Danish doctor. At the turn of the century he belonged to a petty-bourgeois party, but developed towards Marxism, contributing to intellectual periodicals. After 1933, he aided the German anti-fascist refugees in his country. In 1943, under the occupation, he was one of the main leaders of the illegal CP for the region north of Copenhagen. After the war, he was opposed to the CP's acceptance of ministerial posts in the government and to the CP's reformist policy. Expelled in 1950, he joined the Fourth International in 1955. He translated The Revolution Betrayed into Danish, wrote biographies of Lenin and Trotsky, and often presented Trotskyist viewpoints on the radio. Recognised in his country as an eminent person, Moltved was a man of great intellectual capacity.
Martin Monat (Paul Widelin) (1913-1944), was originally a leader of the Socialist Zionist movement and a sympathiser of the German CP before 1933, but then moved towards Trotskyism and broke with Zionism. He emigrated to Belgium in 1939, where he joined the Trotskyist section. During the war he was responsible for organising fraternisation inside the German army in France, publishing the paper Arbeiter und Soldat (Worker and Soldier). He created a cell of German soldiers in Brest, many of whom were arrested and shot. Arrested by the French police and handed over to the Gestapo, he was shot and left for dead in the forest of Vincennes, but managed with help to reach a hospital. Here however, he was recaptured and killed by the Gestapo.
Moulin, German Trotskyist, killed by the GPU during the civil war in Spain.
Jabra Nicola (Abu Said) (1912-1974), was born in Haifa and joined the Palestinian CP before he was 20. As a member of its leadership, he was given responsibility for its organ in Arabic, At Ittihad, but the party split in 1939 along nationalist lines and he refused to join either wing. He was imprisoned under the British occupation from 1940-42. In 1942 he joined a group of Trotskyists, many of them refugees from Europe, but the dislocation of the Trotskyist organisation in the Middle East after the war led him to rejoin the CP, and he was once again given the editorship of its paper in Arabic. In 1956, however, the CP leadership suspended him from his functions because of political disagreements, and in 1962 he joined with others who had left the CP to form the Matzpen group, from which the Israel section of the Fourth International was to develop. Placed under house arrest after the Six Day War in 1967, he left Israel for London in 1970, where he died.
Jabra Nicola was a member of the IEC of the Fourth International from its Seventh World Congress (1963). A brilliant journalist, he wrote numerous articles and pamphlets and also translated some of the classics of Marxism into Arabic. His contribution, both theoretically and politically, to the Fourth International on the problems of the Arab East and the question of Israel within it was unparalleled.
Pantelis Pouliopoulos, prosecuted for his activity in the Creek army in 1922. He translated Das Kapital into Greek. A delegate of the Creek CP to the Fifth Congress of the Communist International, he became secretary of the CP in 1925, but was expelled as a Trotskyist in 1927. Secretary of the Creek Trotskyist organisation, he went underground following the Metaxas coup d'etat in 1936, but was arrested in 1939. He was shot as a hostage by the Italians in 1943 at the age of 43, making a speech to the Italian soldiers while facing the firing squad.
Art Preis (1911-1964), American Trotskyist, while a student at the University of Ohio founded the Free Voice, which was later banned. In 1933 he organised the unemployed in Toledo, then organised employed workers into trade unions and was a member of the Toledo CIO Council. From 1940 on, he was labour editor of The Militant. Author of Labor's Giant Step. Twenty Years of the CIO, a history of the American trade union movement from 1929 to 1955.
Luis Pujals (1942-1971), young Argentinian revolutionist, joined the Palabra Obrera group in 1961.A founding member of the PRT in 1964, he was elected a member of its Central Committee at its Second Congress and later elected to its Executive Committee. He was in charge of political and military affairs for the Buenos Aires region. Arrested on 17 September 1971, he was sent by the authorities to Rosario and brought back to Buenos Aires on 22 September, at the very moment the authorities were denying that he was in custody. According to all indications, he died under torture.
B. Mallikarjun Rao, participated in the revolutionary movement as a student in Andhra and then in Bombay, and became active in the trade union movement. One of the founders in 1941 of the Mazdoor Trotskyist Party of India, in 1942 he participated in the uprising against British imperialism, went underground, was arrested in 1944 and sentenced to two years in prison. In 1947-48 he took part in the guerrilla movement against the Nizam of Hyderabad until this principality was integrated into the Indian Union. He was elected to a trade union post in 1949; and arrested anew in 1959 for his role in the civil service strike in Andhra Pradesh. In 1965 he was a member of the organising committee of the Socialist Workers Party (Indian section of the Fourth International). He died in 1966 after more than thirty years of militant activism.
Ignace Reiss (Ludwig), Polish communist, hero of the civil war during the Russian Revolution, was one of the principal leaders of the Soviet Union's special services. In 1937, following the first Moscow trial, he broke with Stalinism and returned his medals, declaring,'I am joining Trotsky and the Fourth International'. He was assassinated by the GPU a few weeks later near Lausanne.
Alfonso Peralta Reyes (1939-1977), lecturer and member of the Political Bureau of the Mexican Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores (PRT), assassinated by the 'Liga Comunista 23 de Septiembre' guerrilla group in May 1977 while leading a struggle by the university trade unions against the government's austerity measures.
German Rodriguez Sainz, joined the Trotskyist movement in Spain in 1971 and played a prominent part in the fusion between the LCR and ETA(VI), the revolutionary wing of the Basque nationalist movement. He was an active member of the Workers Commissions and a central leader of the 1973 Pamplona general strike, for which he was jailed for two and a half years. Over 30,000 attended his funeral after he had been murdered by police during a Basque nationalist protest in Pamplona in July 1978.
Wolfgang Salus, young Czechoslovakian communist, participated in founding that country's Trotskyist movement in 1929 at the age of 18. He died in exile after having contributed to the reorganisation of the Czechoslovakian movement after the war.
Leon Sedov (1905-1938), Trotsky's son, was expelled from the CPSU in 1927 and from that time on devoted his life to helping Trotsky in the latter's work. Was a defendant along with Trotsky in all the Moscow trials, in which he was sentenced to death. He died mysteriously in Paris, most assuredly assassinated by the GPU.
Henricus Sneevliet (1883-1942), Dutch working class leader, founder of the Indonesian socialist movement in 1914, then of the Indonesian CP in 1920. He was its delegate to the Second Congress of the Communist International, and representative of the Communist International to the Chinese CP, but broke with Stalinism. A leader of the Dutch trade union confederation NAS, he was imprisoned in 1932 for his support of a sailors' mutiny. A founder of the RSAP, he was arrested during the war, and shot by the Nazis on 13 April 1942. His heroic death has been held up as an example in his country.
Shuji Sugawara (1949-1978), national secretary of the Japan Communist Youth (Trotskyist youth group) and a national organiser for the struggle against the opening of Narita airport, died of a brain haemorrhage.
Chen Tu-hsiu (1879-1942), professor at the University of Peking, was one of the leaders of the democratic revolution of 1911. A founder of the Chinese CP, of which he was secretary from 1920 to 1927, but then joined the Trotskyist Opposition. He was seized by the Kuomintang in 1932 and sentenced to thirteen years in prison. Freed on parole in 1937, he died in 1942. His memory is still slandered today by the leadership of the Chinese CP.
Ta Thu Thau, founder of the Vietnamese Trotskyist movement, leader of the Saigon workers in the years preceding the war and imprisoned during the war. Freed in 1946, he disappeared mysteriously shortly thereafter, probably assassinated by the Stalinists.
Pierre Tresso (Blasco) (1893-1943), member of the Central Committee and the Political Bureau of the Italian CP from 1925, party delegate to congresses of the Communist International. Expelled as a Trotskyist in 1930, he was active as an exile in France; participated in the leadership of the Ligue Communiste, in the Copenhagen Conference in 1932, and in the founding congress of the Fourth International. Condemned to ten years of forced labour during the war by the Marseilles military court, and placed in the Puy prison, he was liberated along with all the others by the Resistance forces, shortly thereafter, as was the case with other Trotskyists, he disappeared while with the Resistance forces, in all likelihood assassinated by the Stalinists.
Humberto Valenzuela (1908-1977), born in the nitrate-mining area of northern Chile, recording secretary of the nitrate miners union in Huara at the age of fourteen. Joined the Chilean CP soon after its foundation, but left after the Trotskyists were expelled to join the Izquierda Comunista (Communist Left), formed in 1931. A leader of the United Construction Union, he also helped in the formation of peasant unions. In 1942 he ran as Trotskyist candidate for the presidency. In 1969, he devoted himself to the foundation of a new Chilean section, the Partido Socialista Revolucionario (PSR); he also worked with the MIR to build organs of popular power and was elected a national leader of the Revolutionary Workers Front. After the coup he continued to work underground, organising resistance committees and Marxist education classes.
Joseph Vanzler (John G. Wright), student in chemistry at Harvard University, joined the American Trotskyist organisation in 1929, translated numerous works by Trotsky, died in 1956 at the age of 52.
Libero Villone (1913-1970), became active in the Italian CP under the fascist regime, when it was illegal. He was expelled from the CP in 1938 for having criticised the Moscow trials. Arrested in 1943, he was freed when Mussolini fell. Readmitted to the CP, he was soon expelled for criticising the policy of class collaboration. He joined the Trotskyist movement in 1945. A teacher, he held various positions in the teachers' union. He was editor of Bandiera Rossa for several years.
Neil Williamson, Scottish militant of the International Marxist Group, who played the key role in leading the IMG to understand the new prominence of the national question in Scotland. His funeral after his death at the age of 26 in a car crash in October 1978 was attended by representatives of every significant section of. the labour movement, testifying to the enormous respect he had won in ten years of unceasing political activity.
Erwin Wolf (N. Braun), Trotskyist of Czechoslovakian origin, Trotsky's secretary in Norway, was assassinated by the GPU during the civil war in Spain.
Niiyama Yukio (1954-1978), member of the Japan Revolutionary Communist League, died of injuries received during the struggle against the opening of the Narita international airport at Sanrizuka.
Joseph Hansen (1910-1979), a central leader of the American Socialist Workers Party and the international Trotskyist movement, died as this book was going to press. From 1937 he spent much time with Trotsky in Mexico, assisting in the preparation of the founding congress of the Fourth International. He was present when Trotsky was assassinated, and prevented his killer from fleeing. A very talented journalist, he was editor of The Militant for several years after 1940. He played a decisive role in reunification of the Fourth International in 1962-63 and was subsequently a regular observer at its congresses and plenums. In the last years of his life his political activity mainly centred on the editing of the weekly Intercontinental Press/Inprecor, which he had helped to launch as World Outlook in the wake of the 1963 reunification.

* * *


In ending this most incomplete list at this point, with the observation that the losses of the Trotskyists, relative to their number, are probably greater than those of all other tendencies in the working class movement, let us remember once again the exceptional pleiad of revolutionists who originated the movement, the Soviet Trotskyists, who stood up against all persecution until the day that Stalin decided on their total extermination. The story of their struggle at Vorkuta, of (among others) the great hunger strike conducted by more than a thousand prisoners for 132 days (from October 1936 to March 1937), in the course of which many perished, has come down to us through eyewitnesses returned from the camps. Alexander Solzhenitsyn in The First Circle has given their heroic end a suitable place in the great literature of the world. To their memory, and to the memory of all those who died fighting for the Fourth International, I dedicate this book.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch8



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 8: The Turn in the World Situation (1968 onwards)


The composition of the congress held in late December 1965 reflected the influx of youth that had revitalised the sections. The accentuation of this phenomenon in the following years was to pose a good many new problems. We have reached the point at which our history merges into current politics. It was the war in Vietnam that contributed, in the most conclusive and decisive fashion, to the turn in the world situation that had been ripening beneath the surface apathy, beneath Europe's political stagnation, beneath the reformism that followed 'de-Stalinisation' in the workers states. As Marx said, revolution, that old mole, was inexorably burrowing away, so that one fine day the ground, thus undermined, might cave in.
Other phenomena also operated in a direction equally favourable to the turn in the situation -- for example, China's 'cultural revolution', despite the extravagant forms that it often took. The announcement of the Ninth Congress of the Chinese CP showed that the 'cultural revolution' basically aimed at replacing a bureaucratically ossified apparatus by another apparatus, bureaucratic too, but more active. One of the ways this operation had been effected was through mass mobilisations against the old apparatus. But how many in the capitalist countries saw only these mobilisations and were thus encouraged to revolutionary action!
An international phenomenon, the activation of students in the capitalist countries, was a premonitory sign of this turn in the world situation. Up to then, only students in the under-developed countries participated in mass struggles; there was really nothing surprising about this in the colonial revolution, where students have always played a substantial role. But students entering the political arena in developed capitalist countries was a new phenomenon, whose extent had no comparable precedent in history not even in the bourgeois revolutions. Particular circumstances in each particular country played their part in this phenomenon; since the latter was international in scope, however, it had to have a common objective basis. For the first time -- and this in a by-and-large affluent period -- students, not in tiny minorities but in large masses, attacked university structures, then went on to attack the very social structures of capitalist society, independently of traditional working class leaderships. Various indications also pointed to an awakening of working class youth (even if this was, for the moment, less marked than that of the student youth), with the same tendency towards finding their own path outside the control of the traditional labour leaderships. Finally, an even more unexpected and novel phenomenon appeared -- a political awakening of adolescents in the schools. The International immediately grasped the unusual importance of these developments among the youth.
The sections very rapidly found themselves engaged in propaganda and agitation in favour of the Vietnamese revolution. The aim of this activity was to organise vigorous demonstrations which, in contra-distinction to the never-ending petitions and timid measures of the peace movement, would have real impact and would be really effective. This could be done only by clearly establishing the difference between the demand for 'negotiations' (which was formulated by this instrument of Moscow's peaceful co-existence policy) and a revolutionary policy whose aim was victory for the National Liberation Front, victory for Vietnam.
The policy followed by China and its supporters, confused as it may have been in many ways, also favoured this outflanking of the satellites of the Kremlin in aid to the Vietnamese revolution.
One of the most valuable contributions in furthering the revolutionary currents was Che Guevara's celebrated slogan, 'Two, three...many Vietnams'. He gave his life to make this slogan a reality, to engage the forces of imperialism on another front.
Trotskyists were always in the front ranks of the ad hoc groups organised in many countries, first in the United States and Japan, and then in several West European countries, for the purpose of bringing together into one broad, united front all who favoured mass actions on the Vietnam question. Trotskyists were behind the first demonstrations for Vietnam in West Europe (Liege, 15 October 1966; the October 1967 demonstrations at the time of Che Guevara's death; the Berlin demonstration of 21 February 1968). They were in the thick of the battle at Berkeley and in the forefront of all anti-war actions in the United States. It was they who maintained the unity of the movement conducting the campaign in Great Britain, which brought 100,000 demonstrators out in the streets of London on 27 October l968. [1]
On the heels of these actions for the defence of Vietnam, the Trotskyist organisations linked up with large layers of youth who, in their search for a revolutionary political programme, were beginning to learn the truth about the October Revolution, the ideas of Lenin and Trotsky, the Trotskyist movement. The Trotskyist organisations (especially those in the West European countries and in the United States, which had suffered long and difficult years of debilitation) were rejuvenated and reaped the benefits of a recruitment larger than they had ever before experienced. It was unavoidable that such a phenomenon would provoke sectarian criticism: students, not workers, are being recruited, etc. Vanguard organisations such as those of the Trotskyist movement have no reason to abstain from being active and recruiting among a social layer where valuable intellectual forces, indispensable for the working class movement, can be found. Aside from this fact, however, the generalised student radicalisation in the developed capitalist states merited analysis because it was specific to a new social situation, different from what had hitherto existed.
Technological progress, the needs of the economy, new developments in the sciences -- all this sparked a veritable explosion of the university population. So greatly increased was the size of the student body that it brought about a qualitative change in its social importance. At the same time, the position in society for which these students were being prepared was no longer what it had been. On entering the university -- and even earlier, at school -- they had become extremely concerned about the contradictions of capitalist society. They were even the first to be aware of the new contradictions in neo-capitalist society. This phenomenon assumed exceptionally large dimensions in the United States, but the same tendencies appeared elsewhere. Henceforth there would be about six million students in the fortress of imperialism -- a percentage of the population not very much lower than the percentage of farmers.
This student population is concentrated in university towns. Their studies are not preparing them -- as was formerly the case for most college students -- to fill their parents' shoes, to take their elders' places as bankers, industrialists, or petty-bourgeois professionals (doctors, lawyers, etc.). Gone is the hope that many technicians will be able to find important and high-paying positions in big industrial plants. The new students are destined to become people who work for a living, exploited either by the big corporations or by the state. Socially situated as middle layers, they are threatened with unemployment -- just as workers are. And the numerous social layers of this student population are particularly sensitive to the other multiple contradictions of society.
The use that capitalism makes of their higher education (whether in the natural sciences with, for example, utilisation of nuclear energy for military purposes; or in the social sciences for socially monstrous purposes), together with the criminal behaviour of capitalist society towards the most oppressed strata (colonial masses, blacks, etc.), forced students to go beyond a critique of an educational system that was being 'reformed' only to make it better able to fulfil its alienating functions. They moved on to criticise the underlying causes of the evils that were victimising students themselves, as well.
The International had barely begun preparations for a new world congress (at which, besides the general trend of the world situation, very important specific problems such as the Chinese 'cultural revolution' were to be examined) when a turn in the international situation took place -- the biggest turn, in fact, since the end of the Second World War.
The year 1968, which opened with the smashing defeat inflicted on the Americans by the Vietnamese Tet offensive, will assuredly be a Landmark in the history of the socialist revolution. Two events stand out. First of all, May 1968 in France. Triggered off by a student revolution, a general strike of 10 million workers in its turn drew large sections of the petty bourgeoisie into an unprecedented challenge to the authority of the state, as well as to private ownership of the means of production and numerous other capitalist institutions. This was followed by a revolutionary upsurge in Czechoslovakia that, during the first week of Soviet military occupation, assumed a size and strength unprecedented in a workers state.
Several other events, smaller in scope but pointing in the same direction, should be added to these two, whose significance defies description:
(a) The crisis in US imperialism's two-party political system including a leadership crisis -- shown in the presidential election (Johnson's abdication and the general lack of enthusiasm for both Nixon and Humphrey, neither of whom had any political authority).
(b) The crisis in the international Communist movement, Moscow having definitively lost its authority as 'guide' in this long-time monolithic and extremely hierarchical outfit.
(c) The disgraceful bankruptcy of the British Labour Party government, the strongest party of the international social-democracy, which had strong hopes for it.
(d) The activation, after several years of relative passivity, of the Latin American urban masses. This included Mexico, a country considered by its bourgeoisie up to then as immune to Latin American-type revolutions.
These upheavals, the early outlines of which had been apparent for two years, particularly the entry into the lists of a new generation outside the control of the old bureaucracies, confronted the European sections of the Fourth International with the problem of changing their tactics. As soon as these phenomena appeared, the Trotskyist movement had undertaken certain tactical adjustments. This was particularly true in France at the time of the Algerian war, as a result of the working class parties' position on the latter, but they were only partial adjustments. The size and scope of these phenomena laid the groundwork for the formation of currents to the left of the Communist parties, currents strong enough to become factors on the political scene in several countries. Thus, beginning in 1967, the European sections opened a debate on tactics, with a view to revising the entryist tactic. The open discussion on this point was oriented towards a change in tactic. Entryism was the price that had to be paid because of the disproportion that existed between the hegemony of the old leaderships and the weakness of the vanguard, practically incapable of going beyond the stage of a propaganda group. The possibility now existed of organisations being formed that, while still largely in the minority, could nevertheless exercise enough strength in given sectors to acquire importance on a national scale. Moreover, the entryist tactic had been established almost fifteen years earlier on the perspective, based on the relationship of forces at the time, that the crisis would develop through the formation of left tendencies within those leaderships themselves. Because of the prolonged period of prosperity, leftists in the traditional organisations generally experienced the same slide to the right that the mass working class movement underwent as a whole. In only a few cases did the contrary occur. For us, those few`cases nevertheless justified the tactic.
While those who kept denouncing 'entryism' ended up by withering away into sectarianism, it is sufficient for us, in view of May 1968, to point to the formation of the Jeunesse Communiste Revolutionnaire (Revolutionary Communist Youth) as a result of the application of this tactic within the Union des Etudiants Communistes (Communist Student Union). The JCR constituted Trotskyism's most valuable contribution to the French May. [2] Let us not forget, too, that the SDS in Germany (Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund -- German Socialist Student Union) arose out of the Social Democracy, which is the mass organisation in that country.
The 1968 turning point marked the end of the period of apathy; the end of political stagnation in the advanced capitalist countries, which had begun shortly after the Second World War; the end of the period of reformism that had followed the first years of 'de-Stalinisation' in the workers states. This turning point marked the end of the period in which the world revolution had been carried forward almost exclusively by the colonial revolution, a fact that distorted the world revolutionary process considerably and resulted in a proliferation of numerous theories, reformist or revolutionary, that had one point in common: the alleged incapacity of the proletariat, especially in the advanced capitalist countries, to play a revolutionary role. The activation of the working class masses in France and Czechoslovakia, as well as the demonstrations in the large Latin American cities, delivered a mortal blow to all these theories. The distortions that the world revolutionary process was prey to for almost twenty years were on their way out.
The changes in the international situation were also indirectly reflected even in the policy of the CPs. Since 1935 they have always put forward, especially in Western Europe, a policy of class collaboration with social-democracy and wings of the bourgeoisie under the name of 'Popular Front','national front','left union', etc. But the precise aims assigned to this policy have varied. Before the war, this policy had only the aim of 'stopping fascism'. Immediately after the war, it was a question of an 'advanced democracy' which would very gradually, during an indefinite period, lead on to socialism. At present, this 'advanced democracy' is increasingly often presented as a stage which would rapidly bring about socialism. Obviously a policy based on a peaceful and parliamentary road can lead only to defeats. But it is symptomatic that they are now compelled to speak of socialism in the short term in order to respond to the aspirations of their audience.
Under these new conditions, theoretically and politically so much more propitious, the International made preparations for its 1969 world congress. Ninety-eight section delegates, fraternal delegates, and observers, from thirty countries, were present at this congress, held in April 1969.
The main documents adopted by this congress were:
* Theses on the new rise of the world revolution and an introductory report on these theses by Comrade Ernest Mandel, passed unanimously except for two votes.
* Resolution on the perspectives of the Latin American revolution, presented by Comrade Roca and passed by a two-thirds majority.
* Resolution on the great 'cultural revolution' in China and the report of Comrade Livio Maitan, who presented the resolution to the congress, passed by a very large majority.
* A resolution orienting the International's work in the immediate future towards the radicalising youth and opening a discussion on the problems posed by this orientation, with a document presented by Comrade Albert.
The congress also unanimously adopted the outgoing United Secretariat's report on activities, presented by Comrade Mandel; a report on the finances of the International; and resolutions dealing with the situation of the movement in Germany, Argentina, Ceylon, and Great Britain. In Great Britain, where there had been no official section, the congress recognised the International Marxist Group as the British section of the Fourth International.
The theses presented to the congress on the new rise of the world revolution summarised in six main points the turn in the world situation that took place in 1968:
1. The imperialist counter-offensive, unleashed by American imperialism following the victory of the Cuban revolution, after having met with some important temporary successes in Brazil, Indonesia, and in numerous African countries, had been stalemated by the heroic Vietnamese masses who recaptured the military initiative with the Tet offensive (1968).
2. The victorious resistance of the Vietnamese people coincided with a general slowing down in the economic growth of the imperialist countries, which sharpened the social contradictions and intensified the class struggle in most of these countries.
3. May 1968 in France had reactivated the revolutionary upsurge in Europe.
4. The victorious defence of the Vietnamese revolution and the reactivation of revolutionary struggle in several imperialist countries gave the colonial revolution the possibility of surmounting the obstacles of the preceding phase and again gathering momentum.
5. Stimulated by the Vietnamese revolution and by the revolutionary crisis in France, the ripening of conditions for the political revolution in the bureaucratically degenerated or deformed workers states has already led to large mobilisations in Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, and is at the doorstep of the USSR itself.
6. The appearance of a new, young vanguard on a world scale, largely outside the control of the traditional mass organisations, favours the solution of the central task of our era -- creating a new, revolutionary leadership of the world proletariat.
The report on activities could justifiably record the important -- in many cases, decisive -- role played by the Fourth International's militants in the campaigns for the defence of the Vietnamese and Cuban revolutions; the defence of militants persecuted by the bourgeoisie (Hugo Blanco, the Peruvian revolutionists, the Mexican students) or by the bureaucracies of the workers states (the Polish comrades Kuron and Modzelewsky); the campaign for support of the socialist Arab revolution, etc. The activities report could also point to the considerable advances made by the Trotskyist newspapers and other publications throughout the world, and the extraordinary volume of editions and re-editions of Trotsky's works in many languages and in countries where they had never before appeared.
Most especially, the report had to evaluate the Trotskyist movement's participation in the May 1968 events in France. This participation had its climax at the world congress itself: the Ligue Communiste, ten times larger and with immeasurably greater influence than the pre-May 1968 Trotskyist organisation, became the new French section of the Fourth International.
Side by side with this striking advance, participants at the world congress reported on progress made practically everywhere. Leadership bodies of the International and its sections felt new blood coursing through their veins, supplied by young cadres expressing the high potential of the new generation in the ranks of the world socialist revolution.
The turn in the world situation was expressed not only in the composition and progress of the Trotskyist movement, but it was also examined very carefully in the course of in-depth analyses in the tradition of the Trotskyist movement itself. To the usual outline of general tasks, the discussions added an exceptionally strong note that emphasised the principal result of this turn, i.e., the necessity of raising the International's activity to a higher level, a level demanded by the new situation. The organisation would no longer content itself with participating in mass struggles by advancing its programme; it would now endeavour to intervene, at least in certain countries and on certain fronts of the struggle, with the object of playing a leading role in them. The question of the Trotskyist movement's making an eventual breakthrough on certain points, in and through action, thus constituted the guiding thread in the main discussions of the congress -- which were extremely lively.
During each of the discussions on the principal documents submitted to the world congress, it became apparent that the Trotskyist movement (after having tried for years to stem the Stalinist tide and then having participated in revolutionary upsurges that did not throw off the bureaucratic yoke) had for the first time in its history the possibility of making a breakthrough by effectively proving, on a few, still limited class struggle fronts, the validity of its programme -- no longer in a theoretical way, but in action. The world congress showed that it was very aware of this new situation, of its implications, of the perspectives it offered for constructing a revolutionary Marxist, mass International. It is obvious that such a turn cannot be taken just by voting at a congress, no matter how important that may be. The period after the Ninth World Congress demanded of the International, of its sections, of the organisations connected with it politically, persistent day-in, day-out work to make such a turn a reality -- as well as even closer ties among all the parties in the movement.
Shortly after the world congress, the Ligue Communiste showed the big gain made by the Trotskyist movement in France through the extraordinarily successful election campaign of Alain Krivine, the Ligue's presidential candidate. This campaign went far beyond the borders of France and made the International known to large sectors throughout Europe.
Most of the Fourth International's sections, as well as the Socialist Workers Party in the USA, grew considerably in the period following the Ninth World Congress -- in an uneven fashion from country to country, but very substantially nevertheless. At this time organisations were created in countries where the Fourth International had not been present before (Ireland, Luxembourg, Sweden); sections were rebuilt in countries where circumstances had reduced them considerably (Mexico, Switzerland, etc.) or had even forced them to disappear altogether (Spain, with the spectacular growth of the Liga Comunista Revolucionaria). This phenomenon extended also to countries like Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. More and more the Fourth International was committed in class struggles across the entire world.[3]
The progress made by the Fourth International could be seen concretely in two large demonstrations during 1970 and 1971. In November 1970, the International called a conference in Brussels, seat of the European Economic Community, at which it counterposed to the Europe of multinational trusts the slogan of a 'Red Europe', a socialist Europe which alone can overcome the division between the Western and Eastern parts of the old continent. More than 3,500 enthusiastic people, most of them youth from all the countries of Europe, were present at the Brussels Conference.
The Fourth International issued an appeal for a demonstration to be held in Paris in May 1971 to celebrate the centennial of the Paris Commune by continuing its fight for a world commune, for the world socialist revolution. Over 30,000 people covered the Belleville and Menilmontant districts and filed past the Mur des Federes in the Père Lachaise cemetery, at the very place where the last fighters of the 1871 Commune met their death. An utterly astounded bourgeois press described the demonstration in terms such as 'composed mostly of young people', and 'vibrant with enthusiasm'. The press also had to acknowledge that of all the demonstrations organised for this anniversary (Socialist Party, PSU, etc.), this was -- except, of course, for the CP's demonstration, in which about 60,000 people participated -- by far the biggest.
The international situation since the Ninth World Congress has been marked by some very important events. On the one hand there has been a grave defeat for the Chilean masses with the overthrow of Allende's 'peaceful road' experiment by the generals headed by Pinochet. This in turn has encouraged a general strengthening of reaction in many Latin American countries: in Peru the 'reformist' interlude came to an end while in Argentina the Videla coup in 1976 ushered in a period of the most bloody repression in which the Trotskyists of the Partido Socialista de los Trabajadores (PST Socialist Workers Party) were among the major victims.
In contrast, the revolutionary upsurge of the European workers has won important successes, bringing down the Salazar-Caetano dictatorship in Portugal after half a century, ending the dictatorship of the Creek colonels, and enforcing a rapid liberalisation in Spain after the death of France. Despite subsequent setbacks (the Portuguese defeat of November 1975, the austerity policies imposed in Italy and Spain with the help of the CPs), the revolutionary process in Europe is clearly only marking time before the offensive is renewed in the coming years.
In Africa, too, imperialism has undergone important defeats. The struggle of the oppressed masses in Mozambique, Angola, and Guinea-Bissau not only achieved their liberation from Portuguese colonialism but also helped to stimulate the struggles in Africa south of the Zambezi. A growth in the guerrilla struggles in Namibia and Zimbabwe was followed by a mass upsurge in South Africa itself with the Soweto demonstrations in June 1976.
Finally, and above all, the last period has seen the overwhelming victory of the people of Indochina. The capture of Saigon after a struggle lasting thirty years was an immense encouragement to the revolutionary movement in the whole of South-East Asia.
Meanwhile, the myth of the 'consumer society' in the advanced capitalist countries, of a so-called 'neo-capitalism' which would suppress the contradictions exposed by Marx, is dead for ever. The reality today is of an economic crisis, the first generalised recession since the Second World War, which has led to the unemployment of some 15 million men and women in Western Europe and the USA without at the same time being able to provide any permanent answer to the inflationary tendencies of this period.
The absolute hegemony of American capitalism since the end of the war seems to be over. This is expressed, for example, in the crisis of the international monetary system as its basic currency, the dollar, has steadily declined. This decline is watched with increasing anxiety by the capitalist powers of Western Europe and Japan, particularly as it is accompanied by a series of defeats and other incidents (Watergate) which testify to the disarray among the leadership of the world's most powerful capitalist country.
The progress of the Fourth International in this situation was expressed at its Tenth World Congress, held in the last week of February 1974. About 250 delegates and fraternal delegates participated, representing 48 sections and sympathising organisations from 41 countries. Compared to the previous congress the numerical strength of the Fourth International had increased some tenfold. This recruitment, although mainly of young people, was far from being confined to students or school students. It also included a substantial proportion of worker cadres who in some countries are now able to confront the ageing bureaucrats of the traditional organisations with growing success. This advance has also been reflected in the publications of the sections, as more and more are able to produce weekly papers along with theoretical reviews, pamphlets and books.
Apart from registering the progress of the movement, the Tenth World Congress was also important because of its work. A tendency struggle took place which was conducted in a very democratic fashion: more than 150 contributions to the discussion were distributed to the entire membership in every country; the discussion was conducted from the units at the base through regional and national congresses; tendencies and factions were established nationally or internationally; delegates were elected so that minorities were represented according to their proportion of the votes; finally the congress discussed and voted after having heard reports and counter-reports on the various questions at stake. The minorities were then represented on the leadership bodies elected by the congress, and the leadership of the International has subsequently published not only the documents adopted by the majority but also documents presenting the major minority positions, written by minority comrades. The importance of such democratic procedures for the life of the Fourth International cannot be over-estimated. Although every single one of our enemies predicted that a split between majority and minority was just around the corner, quite the reverse occurred: the differences were able to be resolved through the test of experience to the extent that by the end of 1977 the major factions and tendencies had been dissolved.
The debates of the Tenth World Congress took place on the following questions:
1. The international situation, where the resolution presented by Ernest Mandel and adopted by the congress confirmed and updated the general orientation defined by the preceding congress on the new upsurge of the world revolution since May 1968.
2. Aspects of the situation in Latin America (Bolivia, Argentina, problems of armed struggle on the continent). Most of the debate dealt with past positions, and it included an adjustment of the resolution on Latin America adopted by the Ninth World Congress.
3. Problems of building revolutionary Marxist parties in Western Europe. The theses on this question were presented by Livio Maitan. The importance of this point on the agenda derived from the central place once again occupied by the working class movement of Western Europe in the world revolutionary upsurge, and the possibilities open to the sections of the Fourth International in this part of the world.
Among the organisational decisions of the congress, the main one concerned a substantial strengthening of the international centre. In collaboration with the US Socialist Workers Party, this has recently permitted the combination of previous journals into a single international weekly, Inrercontinental Press/Inprecor, reflecting the views of the Fourth International.
Since the Tenth World Congress the advance of the Fourth International has experienced very few interruptions: it has penetrated various countries of the Middle East, several African countries, as well as further European countries such as Finland and Iceland -- not to mention Portugal, where the Liga Comunista Internacionalista (LCI -- Internationalist Communist League) has been built and stabilised almost from scratch since the fall of the dictatorship. Our publications in the languages of Eastern Europe (Russian, Polish, Czech) have increased as well; the Fourth International has now established a presence in some sixty countries.
The activity of the Fourth International has now reached a stage which it never attained in the past. Support for the Vietnamese revolution, solidarity with Chile, intervention in strike movements, in the struggle for women's liberation, in election campaigns, in anti-militarist work -- the sections of the Fourth International now intervene in all these areas, so that hardly a day now goes by without the mass media reporting some Trotskyist action, intervention or demonstration in this or that country.[4]
In relation to the years which have passed since its founding, the Fourth International has unquestionably made great progress. But we cannot stop here. We must turn our efforts to the ever greater demands made on us by the world situation.
There is still a long way to go before the aims for which the Fourth International was founded are achieved, namely to create a mass, international, revolutionary Marxist leadership and mass revolutionary parties, capable of assuring the victory of the world socialist revolution. For a long time, Trotskyists pursued this aim on the sole basis of historical necessity, of their profound belief in the revolutionary capacities that the working class has evinced throughout history, and in the correctness of revolutionary Marxism and the analyses it enabled them to make. Their opportunities for mass-scale actions were then minimal. Today, the old leaderships continue to clutter the road, to poison working class consciousness; but from now on more than theoretical conviction underlies Trotskyist activity.
The new generation living under the contradictions of capitalism are seeking anti-capitalist solutions, and their vanguard is beginning to rediscover revolutionary Marxism in thought and action. The merging of the Trotskyist movement and this young vanguard is already beginning to take place.

Footnotes
[1] Never did the position of the Socialist Labour League sectarians appear more pitiful than when they refused to engage in joint actions with 'petty-bourgeois' groups. In the existing circumstances, this position reduced SLL activity to violent attacks against the Fourth International and its supporters, and to purely verbal denunciations of the reformist and Stalinist leaderships. It also led to the SLL's total isolation from the big mass demonstrations. Thus, after having sent several hundred British youth to Litge on 15 October 1966, in order to denounce the Fourth International, they abstained from participating in the 27 October 1968 demonstration in London, perhaps the greatest mass demonstration held in England since the end of the war -- the most spirited, at any rate. This anti-Vietnam war demonstration was also, in effect, a demonstration of the left against the Wilson government's general policy; the SLL characterised the demonstration as a petty-bourgeois assembly and a'fraud'!
We do not care to act like scholastics, using and abusing quotations from on high; but with sectarians who follow the letter to better fight the spirit, it is often useful to let the classics take the floor. Let us hear what Lenin had to say in 'Left-wing' Communism: An Infantile Disorder:
'...how is the discipline of the revolutionary party of the proletariat maintained?... First, by the class consciousness of the proletarian vanguard and by its devotion to the revolution, by its perseverance, self-sacrifice and heroism. Secondly, by its ability to link itself, to keep in close touch with, and to a certain extent, if you like, to merge itself with the broadest masses of the toilers -- primarily with the proletarian, but also with the non-proletarian toiling masses. Thirdly, by the correctness of the political leadership exercised by this vanguard....'(Emphasis in original).
Thus, merging to a certain extent with non-proletarian masses is placed above correctness of political line. It took the daring of a Lenin to express the thought. What would our sectarians have said if these lines had been written by us, poor sinners that we are?
[2] May 1968 in France also allowed for an evaluation of the policies of the Organisation Communiste Internationaliste. (This great opponent of entryism has followed a line similar to that of the British SLL on the question of Cuba and Vietnam). During the greatest event in the history of the European class struggle since the end of World War II, the daily denunciations of this group culminated in its abstaining from the confrontations with the bourgeois state. The OCI sounded the alarm each time and advocated retreat, in order not to be led into 'a slaughter'. On this I refer the reader to Daniel Bensaid and Henri Weber's Mai 68, une repetition generale (May 68: A Dress Rehearsal). The authors of this book illustrate, in excellent fashion, how and why the OCI's sectarianism changed into active opportunism at the decisive moments, only to change back into sectarianism when the upsurge receded -- an apt time for this group to indulge in denunciations.
[3] The only serious setback for the Fourth International at this time took place in Argentina. Here the vast majority of the officially recognised section, the PRT (El Combatiente), which was not of Trotskyist origin, laid more and more stress on the guerrilla activities of its military wing, the ERP, until it finally withdrew from the Fourth International under Cuban influence.
[4] At the very time that the Fourth International is seriously growing, however, some observers -- either through ignorance or ill will -- talk about the existence of 'several' Fourth Internationals, owing to the fact that groups outside the Fourth International adopt this label in order to fight us. The Stalinists, of course, use this situation not to talk about 'several' Fourth Internationals but to amalgamate the positions of the Fourth International with those of these other groups. The present situation can be summarised as follows.
The main opponent of the Fourth International in this field was the 'International Committee', consisting of two quite important organisations, the OCI in France and the SLL in Britain, and a few insignificant groups in other countries. When these two organisations broke with each other, each created its own 'International Committee' proposing to 'build' or 'reconstruct' the international. We have mentioned already their political characteristics.
We have also referred earlier to the impressionism which characterised the faction which broke with the Fourth International under the leadership of Pablo. This now concentrates its attention on the question of self-management, which it presents as a panacea for the working class movement. In line with this it has abandoned the 'Fourth International' label which it retained after the split and now poses a solution in terms of a united front composed of mass movements in some colonial countries, workers states, etc.
As for the remaining handful of 'Posadists', a glance at any of their papers will show that their positions scarcely fall under the heading of political analysis.

Read next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-forword



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Foreword


By Brian Grogan, National Secretary, International Marxist Group (British section of the Fourth International)
The Fourth International celebrated its fortieth anniversary in September 1978. It recorded a period of unprecedented growth on a world scale in all parts of the globe. Today its programme unites Mexican peasants, Japanese workers, European youth and a new cadre of African revolutionaries. It would be false to exaggerate the importance of the growth of the Fourth International in objective terms, but the fact that it has grown, developed and intervened in national politics in France, Spain, Japan, Mexico, Argentina and Peru (to take the most obvious examples) is universally acknowledged. The Fourth International is the only revolutionary political organisation that consciously organises itself on a world scale. It is this which both marks it off from the rest of the far left in Europe and America and, at the same time, demonstrates its enormous potential.
We live in an age where everything has been internationalised. Imperialism brought in its wake world politics and world economics. This was the objective criterion for launching the Third (Communist) International. It remains the basis for our attempt to construct a mass revolutionary Fourth International. This does not mean that we deny the existence of national characteristics and peculiarities. These are vital for determining political tactics and strategy in different countries and in different continents. But we insist that these are not isolated features, but represent in every instance novel combinations of world politics and national peculiarities.
The reality of a world economy is not denied today by anyone. Concepts such as 'balance of payments', 'exchange rates', 'multinationals' and 'oil crises' are part of the everyday vocabulary of the popular press in all the capitalist countries. The imperialist rulers also understand the importance of world politics and economics. A number of summits have already taken place to discuss 'measures to curb inflation and unemployment': in other words, to discuss ways of lessening the effects of the capitalist recession. The political interventions of the International Monetary Fund (a 'control commission' of the international capitalist economy) in countries as varied as Jamaica, Britain, Sri Lanka, and Italy are no longer seriously questioned by mass currents within the workers movement.
It is these objective political and economic factors that make the fight to build an International more vital today than ever before. In 1902 Lenin wrote, while drafting the programme of Russian Social Democracy, that 'we are the Russian detachment of international social democracy'. Today it is somewhat grotesque that organisations of the far left who maintain, on occasion even rigidly, their adherence to Leninist principles should reject the idea of building an International. They should have understood that 'national communist' organisations built without programmatic coherence tend to develop deep and unbridgeable differences.
An example here would be in order. The British Socialist Workers Party has based its opposition to the Fourth International on an analogy from the building industry: 'first build the walls and then the roof'. Such an analogy is itself thoroughly misplaced, as any architect could demonstrate in a few sentences. But when architectural deviations are carried into politics the result can be catastrophic. The attempts of the SWP to link up with the Portuguese PRP(BR) and the Italian Avanguardia Operaia have ended in unmitigated disaster. The divergences between the SWP and these other organisations are deepgoing and profound. This process will continue to repeat itself unless the SWP attempts seriously to construct an international organisation on the basis of a common revolutionary programme.
The last ten years have seen important advances for the revolutionary left as a whole. But a number of qualifications have to be immediately added. In the first instance, in no country has any revolutionary organisation succeeded in transforming itself into a revolutionary party. Secondly, with very few exceptions, the overwhelming bulk of'national communist' organisations have either disappeared or developed political orientations which mark a sharp break with Leninism. When a Eurocommunist leader remarked ironically that the 'Trotskyists of the Fourth International are the only Leninists we have left, and that's what is wrong about them', he was stating an incontestable fact.
It would be both counter-productive and false to see the development of the Fourth International over the last ten years as one big triumphalist ascent. Errors were made. Many of them were corrected. Some sections suffered severe blows (the Italian case is the prime example) from which they have still to recover. For that reason we concentrate in this introduction on the developments of the last ten years.
Describing the last tortured decade of Trotsky's life, his biographer Isaac Deutscher wrote (paraphrasing Marx):'This was a time when .. "the idea pressed towards reality", but as reality did not tend towards the idea, a gulf was set between them, a gulf narrower and yet deeper than before.' 1968 was a year when reality and the idea met up once again, shook hands, and embraced each other, albeit for a short period. The largest general strike in the history of capitalism paralysed metropolitan France, the Vietnamese communists launched an offensive which shattered Washington, and giant strides were taken towards socialist democracy in Czechoslovakia which could only be crushed by Soviet tanks. The European working class moved once again onto the political stage after a period of passivity oiled by the long economic post-war boom. Since 1968 world politics has seen unprecedented social and national explosions. The overthrow of fascism in Portugal was the best example of the inter-relationship of world and national politics, as the guerrillas of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Mozambique joined the Portuguese workers and soldiers to bring about the downfall of Caetano. This was followed by the defeat of the South Africans in Angola and the Soweto uprising, the de-Francoisation of Spain, the acceleration of the armed struggle in Zimbabwe, and most recently, the political crisis in Iran. Some of the far left currents believed in the euphoria of 1968 that the traditional mass organisations of the working class would be rapidly bypassed. But the 1970s have seen this thesis refuted. The workers, in their majority, remained loyal to their traditional apparatuses. A minority in most capitalist countries in Europe did, however, become attracted to the revolutionary left and responded to its initiatives. Where they were given ultra-left and over-optimistic assessments of the possibilities of the revolution, they suffered a relapse and withdrew. In other cases they remain responsive to revolutionary initiatives. Spain is the best example of the latter case.
The Fourth International has explained these developments by a creative application of the tenets of classical Marxism. It has defended the 'old' conceptions of the Third International on the united front and transitional demands. However the Fourth International. too, was not immune. In particular it underestimated the tenacious hold of bourgeois-democratic institutions over the working class -- in itself a result of the experience of decades of Stalinism in the USSR and Eastern Europe. It was the political reserves of the European bourgeoisie and the political weaknesses of the workers movement which prevented the establishment of dual power in France and Portugal in 1968 and 1975.
This underestimation of the political resources still available to the bourgeoisie was never more clearly demonstrated than in the case of Spain. While the death agony of Francoism clearly raised the real possibility of a general strike and the entry of the masses into politics, the Spanish ruling class was not standing idly by. It instituted a series of reforms from above which were utilised by the Spanish Socialist and Communist parties to integrate the working class with the central project of the bourgeoisie. Thus a dogmatic insistence on the revolutionary general strike became an obstacle to evaluating the evolution of Spanish politics.
While mistakes of the above sort indicated some problems of analysis, they could not be ascribed to a 'break with Leninism', however. What is more, these mistakes were soon corrected. In 1977 the Fourth International produced its 'Theses on Socialist Democracy and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat'. These theses provide the only real synthesis of the strands in classical Marxism on this question; they represent a real theoretical gain for the revolutionary movement as a whole and the only serious rebuttal to the theoreticians of Eurocommunism who counterpose democracy to socialist revolution.
The mistakes of the Fourth International in this period in relation to Latin America were of a more serious character. The 1960s had seen the victory of the Cuban Revolution, an event which helped to generalise the crisis of the Latin American states. The scope of the social contradictions and the inherent political instability lent all mass mobilisations an explosive character. These were followed by inevitable clashes with the repressive apparatus of the state. The semi-permanent role of the army (which appeared more and more as the main political force of the bourgeoisie) excluded any prolonged periods of bourgeois democracy.
In response to this, the Latin American Trotskyists believed that it was vital to transform their organisations from propaganda groups into armed units capable of resisting the bourgeois onslaught. This response was reinforced with the emergence in every Latin American country of a vanguard which, under the inspiration and direct encouragement of Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, broke with the politics of gradualism and compromise so ably defended by the Communist parties throughout the continent. These militants drew only one lesson from the Cuban Revolution: guerrilla warfare. The Fourth International thus adopted a 'strategy of armed struggle'. This was a serious mistake on a number of counts. On the level of analysis it appeared to endorse the notion that a few hundred militants with weapons could bring about a socialist revolution. This had not been the case even in Cuba, where the mass mobilisations of 1959 and 1960-61 were of crucial importance in ensuring the defeat of the Cuban bourgeoisie and its imperialist masters.
In addition, the analysis of the crisis was at too general a level. There was little specific examination of the conjuncture in each country, in sharp contrast to Trotsky's acute analysis of the respective crises in Germany, Spain and France in the 1930s. The Fourth International's Latin American tactics were more influenced by the Lukacian concept of the 'actuality of the revolution'. Thus specific democratic and transitional demands were seen as unnecessary. The FI has already paid a heavy price for these errors and made a sharp re-evaluation of its tactics.
The developments in the various sectors of the world revolution in this period have confronted the International with arduous tasks on the level of analysis of political conjunctures, their likely evolution, and their inter-relationship. But they lie also at the level of the political and organisational choices confronting the International and its sections.
The accomplishment of these tasks has been rendered more difficult by the fact that from 1969 to 1977 the Fourth International was racked by an extremely sharp tendency fight which strongly influenced both its internal functioning and its capacity for internationally coordinated actions.
It was inevitable that the political developments of the last decade would give rise to different points of view, and that significant divergences would develop in an organisation undergoing expansion in new areas and compelled to respond to increasing political and practical pressures. The Fourth International has always upheld the view that the formation of tendencies is a method of concretising the democratic centralism that should characterise the functioning of a revolutionary Leninist organisation. But when a tendency struggle leads to the creation of permanent crystallised formations this entails grave dangers for the unity of the organisation. A split dynamic can become irresistible.
All these difficulties were further heightened since, at the culmination of the internal conflict at the 1974 World Congress, the political and organisational strength of the two contending tendencies was not greatly different (the majority prevailed by a close vote). Indeed, in a number of countries (Spain, Canada, Australia, etc.) splits did occur, some directly related to the international debate, others fostered by the conditions created by that debate. In some cases disciplinary measures of suspension or expulsion were taken against national minorities; these measures were variously considered, depending on the different points of view, as either legitimate defence against actions by undisciplined militants or violations of the most elementary norms of democratic centralism.
The functioning of the international leadership was seriously hampered, among other reasons because the majority most often had to choose between making decisions that would have been contested by a significant portion of the organisation or accepting delays and paralysing compromises. And it is scarcely necessary to add that such a situation made it far more difficult to effect the necessary work of assimilating groups, tendencies, and militants coming closer or adhering to the International on the basis of differing political experiences. In some cases--that of the PRT/ERP in Argentina, for example--the consequence was that the process of homogenisation simply did not occur and forces that had been won were subsequently lost.
Despite all these difficulties, and despite the many limits--of which those who held leadership responsibilities during these years are the first to be aware--the Fourth International has been able to grasp the elements and fundamental tendencies of this period and to elaborate the strategic and tactical orientations required by the workers movement to develop its struggle successfully in an anti-capitalist direction. In this regard the deep internal differences did not prevent the great majority of the Fourth International from reaching agreement on some basic orientations and conceptions clearly counterposed both to those of the reformist and neo-reformist parties and to those of the centrist or extremist formations, old and new. We do not wish to minimise the importance of the differences that arose on various occasions, in regard not only to Latin America but also to Western Europe (the most significant example was the Portuguese crisis, on which quite different, if not absolutely counterposed, assessments and orientations emerged). But there was substantial convergence on some of the basic and decisive axes.
With regard to capitalist Europe, since May 1968 the analysis of the Fourth International has emphasised the eruption of a general crisis of the system. There were no important differences on this point, nor on the fact that the dynamic of the situation has placed the problem of the struggle of the working class for power on the agenda. Further, there was general agreement that the strategy for the conquest of power must be an ever greater mobilisation of the masses within a perspective of dual power, i.e. the creation of revolutionary-democratic organs of the workers and other exploited layers, conceived as both instruments with which to break the structure of the bourgeois state and embryos of the future workers state. It is scarcely necessary to recall that the experiences in some countries--particularly Italy in 1969 and Portugal in 1975--have confirmed that here the Fourth International was pointing to real tendencies and not simply harping on the past history of the workers movement, as its detractors have often claimed.
These conceptions entailed, of course, substantial differences with the conceptions of the traditional workers parties. These parties--and here there are no important differences between social-democratic or Socialist parties and Communist parties--rejected the very analysis of a general crisis of the system and hence the prospect of a struggle for the overthrow of that system. Instead they posited reformist-gradualist solutions, either in their traditional social-democratic variants or in the 'new' variants of the 'historic compromise', Union of the Left, or the Moncloa Pact. As for the centrist organisations, their analyses oscillated between catastrophic interpretations heavily permeated with spontantism (the entire problematic of a phase of pre-revolutionary or revolutionary crisis being ignored or reduced to minimum importance) and alternate interpretations not qualitatively different from those of the traditional parties. In practice, they wavered between extremist and sectarian attitudes and bureaucratic manipulation of the mass movement on the one hand, and opportunistic tailendism on the other -- sometimes combining the two.
The requirements of polemical clarification against the reformists and centrists therefore stimulated reflection by revolutionary Marxists on the problems of workers councils and organs of proletarian democracy more generally, of their relationship to the political organisations and the trade unions, and of the role of the latter in a phase of generalised crisis of the system. Here again, the most important material of elaboration was provided by the experiences of the mass movements in Italy and Portugal and, to a lesser extent up to now, Spain.
Even with respect to Latin America, the differences which bitterly divided the Fourth International were quite distinct from those which divided and still divide the Trotskyist movement as a whole from the reformist and centrist organisations. As regards the reformists, the point is rather obvious. But also in the case of the centrists--even the most politically mature of them, like the Chilean MIR and the Argentinian PRT--essential differences were expressed between their conceptions and those of the Trotskyists on problems such as the very nature of the Latin American revolution, the policy of alliances, the stance to adopt towards the traditional workers movement, and the role of the working class itself. Let us recall that in the case of the most political experience for the Latin American working class since the Cuban revolution, that of Popular Unity in Chile, the United Secretariat adopted a unanimous resolution at the end of 1971 (which contained, among other things, a criticism of the MIR, whose themes were later taken up by militants breaking with that organisation). Even with regard to the impetuous upsurge of the Bolivian masses during the first half of 1971, the basic assessments and orientations that emerged within the International were not dissimilar, apart from the persistent polemics on the orientation adopted by the FOR in 1969 and on the consequences of that orientation.
Finally, the differences which persist in the Fourth International in regard to the analysis of the situation and trends in the workers states, particularly China and Vietnam, are now of a more methodological and historical than directly political character. Although no formal decision has yet been made, there is a virtually unanimous consensus that the great struggle of the Vietnamese people has concluded with the establishment of a workers state on a national scale. No less important, the Fourth International has unanimously rejected the widespread illusions and mystifications about the so-called cultural revolution and about Maoism more generally. In particular, the events which have occurred since the early 1970s have furnished unequivocal confirmation of the validity of the basic analysis of the Chinese crisis adopted by the Fourth International back in 1967 and more systematically refined at the 1969 World Congress.
Since 1968 a range of organisations and movements have arisen to the left of the traditional workers parties. Many of these organisations accepted the conceptions and orientations of Maoism, while in Latin America the Castroist or Guevarist influence prevailed. In some countries organisations arose which acquired a relative theoretical and even greater political autonomy, giving rise to new variants of centrism. The most substantial formations of this sort arose in Italy after 1969, in Portugal in 1974 and 1975, and in Spain particularly during the death agony of Francoism. In Latin America a similar role was played by the Chilean MIR and the Argentine PRT (the latter after its break with the Fourth International).
Some people hastily drew the conclusion that others were achieving what the Fourth International had failed to realise in decades of effort -- the construction of revolutionary organisations capable of challenging the traditional workers parties with some success. This conclusion seemed reinforced by the fact that some of these organisations (notably Lotta Continua and Avanguardia Operaia in Italy) had begun to establish international links and even to set up organs to concretise them (such as the Junta Coordinadora established by several Latin American organisations). Ten years on, however, after the tragic experiences in Latin America (from the failure of Che's campaign in Bolivia to the Uruguayan, Chilean, and Argentinian events), and after the events in Portugal in 1975 and in Italy in 1976-77, the balance-sheet is radically different. The Castroite organisations in Latin America have almost completely disappeared and the Junta Coordinadora is no longer.
In Britain the changes have been less dramatic. The class struggle has not reached the same level as in Southern Europe; and the largest far left organisation, the Socialist Workers Party (formerly International Socialists), has maintained far greater elements of classical Marxism in its politics.
Nevertheless, the evolution of the SWP also reflects the processes we have just noted. From 1969-74 it was completely dominant to the left of the Labour Party and Communist Party. However, while in some respects it seemed to be developing towards Trotskyist positions, its politics remained marred by residual syndicalism. By 1974-5 this was leading it to a line with many similarities to that of Avanguardia Operaia in Italy, the PRP-BR in Portugal, the OCT in France, etc. The SWP recognised this by starting to develop organisational links with these groups on alternative positions to those of the Fourth International.
The result was a profound transformation of the SWP. It was unable to draw the lessons of the events in Portugal or of the Labour government's success in imposing its austerity measures on the working class in Britain. It also went through a series of purges and splits with the loss of a large section of its mature political cadres, profoundly altering the composition of the organisation. The SWP's policy of 'steering left' led to a wild ultra-left lurch which saw a sharp contraction in the number of its trade union militants with influence in industry, despite an overall numerical growth of the organisation. New currents have now developed outside the SWP so that, while it is still the largest organisation on the far left, it has lost much of the influence it enjoyed immediately after 1968.
In general, therefore, the last ten years have seen the collapse of attempts to avoid drawing the experiences of the decades of revolutionary activity of the Fourth International. The latter, meanwhile, has continued to grow and develop a genuinely effective presence and influence in the mass movements and trade unions, as the sole alternative to reformism and Euro-centrism, the sole revolutionary pole of international dimensions. It appears, especially in certain countries, as the only organisation capable of offering a response to the increasingly pressing questions being raised by workers and militants who have so far followed the traditional organisations and remain under their influence.
As we have already mentioned, the Fourth International, in the spirit of Leninist democratic centralism, considers tendencies and even factions legitimate instruments of struggle to convince members of orientations and methods considered correct, to impose corrections or changes of line, and to renovate or change leading groups. Nevertheless, tendencies--and factions even more--also entail dangers of degeneration. If they crystallise, and perpetuate themselves, they threaten to assume functions objectively opposite to those for which they were conceived. They can become obstacles to the internal dialectic of the organisation as a whole, preventing rather than ensuring open approaches to new problems that arise, and potentially undermining the normal, statutory bodies. Regardless of subjective intentions, tendency struggles entail a potential split dynamic.
These dangers were not at all imaginary during the long internal struggle in the Fourth International in the 1970s. The consequences of the chronic persistence of divisions were becoming ever greater. Hence the process of reflection which led to the decision of the two major tendencies to dissolve. The premise for this dissolution was not the assumption that there were no longer differences, and still less that none could develop in the future. But in the existing state of affairs the actual differences could be discussed directly through the normal bodies of the organisation without recourse to the instrument of tendency or faction. Certain important convergences had already occurred (on the document on the dictatorship of the proletariat and socialist democracy, for example) and possible future differences--even in view of the coming World Congress--would not necessarily occur along the lines of the previous divisions.
This episode was of considerable significance. To begin with, it was important to establish criteria and modes of functioning, particularly since we are bound to see the formation of other tendencies and factions in the future. Second, it was necessary to refute in practice the argument of our opponents that tendencies and factions cannot be permitted because they paralyse the organisation and inevitably end in splits.
If we make a comparison, for instance, between the practice of the Fourth International and that of nearly all the Maoist organisations-resolute opponents of tendencies and supporters of a mythical conception of unity derived, in reality, from Stalinist bureaucratism--the balance-sheet is clear. The Maoist organisations have proved incapable of confronting the slightest internal differences without bitter clashes and resounding splits (with the usual accusations of betrayal, capitulation to the class enemy, and sell-outs to the various imperialist or 'social-imperialist' spy networks). The Fourth International, on the other hand, has passed the severe test of an internal struggle lasting almost a decade while simultaneously maintaining its united international structure, re-establishing it in the various countries in which splits did occur (Spain, Canada, Australia, Mexico), and strengthening its own leadership.
But to leave the picture here would be one-sided and, in the final analysis, triumphalist. To begin with, the reformist and neo-reformist parties continue to maintain their hegemony over the working class despite the creation of situations objectively favourable to the development of revolutionary struggles, and despite the severe blows for their conceptions and orientations in various countries. No organisation of the Fourth International has succeeded in challenging this hegemony, even in cases where we have made striking progress and have won important positions in the mass movements and organisations.
Secondly, in some important countries of capitalist Europe itself (notably Italy and West Germany), the Fourth International still commands very limited forces and is therefore threatened by recurrent crises. In others, even though we have increased our forces significantly, we still have to deal with organisations that are larger--sometimes much larger--than our own (this is the case in Britain and Portugal, and even in Spain the LCR must reckon with Mao-centrist formations of significant dimensions).
The Fourth International also continues to be absent, or present with only very meagre forces, in a whole series of decisive countries of Asia (India, Indonesia, Thailand, Pakistan, Bangladesh, etc.). Even in Sri Lanka, the leading role of Trotskyist militants in one of the major trade union organisations of the country--the Ceylon Mercantile Union--has not had the necessary extension in the construction of a firmly-grounded section.
In the workers states there is undoubtedly more interest than ever in Trotskyist conceptions and in the Fourth International, to which some nuclei of militants have courageously referred directly (and even publicly, as in the case of Petr Uhl in Czechoslovakia). But we remain well below the threshold of the minimum primitive accumulation of forces required for any effective action in the context of the perspective of an anti-bureaucratic political revolution.
Finally, although the great majority of those claiming allegiance to Trotskyism accept the organisational framework of the United Secretariat, some important organisations with significant influence in both Europe and Latin America remain outside that structure. The case of France is particularly significant. The LCR is probably the organisation with the greatest weight and political prestige, but Lutte Ouvriere and the OCI command significant forces which show no sign of erosion for the moment. This situation, however one evaluates the conceptions and methods of LO and the OCI, constitutes an obstacle to the construction of the revolutionary party which obviously cannot be overcome simply by ignoring it. For the rest, it is not for nothing that there have been repeated attempts to promote a process of unification or convergence between the LCR and LO and that it was decided last year to open a public discussion between the Fourth International and the organisations which, around the OCI, constitute the so-called 'Organising Committee for the Reconstruction of the Fourth International' (OCRFI). The first round of this will be a discussion on Eurocommunism.
On the other hand, one must not overlook other problems which, although they appear to be primarily organisational, are in substance political -- and decisive in the final analysis. For instance, there remain serious delays in the formation of an international leadership team broad enough to reflect the full reality of the organisation on a world scale and to deal with tasks which are mounting geometrically (while our forces are rising only arithmetically). There are similar lags in the construction of homogeneous and stable national leaderships commanding the necessary continuity (this problem has not been resolved even by the stronger sections, and constitutes a substantial handicap not only for the qualitative leaps that are now required but also for the very consolidation of what has already been achieved).
If all these elements are kept in mind, there are certainly no grounds for triumphalist optimism, particularly since the workers movement in this phase of the general crisis of the system faces enormous tasks in many countries. Their accomplishment cannot be postponed indefinitely without provoking extremely serious threats and consequences.
Despite all this, however, it remains true that in the past ten years the Fourth International has made the greatest progress of its entire history. On 27 May 1978 Rouge, the paper of the LCR in France, organised a public meeting, attended by more than 10,000 people, which provided an occasion for a broad discussion on crucial problems among militants and representatives of various tendencies of the workers movement in France and other countries of Western Europe. After months of bitter polemics, members of the Communist and Socialist parties came together on the same platforms for a democratic debate, initiated by an organisation of the Fourth International which intended in this manner to implement the Leninist conception of workers democracy and united front in practice. The Communist Party of Spain was also present. Even more significant was the participation in the discussion -- received by a warm ovation -- of the Soviet 'dissident' Leonid Plyushch, who, despite some of his opinions and attitudes on particular points, genuinely represents the courageous militants struggling against bureaucratic oppression in the degenerated workers states.
The intrinsic importance of the episode need not be emphasised. But the symbolic value was even greater. The Paris gathering synthesised the profound changes that have occurred in the workers movement in recent years and indicated the great potential of the conceptions and methods that constitute the heritage of the Fourth International.
20 December 1978.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch4



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 4: From 1933 to 1938 -- Preparing for the Fourth International


A slight economic recovery occurred from 1933 to 1938, due largely to preparations for a new world war. The spread of fascism in Europe was barely held in check by the mass movements in France (June 1936) and in Spain, where fascism unleashed a civil war that was to end in tragedy for the working masses. In the Far East, Japan embarked on what was to prove a hopeless war against China. In the Soviet Union, execution of the five-year plans was accompanied by a monstrous lowering of the standard of living and suppression of the rights of the working masses, by the extermination of the Bolshevik cadres and the entire revolutionary vanguard. The dissension of the previous years between Socialist and Communist parties was replaced by a policy of 'unity'in order to build 'popular fronts'. This class collaboration with sections of the bourgeoisie had results as disastrous for the cause of socialism as those of the preceding period.
The economic crisis of 1929 had important political consequences, beginning in 1932-33. At the end of 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt became president of the United States. In an effort to revive the economy, he inaugurated the New Deal, which proved favourable to development of the trade union movement in the United States -- in a proletariat hitherto under the sway of craft unionism, where workers in the huge plants had not been organised. The rise of the Congress of Industrial Organisations (CIO) would take care of that. But aside from the United States, this change had no immediate repercussions, the American proletariat's big step forward on the political level still remaining to be taken. No doubt this will be the result of the next great crisis, which in the United States will not necessarily be exclusively economic in origin.
Hitler came to power in Germany early in 1933 as a result of the combination of the policies of the two working class leaderships, reformist and Stalinist. For different reasons and in different ways, both were opposed to united action by the workers. Both engendered inertia, passivity, and lack of resistance in the German proletariat as a whole, in face of the growing Nazi movement. Both acted like competing shopkeepers and placed their interests as opposing cliques above the interests of the class they claimed to represent.
A turn in our general orientation took place when Hitler came to power. We abandoned the struggle to reform the Third International and set our sights on building a Fourth International and new revolutionary parties. This decision was not taken in one stroke. We began in the early months of 1933 by abandoning the struggle to reform the German CP, because it was obvious that a party which had failed in so serious a situation was historically doomed. (See Trotsky's article,'The German Workers Will Rise Again -- Stalinism, Never!') We were waiting to learn the reactions in the other CPs and in the Communist International. These reactions were negligible, and the Executive Committee of the Communist International unanimously approved a report by Heckert endorsing the whole previous Stalinist policy in Germany -- even though, in their heart of hearts, most of the leaderships of the CPs were hostile to these policies. Stalinism had definitively triumphed in the Communist International. As the revolutionary International of the proletariat, the Comintern was dead.
Following this vote of the ECCI, an International Plenum of our movement during the summer of 1933 almost unanimously decided on the change in our international orientation. Until then we had spoken in terms of reforming the Communist International, reforming the Bolshevik Party, and reforming the Soviet state, without always making a distinction among them in our statements. The orientation towards building new revolutionary parties and, by extension, a new party in the USSR, called for a clarification of our position vis-a-vis the Soviet state. At that time we made a careful distinction between reforming the Bolshevik Party, henceforth an impossibility, and the still possible reform of the Soviet state, which remained a proletarian state. Later, in 1935, our point of view developed on this question too, and led to our affirming the necessity of a political revolution in the USSR as a degenerated workers state -- a political, not a social, revolution, because what was needed was not a fundamental change in the Soviet Union's production relations but the destruction of the omnipotence of the bureaucracy and the re-establishment of workers democracy.
We were dealing with a country where property relations were different from those of a capitalist country and corresponded to those of a transitional society towards socialism (collectivisation of the means of production, monopoly of foreign trade, planned economy), but where the working class and the toiling masses were deprived of power and of all democratic rights which could enable them to reform and correct the situation. Trotsky reminded us of the history of bourgeois revolutions, recalling particularly that in spite of all that the great French Revolution had achieved, two more revolutions -- in 1830 and 1848 -- were needed to complete this revolution from the bourgeois point of view. He thought that the October Revolution too would need to be completed by a revolution which would aim not to change the basic property relations but to re-establish socialist democracy in the workers state.

 'The revolution which the bureaucracy is preparing against itself will not be social, like the October revolution of 1917. It is not a question this time of changing the economic foundations of society, of replacing certain forms of property with other forms. History has known elsewhere not only social revolutions which substituted the bourgeois for the feudal regime, but also political revolutions which, without destroying the economic foundations of society, swept out an old ruling upper crust (1830 and 1848 in France, February 1917 in Russia, etc.). The overthrow of the Bonapartist caste will, of course, have deep social consequences, but in itself it will be confined within the limits of political revolution... The proletariat of a backward country was fated to accomplish the first socialist revolution. For this historic privilege, it must, according to all evidences, pay with a second supplementary revolution -- against bureaucratic absolutism.' (Trotsky, Revolution Betrayed, Chapter IX)
Trotsky's idea of a new, political revolution in the Soviet Union remained for long a purely theoretical notion, specific to the Trotskyist movement. With the international crisis of Stalinism, however, this notion has passed from the realm of theory and has begun to be outlined in reality. Thus others as well as Trotskyists have adopted it, although often in a confused fashion.
The preceding period of our history had been chiefly characterised by the grounding of our movement in the bedrock of principle. In the new period, we added to it a large measure of organisational flexibility. At the time of our struggle to reform the Third International, we assiduously separated ourselves from all currents that had an equivocal attitude, no matter how tiny, on this question of reform. But declaring that the Third International was no longer capable of being reformed meant placing on record an enormous setback to revolutionary consciousness, and it was not possible to tell in advance what a new International and new revolutionary parties would be and in what ways they would be established. Certainly we intended to try to gain acceptance for our programme, as being the most complete expression of the proletariat's experience to date; but we could not foresee how we would reach this goal, i.e. what organisational paths the construction of revolutionary parties would follow. Nor could we foresee what the evolution of our relationships with other revolutionary currents in the working class movement would be. Two experiments were made in this regard -- one limited in scope, the other much larger.
The 'Declaration of the Four'


From July-August of 1933, the question of regroupment of the revolutionary forces was placed before us in concrete form following the calling by the British ILP (Independent Labour Party) of a conference open to all organisations outside the Second and Third Internationals, for the purpose of examining the world situation and the situation of the labour movement in light of the Nazi victory. We decided to participate in this conference to make our position known and to try to get together all the organisations that were willing to promulgate -- to the working class of the world the need for a Fourth International. This participation was somewhat similar to that of the Bolsheviks, in other circumstances, at Zimmerwald and Kienthal. The result was the 'Declaration of the Four' -- a document signed by our international organisation, the League of Internationalist Communists; by the German SAP (Sozialistische Arbeiterpartei -- Socialist Workers Party); and by two Dutch organisations, the RSP (Revolutionair-Socialistische Partij -- Revolutionary Socialist Party) and the OSP (Onafhankelijke Socialistische Partij -- Independent Socialist Party).
The SAP consisted of some of the left socialists who, critical of its reformist line, had broken with German Social Democracy in 1931-32. Shortly before Hitler came to power, leadership of the SAP passed into the hands of Walcher and Frölich, two former leaders of the Communist right opposition (Brandlerites) who had broken with the latter to join the SAP. The Dutch OSP corresponded in origin to the German SAP. The RSP was led by Henricus Sneevliet, a Communist leader for many years, who had come into conflict with the Communist International over trade union policy in Holland, where he was an official of the NAS (Nationaal Arbeiders Syndikaat -- National Workers Union), a labour federation that included Communists and anarcho-syndicalists. In his struggle against the latter, Sneevliet had been led to organise his union faction into a political party.
The 'Declaration of the Four' proclaimed the need for a new International, for new revolutionary parties, and defined the main points on which they should be built. While it did not set forth our whole programme, the Declaration did contain our essential points. On a world scale the results of the 'Declaration of the Four' were minimal. In Holland, nevertheless, the two organisations held common rallies, and then merged to form the RSAP (Revolutionair-Socialistische Arbeiderspartij -- Revolutionary Socialist Workers Party). Later this party joined our movement, then split with us during the Spanish revolution, when it supported the POUM (Partido Obrero de Unificacion Marxista -- Workers Party of Marxist Unification). The opposition to this line in the RSAP was based on the youth, led by Sal Santen. During the war, it was these youth who organised the Dutch section of the Fourth International. Sneevliet, who led the RSAP and who broke with the movement for the Fourth International on the question of the war in Spain, nevertheless remained extremely close to us. He died a hero during the war, shot by the Nazis.
As for the leaders of the German SAP who lived in exile, they behaved like inveterate centrists. Shortly after having signed the 'Declaration of the Four', they became the bitterest enemies of Trotskyism and were at the bottom of all the centrist groupings (the London Bureau, etc.) that spread indescribable confusion among the vanguard in the period preceding the Second World War. After the war, Walcher became a functionary in East Germany; Frölich, on the other hand, was a sympathiser of our movement.
The first draft of a transitional programme


Before going into the second experiment, by far the more important in building the revolutionary party, a few words should be said on the political situation resulting from Hitler's accession to power. The Nazi victory cut off the prospect of revolution in Germany for an entire period. Throughout the rest of Europe, reaction was sharply on the rise, but not without resistance. In Austria, where the working class was completely under the influence of the Social Democracy, the clerical reaction, led by Dollfuss, propelled the workers into armed struggle under Social Democratic leadership, and they fought for one week in February 1934. The crushing of the Austrian proletariat by Dollfuss opened the way to the Nazi victory in Austria -- the fascists took power after killing Dollfuss and eliminating his party.
The centre of the European working class movement shifted to France after 1933. Hitler's victory upset the equilibrium established in Europe at Versailles in 1918; this, in turn, laid bare the most formidable crisis in government that France had ever experienced -- a crisis that continues to this day. For the first time, it was apparent to all that France was no longer a first-rate power. To re-establish its position, or rather to maintain it, French capitalism had no other recourse but to lower the standard of living of the masses -- which could only be done by inaugurating a 'strong state'. French capitalism tried to get rid of parliamentary forms by means of the reactionary coup of 6 February 1934. But from the point of view of the bourgeoisie, the blow was struck prematurely. The French working class, literally whipped into action by this blow, awoke to the fascist danger, and there was a great deal of political tension in the country as a result.
Against the growing fascist danger, we advocated a united front of working class organisations in France. But to implement this, a programme of action was needed on the basis of which the working masses could mobilise to extricate themselves from the situation into which capitalism had plunged them. It was in that spring of 1934 that the first Bolshevik-Leninist programme of action was drawn up with Trotsky's collaboration. This document is of interest mainly because it constitutes the very first draft of a transitional programme. The following year, the Belgian comrades drew up a similar programme (against the decree laws in their country), and comrades in other countries followed suit. Thus the Transitional Programme adopted in 1938 by the founding congress of the International, far from being an improvisation, was the fruit of various earlier experiences in the different sections of the International.
As we have said, the French Trotskyist organisation, the Ligue Communiste, waged a systematic campaign for the united front. In the week following 6 February, a united front was established between the Ligue and the Seine Federation of the Socialist Party, which was under the influence of Marceau Pivert. Mass pressure for united action intensified after February 1934. In July of the same year, the Socialist and Stalinist leaderships, forced to respond to the pressure from below, signed a pact for unity in action. This pact did not rest on any concrete revolutionary policy; but the very fact that the two leaderships, who had fought each other so violently for so many years, called on the working class to counterpose a common front to the fascist gangs aroused enormous enthusiasm in the masses.
This pact had another result that concerned us. At the very moment that our campaign for an SP-CP united front was to a certain extent successful, paradoxically enough the consequences of this victory were unfavourable for our organisation. All the sympathetic response we had met with, partly in the CP and much more in the SFIO,[1] which had recruited a substantial number of workers, often former CP members -- all this sympathetic response was lost to us. This was not due to hostility, but rather to a lack of political clarity on the concept of a revolutionary party and the need for such a party -- especially in the united front and to the very strong attraction exercised by the CP-SP united front. Our meetings were no longer attended; our organisation became very much isolated, as it had been before. Inevitably, a crisis developed. We searched for a way out of this isolation; for a way to establish connections with, and links to, a mass movement the likes of which had never before been seen in France and which was growing larger with each passing day; for a way to be with the masses in action.
'Entryism '


Our second big organisational experiment, aimed at building a revolutionary party, took place at this point. In our efforts to move towards a stronger organisation, we were to pass through a stage in which the Trotskyist group would temporarily lose its organisational independence by entering a mass working class party. Trotsky himself raised the question of the Ligue Communiste entering the SFIO. The move was decided on in September-October of 1934. This policy, called entryism, was subsequently extended to other countries. At first it aroused a great deal of disagreement within our international organisation, even causing splits. It was with a great deal of resistance that the October 1934 International Plenum ratified the policy of the French Trotskyists' entering the SFIO. Since then the majority of the organisation has considered this tactic admissible.
For an entire initial period, the activity of the Bolshevik-Leninist Group [2] in the SFIO was conducted with remarkable political clarity. This attracted numerous young people, particularly the whole Jeunesses Socialistes (Socialist Youth) tendency, organised under the name Jeunesses Socialistes Revolutionnaires (Revolutionary Socialist Youth), into the organisation's ranks, thus renewing its membership. On the other hand, our exit from the SFIO while the Popular Front was being organised took place under very unfortunate circumstances, and the split among the Bolshevik-Leninists occurring at that time caused us to lose part of the benefits obtained from our entry.
In other countries, notably Belgium and the United States, entryism had better results. In Belgium, where the organisation had a working class base in the Charleroi Basin, it acquired a strong mass base in the Borinage. In the United States, the Socialist Party never recovered from the blow it suffered when the Trotskyists left.
On the contrary, Nin and Andrade in Spain, who had opposed the entry of the French Trotskyists into the SFIO, did not delay in uniting -- on an incorrect programmatic basis -- with the Worker-Peasant Bloc in Catalonia, thus forming the inveterately centrist POUM.
The rise of fascism and the war


On an international scale, this entire period was dominated by the rise of fascism and the approach of the new imperialist war, despite high peaks of workers' struggles, notably the movements of June 1936 in France and a few other countries, and the civil war in Spain. In the course of this period, three large struggles dominated the activity of our international movement:
1. The struggle against the Popular Front policy, with especial reference to Spain and France. With a tenacity born of desperation, our organisations fought the class collaborationist policy by means of which Stalinists and social-democrats -- this time united, not divided -- prepared the worst of catastrophes for the working class movement. The Popular Front constituted the first big period of class collaboration for the Stalinists. On that occasion, however, they were not (except in a very limited fashion in Spain) seeking ministerial posts. This came later, and became widespread in another period of class collaboration by the Stalinists -- the period following the close of World War II.
The united front and the Popular Front incorporate two very opposite conceptions. Since the Third Congress of the Communist International in 1921, the united front has meant the unity in action of big working class organisations to achieve more or less extended common aims. Before 1933 the Trotskyists advocated the united front between the CP and the Social Democrats in Germany against the rise of Nazism. The united front of the mass organisations of the working class is a generally positive fact -- if, however, the revolutionary yeast can act in it. This is never the case with the Popular Front, which is a political combination -- a bloc of working class reformist parties with wings of the bourgeoisie. In these cases the bloc is realised on a bourgeois programme, a class collaborationist programme.
The Stalinists justify such a line by pretending that the working class must not isolate itself from the petty bourgeoisie, that it must not frighten it by socialist demands and aims, by the use of force, etc. The aim of the Popular Front policy, according to the Stalinist~, is to cajole the petty bourgeoisie, to accustom it to march with the workers parties, and to create a broader and broader 'democracy' finally culminating in socialism.
All these arguments are wrong. One should not identify the petty bourgeoisie with parties -- like the Radical Party in France which are capitalist parties whose electoral base is made up of the petty bourgeoisie. It is not true that the working class becomes more attractive by diluting its programme. It is not true that the Petty bourgeoisie is essentially parliamentarist, electoralist, hostile to force. The example of the Nazis in Germany shows this only too well. The Nazis used the most brutal force and a 'socialist' demagogy, not fearing in the slightest to put the word 'socialist' in the name of their party. The petty bourgeoisie cannot be attracted by sweet words. This social layer has no political stability; it is attracted by those who show strength. Every worker who has been on strike has a clear experience of this. When strikers are determined, small shopkeepers often sympathise with them; when they are hesitant, undecided, the latter immediately turn against them. The Popular Fronts never ceased to be characterised by their hesitations and their softness, owing to the presence and pressure of bourgeois politicians. The working class can only win a section of the middle classes to its side, and neutralise another section, by being strong, decided and determined.
2. The struggle against centrism. This struggle was characterised by a denunciation of the policy of the London Bureau and centrist organisations such as the Spanish POUM, the English ILP, the German SAP, and the Norwegian NAP.[3] The struggle against centrism also required entering the PSOP[4] -- an unhappy experience because of the French Trotskyist movement's state of disintegration at the time.
In Marxist literature, the characterisation 'centrist' is applied to all tendencies or groups that fluctuate between revolutionary Marxism and reformism. Some very diverse organisations are thus included in this category. There have even been some mass organisations of a centrist nature, for example, the Independent Socialist Party of Germany (USPD -- Unabhtingige Sozialistische Partei Deutschlands), which broke with the Social Democracy during the First World War and part of which participated in forming the German Communist Party in 1920.
The struggle against centrism is one of the most difficult and yet essential tasks of revolutionary Marxists. Reformism has an unmistakable shape, and the struggle against it is comparatively easy -- at least with working class militants who do not rely only on day-to-day demands, especially in periods when capitalist contradictions are crudely revealed. Centrism, however, needs more than theoretical denunciations in order to be fought efficiently. To carry out this task requires very great flexibility, because centrism takes the most varied and oscillating forms. It easily adopts a revolutionary vocabulary, mostly adopted from Marxism, but its actions usually fail to correspond with its words. It should not be forgotten that Kautsky's centrism dominated the Second International for twenty years, and it took August 1914 for Lenin himself to grasp it thoroughly. And for many years the Communist parties, before they became completely bogged down in reformism, followed a centrist policy which duped very large sections of the masses.
Centrist currents often go out to win large sections of the masses by offering short cuts, throwing overboard part of the revolutionary Marxist programme. Not to believe in short cuts, to defend the revolutionary Marxist programme as a whole, is regarded as evidence of 'sectarianism' by the centrists. But up to now no victorious revolution has travelled such a road; and, far from having proved the necessity to simplify revolutionary Marxism, the experience has enriched it. This will be even more true for the victory of socialist revolutions in countries with a more developed economy and much more complex social structures. No-one will triumph with a second-hand programme, with leaderships unable to answer the more complex problems raised by revolutions in such countries. It may perhaps be more tempting, in the light of the difficulties encountered by the Trotskyist movement, to set out on a seemingly shorter road with a lighter theoretical and political burden. But all those who have acted thus -- and there have been many of them in half a century -- have come to nothing. They have only hindered the process of building revolutionary parties and disoriented numerous militants, particularly when the weakness of the Trotskyist organisations prevented them from vigorously opposing these centrist experiences.
In the period preceding the Second World War, these small centrist groupings sought to break the masses away from the old parties, without, however, developing a cohesive programme as a basis for a new, revolutionary International (that's what they called the'sectarianism' of the Trotskyists!). They did not, of course, attain their objective. But they did succeed -- and that was their main activity -- in raising all kinds of obstacles to theoretical and political clarification among the vanguard militants who were disgusted with the old parties and disoriented by a terrible decline in the working class movement. During the Second World War, the London Bureau showed no sign of life. The same held true for the SAP and the PSOP. In England, the ILP was nothing more than an empty husk.
3. The struggle against the Moscow trials was one of physical defence, a struggle, literally, for the very existence of our movement, a struggle against an avalanche of slander, of frame-ups, of widespread brutality and Stalinist crimes against Trotskyist militants, in a whole series of countries outside the Soviet Union. (In France, Leon Sedov, Rudolf Klement; in Spain, Erwin Wolf, Moulin; in Switzerland, Ignace Reiss.)
From 1936 to 1938, three big trials took place in Moscow, in which the role of prosecuting attorney was played by the ex-Menshevik Vishinsky, who became foreign minister after the war. In the first trial, the defendants (Zinoviev, Kamenev, I.N. Smirnov, etc.) 'confessed' to having plotted against Stalin out of greed for power. In the second trial, the defendants (among whom were Pyatakov and Yagoda, organiser of the first trial) 'confessed' that they and the defendants in the preceding trial had conspired to re-establish capitalism in the Soviet Union. In the third trial, the accused (Bukharin, Rakovsky, etc.) 'confessed' that they all, including those executed following the previous trials, had for a long time been spies in the service of the (German) Gestapo, the (British) Intelligence Service, the Mikado, etc. In addition to these 'trials', this period saw the execution, also as plotters, of the most important heads of the Red Army (Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, Putna, etc.).
In all these trials, the main defendants were Trotsky and his son Leon Sedov. Trotsky was pictured as a counter-revolutionary agent -- from time immemorial! These trials served to prepare the groundwork for the assassination of Trotsky and Leon Sedov and for the liquidation of the Bolshevik Old Guard who, in the difficult period of the war then looming on the horizon, could have become the centre of a revolutionary opposition to the Stalinist faction. Despite our campaigns, despite the irrefutable evidence placed before the Dewey Commission[5] proving that these trials were infamous political machinations, Stalin attained his objectives -- with the seal of approval of representatives of American big business, such as Ambassador John E. Davies.
This period as a whole was characterised by great demoralisation in the vanguard of a working class more and more on the downgrade. For our movement, the most painful example of this was the fragmentation of the French Trotskyists, which reached such a state that at one point the International declared it could no longer accept responsibility for their actions.

* * * * *


In 1936 an international conference of supporters of the Fourth International was held. Trotsky wanted the birth of the Fourth International announced then and there, but his proposal was not accepted by the conference, which called itself merely 'Movement for the Fourth International'.

Footnotes
[1] 'Section Francaise de l'Internationale Ouvritre -- French Section of the Second International, official name of the Socialist Party.
[2] The name adopted by the Trotskyist organisation when it joined the Socialist Party.
[3] The NAP (Norsk Arbeiderpartiet -- Norwegian Labour Party) was a mass party that broke with the London Bureau and subsequently fulfilled the traditional social-democratic role in Norway.
[4] The PSOP (Parti Socialiste Ouvrier et Paysan -- Workers and Peasants Socialist Party) was formed by the 'revolutionary left' tendency in the SFIO, which Blum expelled when the Popular Front fell apart. The PSOP was led by Marceau Pivert, who joined the 'old house' after the war and became an assiduous anti-Trotskyist.
[5] A commission of socialist-minded and liberal intellectuals formed to investigate the charges against Trotsky made in the Moscow trials of 1936-37. It was headed by John Dewey, the most reputable bourgeois philosopher and educator in the United States, and brought in a not-guilty verdict for Trotsky.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch7



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 7: Splits and Reunification (1953-68)


At the Third Congress, no principled differences had appeared within the International, such as the disagreement on the class nature of the Soviet Union that had in earlier years torn the movement. Apparently the International was united; the opponents of the congress's theses in the French section (who were subsequently to form the Internationalist Communist Organisation [Organisation Communiste Internationaliste -- OCI] placed the emphasis in their attacks on the tactical conclusions, in which they saw a capitulation to Stalinism, rather than on the analysis itself, only certain parts of which, generally speaking, they criticised.
The 1953-54 split


The error in perspective discussed above would not in itself have caused a split; besides, nobody had proposed any other perspective. Nevertheless, two years after the congress, a split occurred on an international scale, preceded about a year before by a split in the French section.
How can the split be explained? As already indicated, we were on the threshold of an unexpected development, the outcome of which was not clear. It is, therefore, not too surprising to realise, after the fact, that the congress's quasi-unanimity really masked divergent positions and tendencies which had not been expressed, not because of lack of democracy in the organisation, but because the situation was so unclear. The divisions that subsequently surfaced, not only in the form of splits but also inside each of the groupings resulting from the splits, attest to that. With this as a basis, two other factors played an important, if not decisive, role. To begin with, the theses adopted by the congress had not been assimilated by the sections, their leaderships included. It was only with the advent of the split that the situation became completely clear to the leadership of the International. The latter had not at all been aware of this state of affairs; it did not have a clear view of the condition of the organisation as a whole; and it realised all this, belatedly and to its very great surprise, only in 1953, when preparations were being made for the next congress.
In the months following the Third World Congress, relationships between the International and the majority of the French section, which kept refusing to implement the congress's decisions, deteriorated to such an extent that in the middle of 1952 a split took place in the PCI. This split was not to end there: the two organisations claiming to be the French section of the Fourth International soon had their own splits. Disciplinary measures were taken by the International, with the approval of those who, the very next year, would join with those who had been expelled to form the International Committee.
Somewhat later, extremely violent differences erupted in the British section, which, by dint of its systematic work, had made palpable progress inside the Labour Party. So intense was the disagreement that a split took place even before the respective positions were clearly established.
The decisive factor in the split was an internal crisis within the Socialist Workers Party (SWP), the American Trotskyist organisation. At that time the situation in the United States was growing more and more difficult for the vanguard. McCarthyism was on the rise. While a majority of the American organisation maintained fundamental Trotskyist positions, a strong minority was searching for a new path. Without stating its essential positions -- at least in those of its published documents known to the International -- this minority seized upon the Third World Congress's theses and subsequent documents of the International (particularly a discussion document on Stalinism, drawn up in preparation for the next world congress) as weapons in its fight against the majority of the American organisation.
When this internal struggle ended in a split, the majority of the SWP blamed the leadership of the International, with which it disagreed at the time on the question of 'de-Stalinisation'. Moreover, the political differences were overlaid with organisational and even personal suspicions. Finally, there was practically no personal contact, no person-to-person exchange of views, during this period. Thus, without being preceded by an extensive political discussion in the international movement, a split occurred on an international scale. A minority established the 'International Committee of the Fourth International'. As for the SWP minority, no sooner did it break away from the party than it publicly expressed liquidationist positions and openly fought the Fourth International.
The McCarthyism just referred to subjected the SWP to a great deal of pressure and led the party's leadership, embroiled in a fight against the liquidationist current, to resist what it considered dangerous innovations. This happened in 1953 when, immediately after Stalin's death, the first 'de-Stalinisation' measures were taken in the Soviet Union. In preparation for the next world congress (the decision to call this congress had been taken in May 1953), the leadership of the International had prepared a document, 'The Rise and Decline of Stalinism', which, in a way the leadership had not expected, sparked the powder keg. Since this document was adopted at the Fourth World Congress and completed at the Fifth, we shall analyse it later. However, we must say here and now that it excited more than fear in the comrades who were going to form the International Committee: they saw in it a capitulation to Stalinism, the liquidation of the Fourth International, and 'Pabloism'.
This split was by far the most serious of all for the Fourth International. Although all the groups and all the people who have through the years left the organisation cannot be considered lost to us for all time, the other splits proved, by their nature and in actual fact, to be rather splits away from the Trotskyist movement. On the other hand, this split was in fact primarily a division of the movement itself into two parts, one continuing the International and the other organised in a committee that acted as a faction. This split profoundly affected the life and development of both sides. Actually, it had the effect, among others, of injecting into the International, into the part continuing the organisation as well as the other, both a disequilibrium and a reinforcement of the centrifugal forces -- during a period which was replete with powerful forces placing unequal degrees of pressure on various sectors of the movement. Ail this certainly resulted in reinforcing the heterogeneous character of certain tendencies, as well as reducing the authority of the organisation as such and of its centre. During the years of this split, members and groups of the international Trotskyist movement experienced developments that were by no means inevitable. Had this split (which, in our opinion, was not unavoidable) not taken place, the International would have been able to reach the overall appraisal of the post-war world that it acquired at the reunification perhaps faster and certainly in a less costly way.
The Fourth and Fifth World Congresses (1954 and 1957)


Preparations for the Fourth World Congress as well as the congress itself were dominated by the split that had occurred in the meantime. Representatives from twenty-one countries participated in the congress, which was held in July 1954. The congress devoted part of its time to a small group that had waged a violent struggle against supporters of the International Committee but which, right after the split, turned its fire just as violently against the International. This group considered the struggle to create new revolutionary parties unnecessary, did not even stay until the congress adjourned, and then rapidly fell apart.
The most important task facing the congress consisted in subjecting the positions adopted at the previous congress to a thoroughgoing reappraisal. Two principal documents were adopted. One dealt with integrating the Trotskyists into bona fide mass movements and reviewed the revolutionary conditions of the era and the essential task of building mass revolutionary Marxist parties. For this purpose, the document insisted on the necessity of merging with the masses in action, not in programme. It brought out what was happening within the mass organisations, and pointed out the necessity for the Trotskyist organisations to choose a field of work in these organisations -- it being understood that reforming them was not the question. To the main considerations, the document added considerations appropriate for applying the tactic in various countries.
The other document, presented by Ernest Mandel, was entitled 'The Rise and Decline of Stalinism'. Since it was taken up again and completed at the following congress, we shall come back to it later.
The Fourth Congress served mainly to put a brake on the consequences of the split, to effect a regroupment against the centrifugal tendencies let loose by the split, to consolidate the organisation in the wake of the blow it had just suffered. The congress also adopted a resolution declaring the re-establishment of unity in the Trotskyist movement both possible and desirable, and authorising the International Executive Committee elected at this congress to contact the non-represented organisations -- those of the International Committee -- in order to apprise them of the congress's position on the question of unity.
Shortly after the Fourth Congress, the situation in the International began to improve somewhat, helped in large measure by developments in the international situation.
Beginning in 1955, an unexpected turn in the economic conjuncture became apparent in the advanced capitalist countries. Prosperity began to settle in. This turn called for analysis, and in October 1955 the International Executive Committee provided an initial appraisal. The IEC noted the radical change in the economic conjuncture, the economic prosperity that had been appearing for over a year. The IEC gave a description rather than a theoretical analysis of this phenomenon, and was somewhat cautious as to perspectives.
The most important factor in improving the movement's condition was developments in the Soviet Union and in the workers states of Eastern Europe. In the former, a struggle was going on inside the leadership that had taken over at Stalin's death. Beria was the first to be eliminated. Then Malenkov had to give way to the Bulganin-Khrushchev team. The struggle was to continue for almost another two years. The crisis at the summit, the concessions made by the leadership, opened possibilities for expressing nonconformist views in what had for so long been the citadel of monolithism. And then came 1956 -- the year of the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU, the year of the Polish and Hungarian events. At a closed session of the Twentieth Congress, Khrushchev had delivered a report on the 'Personality Cult of Stalin', in which he denounced many of Stalin's crimes. Khrushchev was not inquiring into the origin of the Stalinist phenomenon; on the contrary, this report sacrificed Stalin as an individual in order to save the power of the bureaucracy. In Poland, strikes followed by a mass movement brought Gomulka, one of Stalin's victims, to the leadership of the party and the state. In Hungary, faced with the breadth of the mass mobilisation and the indecisive attitude of Imre Nagy, the Kremlin repressed the mass movement by a bloody intervention of the Soviet army.
Elsewhere, in the arena of the colonial revolution, hardly had the war between French imperialism and the Vietminh been ended by the Geneva Agreements in July 1954, when the Algerian war began (November 1954). Likewise in 1956 came the Suez crisis, in which the governments of France and Great Britain intervened militarily in collusion with Israel against Egypt, following the nationalisation of the Suez Canal. Under the joint pressure of Washington and the Kremlin, France and Great Britain had to end their military intervention.
All the sections of the International were engaged in two kinds of activity. First of all, they intervened in the international crisis of Stalinism and the Communist parties, which was expressed mainly among students and intellectuals inside those parties but which also reached working class layers. In addition, many sections co-operated more and more in helping the Algerian revolution and, more generally, the colonial revolution.
On the whole this period witnessed a new start for the sections, a certain amount of recruiting, a growing confidence due to the fact that, for the first time, all the things we had been saying about Stalinism for so long in an essentially theoretical way were being verified in actuality on an already considerable scale. Besides a still limited recruitment, the organisation had a wider audience, and its political authority was reinforced. Under these conditions, preparations for the Fifth World Congress got under way in November 1956. This congress was to have an entirely different character from that of its predecessor.
In the course of preparing for the congress, an attempt at rapprochement with the International Committee was made, with a view to reunification in line with the decision of the Fourth Congress. In the wake of the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU, it appeared from a reading of the publications, especially those of the SWP, that differences on the USSR and 'de-Stalinisation' had diminished. This attempt at rapprochement failed, mainly because distrust on the organisational level persisted.
The Fifth Congress, in October 1957, assembled about a hundred delegates and observers from twenty-five countries. Among the fraternal delegates were representatives of the Algerian fighters.
The march of events had permitted far more light to be shed on the problems posed by the post-war upheavals. Three essential questions were dealt with by the congress, the conclusions reached appearing in the following documents: 'Economic Perspectives and International Policies';'Colonial Revolution Since the End of the Second World War';'Rise, Decline, and Fall of Stalinism'.
The document entitled 'Economic Perspectives and International Policies', presented by Michel Pablo, started off with a thorough discussion of the causes for the unexpected prosperity in the United States and Western Europe. It explained the 'anti-crisis' methods employed by the capitalist states, the role of consumer credit, the public debt, etc. The document went on to explain that the devices used by capitalism to obtain its much vaunted results would eventually bring about increasingly frequent recessions, technological unemployment, and a long-range depreciation of money.
On the economy of the workers states, the document noted its prodigious growth and pointed out that these countries, which had until then stressed the production of capital goods, usually without taking production costs into consideration, would (for social reasons) have to expand their production of consumer goods and would also have to 'rationalise' their economy. Far from advocating solutions such as those presently prescribed by reformers such as Liberman, Trapeznikov, Sik, etc., the document emphasised the basic role of workers democracy, not only as a political factor but as indispensable for development in the economic area.
This document also stressed the fact that although the colonial countries were making economic progress in terms of absolute figures, they were actually regressing in a relative sense compared to other countries; that the result of this would be a growing impoverishment of the colonial masses and consequently the continuation of the objective conditions that were fanning the flames of colonial revolution.
As to the class struggle in the capitalist countries, the document stated that while the economic conjuncture did not allow for revolutionary struggles in the immediate future, in certain countries it could not fail to give rise to trade union struggles linked to the various phases of the economic cycle.
The congress's document on the colonial revolution, presented by Pierre Frank, stressed the fact that it was the dominant feature of the post-war period; it had upset all the perspectives that had been made since the origin of the working class movement, even those made after the October Revolution, because all the perspectives had been based on the victory of the revolution in the West before it could triumph in the East. The document pointed out that the colonial revolution could triumph only as a permanent revolution; that it was thus an integral part of the world revolution; that it constituted at a given stage the link between October and the victory of the world revolution. The document went on to a detailed study of the colonial movements, of the nature of their leaderships (particularly those of a pronounced Bonapartist character), of the policy of the imperialists and of the different workers states (USSR, China) with respect to colonial countries and colonial movements. The document examined the respective roles of the proletariat and the peasantry in the colonial countries. Already emphasised was the importance of guerrilla warfare in colonial countries, not only as a military factor but also as a factor in the organisation and political education of the masses. The congress insisted on the necessity for the Trotskyist movement, especially for the sections in the imperialist countries, to devote a large part of its activity to aiding the colonial revolution.
The Fifth Congress went back to the document 'The Rise and Decline of Stalinism' adopted by the preceding congress and added another section to it entitled 'The Decline and Fall of Stalinism'. The completed document, presented by Ernest Mandel, constitutes one of the most exhaustive texts extant on Stalinism, the workers states, and the Communist parties. Its point of departure is the great historical stages since the October Revolution: the rise in the revolutionary tide from 1917 to 1923, the decline from 1923 to 1943, the new rise beginning in 1943. It reviews the objective conditions surrounding Stalin's rise in the Soviet Union and the Stalinisation of the Communist parties (isolation and backwardness of the Soviet state, decline of the world revolution) and counterposes the objective conditions of the new situation: the existence of several workers states, the USSR become the second world power, the revolutionary rise throughout the world. Thus it clearly sets forth the conditions underlying the crisis of Stalinism. It demonstrates that henceforth there can be no danger, except in the highly improbable case of defeat in a world war, of a restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union. The crisis of Stalinism should consequently result in a confrontation between the bureaucracy and the proletariat. The document characterises the 'de-Stalinisation' measures as measures of the self-defence -- not self-liquidation -- of the bureaucracy, showing that those in power are hoping, through these measures, to find a wider base in the bureaucracy itself and to satisfy some of the crying needs of the masses. That part of the document written after the events of 1956 contained an erroneous perspective: it envisaged a sharpening of the crisis of Stalinism in the immediate future. It did not foresee the period that may be called 'reformist', which followed the elimination of the 'anti-party group' by Khrushchev in 1957 and which lasted about ten years. Finally, the document outlined a programme of transitional demands for the political revolution, starting from the demands Trotsky had already formulated in the 1938 Transitional Programme, taking into account the data furnished by the new conditions in the Soviet Union and by the Polish and Hungarian events of 1956. The document devotes considerable space to the crisis in the Communist parties, both in the workers states and in the capitalist countries. The subsequent development of the Sino-Soviet dispute would renew this subject and intensify its importance.
The discussions at the Fifth Congress were broad in scope; certain points were strongly debated by various delegates, but there was no tendency struggle. The International had largely recovered; it came out, once again unanimously, in favour of reunification of the international movement. But underneath the unity shown at the congress, new crises were brewing. Friction could already be felt in the International's leadership.
Crises and regroupments (the Sixth World Congress)


The 1953 split had brought the North American movements, among others, into conflict with the International. This resulted in a dangerous disequilibrium within the organisation, where the Asian representation was relatively limited; where, as would later be realised, the Ceylonese section had started to degenerate; and where the European sections were working under increasingly unfavourable conditions, in an atmosphere of growing political apathy. The European sections were, of course, going to devote a large part of their activity to helping the Algerian revolution; but, important as this activity was, it involved only a limited, often not very proletarian, group of people who were sympathetic to the colonial revolution but many of whom had defeatist feelings about a socialist revolution in advanced capitalist countries. There was a striking contrast between what was happening in the colonial countries and the almost complete political stagnation in Europe. In the colonial countries, even when the mass movement suffered defeat, it made a very quick recovery; the revolution was victorious in Black Africa in 1960; it was going to triumph as a socialist revolution in Cuba, in the very jaw of imperialism. In Europe, on the other hand, with the accession to power of de Gaulle in 1958, the proletariat was going to suffer its most severe defeat since the end of the war.
Another phenomenon of major importance also having repercussions in the Trotskyist movement was the Sino-Soviet dispute.
These events affected not only the Fourth International but also that part of the Trotskyist movement regrouped around the International Committee. There, too, various differentiations were taking place. Thus, through a process involving both differentiation and regroupment, the reunification of the International was being prepared. But meanwhile, prior to the Sixth Congress, a serious crisis began to ripen in the International.
Within the International's leadership, divergent points of view became evident, in the first place on tactical problems concerning the European sections that were devoting the major portion of their activity to helping colonial revolutions. Tendencies appeared that considered any effort by the European sections to deal with problems in their respective countries as of little or no value. These tendencies were a reflection in our movement of those currents that had lost all hope in the working class of the European countries; they had been seriously reinforced, especially in France, following de Gaulle's accession to power. The defeat had been a severe one for the working class: the Communist Party had suffered its first big electoral defeat in the second half of 1958, losing a million and a half votes to de Gaulle. Some regarded aid to the colonial revolution not as a task whose importance was determined by the current political conjuncture, but rather as the only thing possible, the proletarian revolution in Europe having been struck off the agenda for a very long period -- if not forever.
In the leadership of the International, a kind of agreement took place at that time between Michel Pablo and Juan Posadas. They united against the 'Europeans' and the members of the international leadership who did not want to abandon political activity within the European mass movement, even though that movement was generally at a very low level of militancy. The early outlines of tendency formations appeared towards the end of 1959, when the International Executive Committee decided to convoke the next world congress. While the documents were in the course of preparation, comrades Pablo and Santen were imprisoned in Amsterdam and prosecuted for their aid to the Algerian revolution. The organisation reacted to these arrests and waged a big campaign for the defence of its members, a campaign linked to the defence of the Algerian revolution.
The arrests gave Posadas the opportunity to launch a violent faction fight against the majority of the members of the international leadership. He mobilised all his forces in Latin America to obtain a majority at the congress. He pretended to be Pablo's spokesperson, and it was at this time that his positions and his statements began to become more and more extravagant. So extreme was his behaviour at the congress that a small group of comrades, forerunners of the Pablo tendency, dissociated themselves from Posadas despite sympathy for his positions. Defeated at the congress, Posadas pursued the struggle inside the International for a few months; then suddenly, shortly before Pablo was set free, he attacked the latter publicly in the Latin American organs available to him and broke with the International.
The Sixth Congress, held early in 1961, had a hundred participants from about thirty countries. Because of the fierce and bitter -- and politically impoverished -- struggle waged by the Posadas faction, the discussions did not allow the International to make any real progress in its thinking; on several occasions it was necessary to refute rather primitive statements on the constant and uninterrupted rise of the revolution and the total inability of capitalism to take measures capable, not of halting the revolutionary thrust, but of containing it for a time. But the documents ratified by the congress were not without importance.
The document on the world economic situation, presented by Ernest Mandel, noted the economic growth in the workers states, particularly China's appearance on the world scene as an industrial power. At the same time, the document refuted Khrushchev's claims, widely believed in that period, to the effect that the USSR would rapidly surpass the USA on the economic plane. As to the capitalist states, the document restated the explanations already supplied on the causes of the 'boom' and expanded them in various areas, especially those related to the proliferation of technological innovation. The document further pointed out the possibilities and the limits of the European Common Market, which was then becoming operative. As to the colonial countries, the document stressed their economic stagnation, if not headlong regression, and stated that economic aid -- whether from capitalist or workers states -- would be insufficient to remedy this state of affairs and thus would not undermine the objective causes giving powerful impetus to the colonial revolution.
The document on the colonial revolution, presented by Livio Maitan, made a special study of the situation in a certain number of colonial zones or colonial countries. A great deal of space was allotted to the Algerian revolution, whose conquest of independence for the country, already discernible, loomed on the horizon. A special resolution was devoted to Cuba, retracing the revolutionary process that had culminated only a short time before in making the island a workers state, the first in the Western hemisphere.
A document on Stalinism, presented by Pierre Frank, noted the 'reformist' character of the period that followed the 1953-57 unrest, and the new contradictions that were beginning to take shape in the workers states. The document also made a study of the new contradictions to which the Communist parties were subject. It pointed out the compromise between the Chinese and Soviet leaderships embodied in the text adopted several weeks earlier by the Moscow Conference of 81 Communist and Workers parties, and concluded that this compromise could not be a lasting one, that the Sino-Soviet crisis would inevitably erupt again.
This was the first congress since 1948 at which the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (Ceylonese section of the Fourth International) was not represented, and its absence was of great concern to the congress. The LSSP had suffered an electoral defeat in March 1960, completely dashing the optimistic prospects it had envisaged and had led the International to share. Instead of moving on to a thorough examination of the causes for this error in analysis and perspective, as the International -- in its internal documents addressed to the LSSP -- attempted to have it do, the leadership of the LSSP had adopted a clearly opportunistic line that the International could not approve. In a public declaration, the Secretariat of the International had dissociated itself from the LSSP's line. The Sixth Congress adopted a resolution, which it made public, disapproving the policy followed by the LSSP after the latter's electoral defeat. The resolution especially criticised the LSSP's vote in favour of the budget of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party bourgeois government, and called on the Ceylonese section to correct its line.
Meanwhile Posadas and his faction (which kept losing ground in Latin America) noisily proclaimed that they supported Pablo, even denying that their faction was separate and distinct from his. Suddenly, after the congress and about two months before Pablo was released from jail, Posadas unleashed a public attack in Latin America against him. Why this unexpected attack -- an attack that surprised Pablo himself at the time it occurred? It soon became clear that even if they were in agreement against those they called the 'Europeans' -- meaning Ernest Mandel, Livio Maitan, Pierre Frank -- and subsequently the 'North Americans', they were absolutely opposed to each other on the question of the Sino-Soviet dispute. This question affected the Trotskyist movement considerably, as well as the working class and mass movements as a whole.
During 1959-60, when the Sino-Soviet conflict began to be publicly revealed as a conflict between two parties in which political differences were of prime importance, the International almost unanimously reacted by giving critical support to the Chinese, whose positions on a certain number of basic questions (colonial revolution, peaceful and parliamentary roads to socialism, peaceful co-existence) were progressive compared to those of the Soviet leadership. At the Sixth Congress, right after the conference of the 81 Communist and Workers parties at which the Chinese and Soviet leaderships had arrived at a compromise, the International was unanimous in its analysis of the Sino-Soviet dispute. In a letter to the congress, Pablo wrote from his prison cell:'Independently of the inevitable ups and downs of this crisis -- the Sino-Soviet dispute -- and independently of the possible smoothing over of differences, the break between the correctly characterised opportunistic right wing [the Soviet leadership] and the centrist-leaning wing [the Chinese] can be considered deep and lasting...'
But towards the middle of 1961, differing opinions on the Sino-Soviet dispute appeared in the International. After having broken with the International, Posadas not only identified his positions almost completely with those of the Chinese, but even declared that he had inspired them. It is common knowledge that Moscow, by distorting certain of Mao Tse-tung's statements on atomic weapons, made every effort to accuse him, falsely, of wanting nuclear war. But Posadas had no qualms about pushing matters to extreme absurdity, claiming it was necessary for the USSR to launch a preventive nuclear war to assure the triumph of the world revolution. He also picked up the Chinese attacks against Castro and even added to them. While the great majority within the International upheld its positions, Pablo completely reversed his viewpoint. He identified the Chinese positions with Stalinism, and gave almost uncritical support to Khrushchev and especially the Yugoslavs.
The international Committee


A history of the Fourth International must, of course, include the history of the organisations comprising the International Committee and that of the International Committee itself. On this, we apologise for not being able to supply more than brief notes. The primary difficulty stems from the fact that the International Committee really functioned not as a centralised organisation but as a faction with loose ties among its members. According to information supplied by comrades who took part in the International Committee, there were few international meetings of the committee, political positions often being formulated, in the form of documents from national sections, after exchanges of views between the committee's sections. Consequently, after reviewing the conditions mentioned earlier under which the International Committee was formed, we shall deal here with the circumstances that brought it to reunification.
We had said that originally there were political differences, particularly in connection with evaluating the meaning of 'de-Stalinisation' when that process began. There were also suspicions about the role of the international centre in the crisis that divided the Socialist Workers Party in the United States in 1953. For various reasons there had been no clarification of this subject. For some years these suspicions, aimed at Pablo in particular, were a serious obstacle to any rapprochement. But beginning in 1956, the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU and the Sino-Soviet dispute brought the positions of the two groups closer on the question of the crisis of Stalinism.
Moreover, on the problems of the colonial revolution, members and sympathisers of the International Committee, especially those in North America and Latin America, underwent an experience with the Cuban revolution that was in many respects similar to the Fourth International's experience with the Algerian revolution.
In the International Committee, too, while the majority adopted positions converging with those of the majority of the International, there was a minority that was to hold differing and clearly opposed positions. This led to a split in the International Committee when the reunification took place. That committee's British and French groups, the Socialist Labour League (SLL) and the Organisation Communiste Internationaliste (OCI) respectively, while not holding identical positions on all questions, nevertheless agreed to reject the above-mentioned points of view and adopted ultra-left positions.
For them the colonial revolution does not exist. Colonial countries are capitalist countries -- which is true -- and consequently, without a really proletarian and revolutionary Marxist leadership, there can be no socialist revolution in these countries, only betrayal of the mass movements. The SLL (now the Workers Revolutionary Party) and the OCI have a limited understanding of the peasantry in these countries, identifying it with the relatively well-off peasantry in Western Europe. Although claiming to adhere to Trotskyism, they do not understand the permanent character of the revolution in these countries. When the revolution triumphed in Cuba, they refused to recognise it. A declaration of the National Committee of the SLL stated that in Cuba there had been 'a political revolution that has transferred power from the hands of one bourgeois class to another sector of that same class....Thus we have Kemal Ataturk, Chiang Kai-shek, Nasser, Nehru, Cardenas, Peron, Ben Bella -- and Castro'. 'Castro's regime has not created a new type of state', qualitatively different from the Batista regime. Even now, at this date, the WRP still considers Cuba a bourgeois state, and Castro a leader of the same stripe as Batista and Chiang Kai-shek !
As to de-Stalinisation, these groups almost completely deny the processes that have taken place in the Soviet Union since Stalin's death. They consider that acknowledging the existence of liberalisation measures is a 'capitulation' to Stalinism. They are incapable of differentiating between the 'liberalisation' that has taken place to a certain degree and 'democratisation' -- which does not exist at all.
In fact, in their eyes no profound changes have occurred in the world since 1938, when the Fourth International was founded and the Transitional Programme adopted. They hold on to every letter of it in an extremely rigid fashion, and denounce as capitulators those Trotskyists who have tried to understand the new conditions of our times and to define a revolutionary Marxist policy appropriate to these new conditions.
The International Reunited


A relatively prolonged period of crises and splits may prove to be a prelude to a period of reunification. All the great events of the epoch -- 'de-Stalinisation', the Sino-Soviet conflict, colonial revolutions -- had not only resulted in dividing the Trotskyists, they were to contribute to healing the most serious split, that of 1953-54.
The narrowing of the political differences between the majority of the Fourth International and the majority of the International Committee on such important questions as 'de-Stalinisation' and the colonial revolution; the similarity of experiences in Cuba and Algeria -- all this could not fail to raise the problem of reunification. At a time when a resurgence of Trotskyism was beginning to appear in the world, both sides were well aware that a divided movement would considerably diminish the prospects lying before the Fourth International. In 1961-62, contact was initiated. In the course of discussion, it became evident that the similarity of positions discernible in the respective publications was indeed substantial, and that there did not seem to be any major political obstacles in the way of reunification.
A Parity Commission between the Fourth International and the International Committee was established to prepare for reunification through a joint congress. In the Fourth International as well as in the International Committee, those who opposed reunification and who had opposing political orientations (the Pablo faction on one hand, the SLL and OCI on the other) wanted to subordinate the reunification discussion to a discussion of the 1953 split, of what caused the split and where the responsibility for it lay. The majority on both sides refused to accept such a proposal. No one dreamed of denying the value of such a discussion -- if it was placed in a context that could lead to positive results. If the split was based on questions of principle, these would continue to surface in one form or another in the 1960s, in connection with current political problems. If the split was essentially the product of conjunctural causes (errors of analysis or perspective) or organisational causes, as we thought, these should not constitute an obstacle to reunification. Study of the causes of the split and who was responsible for it should be of an educational nature; thus it was decided, by common accord, that this question would not be raised at the time of reunification and that it would be studied at a later time, when the reunification had been consolidated. The discussion could then take place without interfering with the organisation's activity and without necessarily following the lines of cleavage that existed during the split. It was clear to those who wanted reunification that lurking behind the demand of the minorities was, above all, their desire to use this discussion not to further reunification but once more to justify the split and, worse yet, to assure its perpetuation.
The Reunification Congress ('Dynamics of World Revolution Today')


At the same time that the International was preparing its Seventh Congress, and the International Committee a conference of its organisations, the Parity Commission worked on the reunification. The latter was to be effected at a joint congress held immediately after the two above-mentioned assemblies. The Parity Commission prepared the documents that served as the basis for what was to be jointly discussed.
Thus in June 1963, after the International's congress and the International Committee's conference, the Reunification Congress was held, with twenty-six countries represented. Invited to attend the Reunification Congress, the Posadas tendency did not reply, while the SLL and OCI refused to participate. Both assemblies were held, then a joint congress announced the reunification, formally adopted the documents that had been approved by the two assemblies, and elected the new, united leadership. The minority led by Pablo presented a counter-resolution on the international situation and the tasks of the Fourth International. This minority was given representation in the leadership bodies.
The congress decided to initiate a campaign to free Hugo Bianco, who had recently been arrested in Peru and was facing the death penalty.
This time the Ceylonese section was represented at the world congress, but we learned that the section was in bad shape and that its delegate represented only a minority in the leadership. What happened to this section will be described later.
The congress devoted an entire day to discussing the Algerian question, on which Pablo had presented a report. The congress was unanimous in seeing important possibilities for the development of the Algerian revolution towards a socialist revolution, as had happened in Cuba, and decided to do its utmost to mobilise the International and its sections in support of the Algerian revolution.
As a basis for reunification, the congress adopted a sixteen-point charter, compactly formulating the fundamental positions of Trotskyism. The charter had been adopted earlier by the US Socialist Workers Party, which wished in this way to show its complete support for reunification; the SWP could not participate in the reunification formally, on an organisational level, because of 'democratic' America's restrictive laws.
In addition to the resolution on the international political situation, the congress adopted two important political documents. One dealt with the Sino-Soviet conflict and the situation in the USSR and the other workers states; the other was devoted to the dynamics of the world revolution today.
The document on Stalinism gave an overall picture of the latter's decomposition. It dealt at length with the differences that came to the surface in the Sino-Soviet conflict, and offered a minutely detailed criticism of the positions of both sides. It also examined the differentiations that had appeared in the other Communist parties. The document analysed, among others, the Cuban leadership, stressing its generally progressive positions while noting that its perspectives were limited to Latin American problems. The text also included a detailed study of the situation in the workers states, where new contradictions -- as well as currents with oppositional potential -- were appearing. Yugoslavia was analysed as a special case: on important points the orientation had been more correct than in the other workers states, but decentralisation pushed to the extreme and acceptance of the free play of market laws brought serious dangers. Finally, the document reformulated the essential points of a programme of action for the workers states, enabling the Trotskyist movement to intervene in the crises of Stalinism and to find support inside the workers states.
The main document of the congress was devoted to 'Dynamics of World Revolution Today'. It embodied the conclusions reached by a very large majority of Trotskyists throughout the world in the wake of the gigantic upheavals of the post-war period.
This text began by pointing out the fact that the world revolution had extended from the Soviet Union towards the colonial countries and not, as had for a long time been expected, towards the economically developed capitalist countries. The document showed that this process, which had carried the revolution to the periphery first, before reaching the heart of the capitalist system, had in no way been an inevitable one: it was essentially a product of betrayal by the traditional working class leaderships, social-democratic and Stalinist.
The document then explained that in our era the world revolution was going forward on three fronts, each with its own distinct characteristics: the proletarian or classical revolution in the developed capitalist states; the colonial revolution in the underdeveloped capitalist countries, where it tended to become a permanent revolution; the political, anti-bureaucratic revolution in the workers states. The document emphasised that it was not a question of simply adding up the three sectors, since the world revolution constitutes a whole whose various parts have a reciprocal effect on each other. And most of the text was specifically devoted to a study of the characteristics of each of these sectors and their interaction with each other.
But the document was not limited to an examination of the 'objective' conditions of the world revolution; it dealt with the 'subjective' conditions in just as thorough a fashion. Reviewing the necessity for revolutionary leaderships (building such leaderships was the task the Fourth International had set itself from its very foundation), the document replied to a question raised by numerous militants who felt neither deliberate hostility towards the Fourth International nor hostility towards the necessity of a democratically centralised party. That question was: Why hasn't the Fourth International developed into a mass organisation? Why wasn't it able to do so after the period of ebb, which extended from 1923 to 1943, came to a close?
The document does not dodge this question. It points out how the defeat of Nazism, due in great part to the Soviet armies, had directly served to strengthen the Stalinist leaderships. The war of 1914-18 had been a war between imperialists, which mainly implicated the European workers. Organised then by the parties of the Second International, these workers came out of the war full of indignation against the betrayal by social-democracy; they responded en masse to the appeal of the October Revolution and the Communist International. Their feelings were unambiguous, although they were still in the grip of political confusion. The war of 1939-45, however, combined the previous war between imperialists with a war of defence of the Soviet Union against German imperialism and its allies.
Another element was added to this situation with the occupation of Europe by the armies of German imperialism. The European workers wanted to defend the Soviet Union and to fight Nazism in their own countries. Following the policies of Stalin and the CPs, they carried on their struggle not only in alliance with socialist and bourgeois organisations, but under the leadership of bourgeois governments 'allied' to the Soviet Union. For many of them, the military struggle had priority over everything else, in the hope that things would become clear with the coming victory. Besides, the programme of the Resistance also generated many illusions.
Thus the European workers, contrary to what occurred at the end of the First World War, came out of the war in 1945 with mixed feelings. In any case, they were very far from being hostile to the leaders of the CPs, who appeared to them as the representatives of the Soviet Union which had brought about victory through so many sacrifices. At the time the Trotskyist propaganda against the class collaboration of the CPs with the bourgeoisie of their country was not understood. These circumstances allowed the European bourgeoisie, with the help of the CPs, to contain the revolutionary upsurges which took place. The crisis of Stalinism began to appear and develop only after the beginning of the 'cold war' and during the period of prosperity dominated by the political apathy of the masses.
[?] of the CPs, to contain the revolutionary upsurges which took place. The crisis of Stalinism began to appear and develop only after the beginning of the 'cold war' and during the period of prosperity dominated by the political apathy of the masses.
'Dynamics of World Revolution Today' also showed how -- since the crisis of Stalinism developed under extremely complex conditions, while the countries with the greatest Marxist traditions were going through a stage of political apathy on the part of the working class -- the Fourth International had come up against numerous and substantial obstacles to progress. Nevertheless, these obstacles had not prevented the Fourth International from making more and more solid progress, as: the old leaderships suffered erosion. The document ended with an exceptionally forceful justification of the need, more imperative in today's world than ever before, for the Fourth International as it is today, in order to build the mass Fourth International of tomorrow. To our knowledge, no one has attempted to criticise this document, or even partially or indirectly answer it.
Attacks against the reunited International (the splitters)


The Reunification Congress had put an end to an organisational situation that had given momentum to the centrifugal forces operating on the International; but these forces had not disappeared with the reunification, nor had the difficulties in this area been overcome.
The majority of the organisations brought together in the reunited International encountered no difficulties, even of a minor order, amongst themselves. On the contrary, they had to defend the International against those who had not wanted to participate in the reunification, and for several months internally against the faction led by Pablo. For the latter groups, the reunification constituted a step that, in the long run, threatened their existence, and they had to try to break it up while it was still weak.
The congress had reunited a very large majority of the Trotskyist forces. The Posadas faction was soon to dwindle to a single group in Argentina of slight importance; everywhere else it was composed of individuals. When the Pablo faction publicly broke with the International, about a year after the congress, that faction, too, was numerically very weak. The only two groups of any size outside the International were the SLL in Great Britain and the OCI in France. But what could be clearly seen from inside the International was not so obvious to the world at large, since these groups made their existence known through publications that concentrated on attacking the International.
We have already presented the sectarian positions of the Healy and Lambert groups, and it is not necessary to take this up again at any length. Curiously enough, they intensified their attacks against the 'Pabloite' International even several years after Pablo's split, and their attacks were directed to a much lesser degree against Pablo himself, whom they ignored from the moment he broke with the International. It was not Pablo and his ideas that bothered them, but rather the very existence and activity of the International and its sections. The Healy and Lambert groups made a big fuss about holding an international conference of their 'Committee' in April 1966, aimed at 'reconstructing' the Fourth International; this conference was completely unsuccessful and wound up in a break with those who had attended as observers.
The Posadas group' had been especially harmful to the International in Latin America, where, to the Cubans in particular, it represented (wrongly) Trotskyism and the Fourth International. Castro's attack on the Fourth International -- as well as on other revolutionary tendencies -- at the Tricontinental Conference in Havana in January 1966 was partially based on the incorrect positions taken by the Posadas group. Without for one instant abating its activity in defence of the Cuban revolution, the Fourth International firmly but without exaggeration challenged Castro's anti-Trotskyist statements. We were able to ascertain the results obtained on this point when, the following year, on the anniversary of the Tricontinental Conference, Radio Havana re-broadcast Castro's speech without, however, including the part directed against the Fourth International and the other revolutionary tendencies.
The struggle that Pablo and his faction undertook, right after the congress, lasted several months, during which time they often went from one subject to another. With the defeat suffered by the French working class as a result of de Gaulle's coming to power, it was the development of the Algerian revolution, in the years preceding and immediately following its conquest of independence, that heavily influenced Pablo's thinking. He saw, and correctly so, analogies between the course of the Algerian revolution and the course of the Cuban revolution, and, consequently, hoped for a victorious socialist revolution in Algeria. There was no disagreement with Pablo on that point. But losing more and more contact with the Fourth International on one hand, and placing false hopes in his personal opportunities for intervening at the top levels of the Algerian movement on the other hand, he wound up not so much by elaborating an international political line, whether opportunistic or sectarian -- at that time he adopted positions in an impressionistic fashion and often changed them from top to bottom in a very short space of time [1] -- as by denying the need for an international organisation, functioning as at present on the basis of democratic centralism. He put forward a concept of the Fourth International that he had formerly vigorously denounced, i.e., a federation of factions independent of each other and acting in common only on questions on which they were in agreement. After the split, he devoted himself principally to commenting on events; thenceforth he favoured using mass movements as they are rather than building new revolutionary parties.
The degeneration of the Ceylonese section


One of the most painful questions facing the united leadership was that of the Ceylonese section. This is the place to discuss the entire problem.
The Lanka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP) was a section of the Fourth International with very special characteristics in comparison with all the other sections, by reason of its origin, its composition, its functioning and its influence in its own country. To a large extent, this stemmed from certain characteristics of the political and social situation in Ceylon itself. This island had had no bourgeois movement for independence, unlike its neighbour India, whose Congress party even dared to organise an uprising against British colonialism during the Second World War, in British colonialism's most difficult days.
Ceylon's struggle for independence was launched by young intellectuals of bourgeois origin who, in the course of their stay in British universities during the 1930s, had been won over to communist ideas. Moreover, the most outstanding of these young people, moved by the defeat of the second Chinese revolution and seeking the reasons for that defeat, became aware of Trotsky's positions on China and adopted the theory of permanent revolution. Returning to Ceylon, they created the LSSP and began to organise the workers into trade unions. During the war, the LSSP got rid of the Ceylonese Stalinists who, because of the alliance between the Soviet Union and British imperialism, refused to wage a struggle against colonialism.
Imprisoned as a result of the repression, these young Trotskyists managed to escape and make their way to India, where they took part in that country's struggles and helped to found the Indian section of the Fourth International. Back in Ceylon after the war, their wartime attitude earned them enormous popularity among the working class masses. The Ceylonese bourgeoisie, more exactly its comprador part strongly attached to British capitalism, benefited from the latter's retreat and obtained independence in India's wake in 1948, without having to wage the slightest struggle for it. The political party of this comprador bourgeoisie, the UNP (United National Party), came to power. The LSSP then surged forward as the island's second party -- the party of the workers.
Thus this party, which had got rid of its Stalinist wing and had joined the Fourth International, did not arise out of crises within the working class movement and struggles against the old leaderships -- as did the other sections of the Fourth International. It was rather the fruit of courageous action by a team of young, revolutionary intellectuals who, the first to do so in Ceylon, had organised the working class and demanded the country's independence from British imperialism.
Heading the party was a team composed for the most part of people like Colvin R. de Silva, Leslie Goonawardene, Bernard Soysa, Doric de Souza, Edmund Samarakkody, people of great intellectual worth and great fighting spirit. There were also other elements in the leadership, such as N.M. Perera, far less interested in theoretical questions, opportunistic in character, whose authority stemmed from his systematic trade union work. These elements were held in check by the leading nucleus. The ranks of the party were composed of very militant workers, very devoted to their class.
But for objective reasons, there had from the start been quite a big gap between the political education of the leadership and that of the rank and file. The overwhelming majority of the workers do not know English. In the absence of adequate material in the Sinhalese or Tamil languages for their political education, the workers had only a rudimentary notion of Marxist principles and the theories of Trotsky and the Fourth International. In its mass, the LSSP was not really Trotskyist in origin.
The party also went through internal struggles, and bourgeois elements were fought and eliminated by the LSSP leadership, which for years acted as a true revolutionary leadership, working to advance its organisation towards Trotskyism. Its attitude on 12 August 1953, when a hartal (general strike) paralysed the country, was remarkable, and later it most courageously opposed the communalist currents which for a time set one of Ceylon's main nationalities against the other.
Nevertheless, despite their intellectual qualities, members of this leadership were not without weakness. The party did not have a real Bolshevik organisational structure; its congresses were actually general assemblies in which eloquent oratory often outweighed sound political argument. After a while, when the organisation had made electoral gains, political education was neglected in favour of superficial activism, and growing parliamentary tendencies in the party could be observed. While acknowledging these tendencies, the leadership did not fight against them hard enough, and eventually itself became infected.
Finally, while the party had a solid working class base, it barely had a toehold in the rural masses that constitute the majority of the island's population. The party hardly had a programme for them -- and this proved to be an important factor in leading to its political debacle. For a long time, the party had taken hold only among the Sinhalese workers (workers in the port city of Colombo, transport workers, clerical workers, etc.); only with difficulty did the party reach the biggest part of Ceylon's proletariat, the plantation workers made up of Indians 'imported' long ago by the British for the latter's needs. These workers still have no citizenship, neither Ceylonese nor Indian.
The International had frequently called the LSSP leadership's attention to these weaknesses and to the necessity for remedying them. But the International's efforts were limited to those members who could understand English, and under the circumstances, this meant the most advanced section, i.e., the leadership of the party. For many years, there had been only two opposing parties on the national level, the UNP and the LSSP. During the 1950s, however, the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) arose out of a split in the UNP. To the surprise of the LSSP leaders, the new party's success in the 1956 election brought it to power. Instead of proceeding to a profound analysis of the causes for this electoral victory, the LSSP's leaders, who very correctly characterised the SLFP as a bourgeois party with a wider base than the UNP, judged that the new party, like the UNP, would rapidly wear out its credit and that the LSSP would then have a clear field.
It was with this perspective that the LSSP approached the March 1960 elections, in which it hoped to win a parliamentary majority. The tremendous effort the party put into these elections made its defeat all the more painful. From that time on, the LSSP's leadership found itself politically disoriented. It began to vacillate politically; the influence of N.M. Perera, who became more open in advancing reformist positions, began to spread. Right after these elections, N.M. Perera proposed that the LSSP enter a government coalition with the SLFP. This proposal was rejected, but the LSSP's parliamentary group practically gave the bourgeois government of the SLFP a vote of confidence. The Fourth International publicly disavowed that vote.
Later on, when the masses went into action against some of the new government's measures, the LSSP went over to the opposition, but without making a serious self-criticism of its previous attitude. The relative consolidation of the SLFP in the 1960 elections accentuated the vacillation of the LSSP leadership. It had to suffer the political consequences of neglecting the problems of the Ceylonese rural population. It did not understand that this new bourgeois party, unlike the comprador UNP, was based on the 'national bourgeoisie', and that this party had been able to win support among the rural masses neglected by the LSSP.
Nevertheless, there was another partial turn to the left by the party in 1962-63, when the masses again went into action. Together with the Ceylonese Communist Party and a small, radical-appearing bourgeois organisation, the Mahajana Eksath Peramuna (MEP), the LSSP formed what was called the United Left Front. This organisation was well received by the Ceylonese masses and could have, were it not for the inadequacy of its programme, constituted the point of departure of an extra-parliamentary struggle for power. But a half-fought fight paves the way for disaster.
Inside the leadership, N.M. Perera, who for a long time had been held in check by the intellectual authority and political strength of the other members of the leadership, gained free rein as a result of the latter's vacillations. The leadership, disoriented and unsure, was divided: on one side, the main nucleus, including Colvin R. de Silva and Leslie Goonawardene, adopted a conciliatory position towards the SLFP; on the other, Edmund Samarakkody and Bala Tampoe defended correct, principled positions, but in a political form that the International considered sectarian and hardly likely to convince the rank and file to oppose the party's political concessions. In this troubled situation, N.M. Perera entered into negotiations with the prime minister, without the party's knowledge, and then demanded the immediate calling of a special congress of the party to answer the proposals for a government coalition that the prime minister had made to him. By then the Ceylonese organisation had reached an advanced stage of political degeneration. At the congress, about 25 per cent of the members rejected in principle any participation in the government, any participation in a bourgeois regime. The old Colvin R. de Silva-Leslie Goonawardene team, which for twenty-five years had led the party, received only 10 per cent of the votes on an amendment to the Perera resolution, and in the final vote only retained 4 to 5 per cent -- the remaining votes going to Perera, who became head of the organisation. With certain of his friends, he entered the government.
After the Sixth World Congress's condemnation of the LSSP's vote for the SLFP budget in 1960 -- a condemnation independently supported by the position publicly taken in The Militant by the US Socialist Workers Party -- the LSSP leadership still had not sufficiently rectified its orientation. Its oscillations continued. In numerous interventions, the International tried to change the LSSP's line in a more vigorous and thoroughgoing fashion. At the Seventh World Congress, which preceded the reunification of the International, Ceylon was represented by Comrade Samarakkody. At that time, the left wing to which he belonged had dissociated itself from the centrist majority of the leadership, but without deeming it necessary as yet to organise a faction for waging the struggle. The LSSP had just organised the United Left Front. The congress forwarded a long letter to the LSSP, in which it stressed the inadequacies of this policy on four fundamental points:
1. Insufficient critical analysis of the 1960 error.
2. Lack of clarity with respect to the extra-parliamentary nature of the potentialities of the United Left Front, in contrast with its parliamentary aspects.
3. Failure to criticise publicly the opportunistic policy of its allies (the CP and the MEP).
4. Failure to include the Tamil plantation workers' trade union organisations in the United Left Front.
Later, on 23 April 1964, when the United Secretariat of the Fourth International was informed of N.M. Perera's moves, it condemned them, declaring that accepting such a policy would be tantamount to betrayal. At the congress held in Colombo on 6-7 June of the same year, the Fourth International's delegate, Pierre Frank, denounced the policy of coalition from the speakers' platform. To all the Ceylonese people who were following the congress's proceedings, he publicly declared that if such a policy were adopted, it would cause a split between the LSSP and the International. Immediately after the vote, the break was effected by the United Secretariat.
Supporters of the Fourth International regrouped after the congress's vote for the purpose of re-establishing the Trotskyist organisation. Unfortunately, Trotskyism had suffered a severe blow in Ceylon and the Trotskyist movement in that country has yet to regain a firm foundation.
The campaigns of the International (The Second Congress after reunification)


Internal difficulties and attacks of hostile groups were, fortunately, not the only matters claiming the attention of the united leadership of the International. The entire Trotskyist movement was engaged in increasing its activities, consolidating the reunification and preparing for an expansion of the International.
The International undertook a campaign in defence of the imprisoned Polish revolutionists, two young leaders in particular, Modzelewsky and Kuron, who were spokespersons for left currents at the University of Warsaw. The International was responsible for publishing their 'Open Letter to the Polish Workers Party"' which was the first programmatic document of the anti-bureaucratic revolution to come out of a workers state since the days of Trotsky and the Left Opposition. The International also publicised the positions of Communists who criticised, from the left, the Yugoslav Communist League's policies. For the first time in many years, Marxist revolutionary thought was being formulated in places where Stalinism had exercised almost total domination, or where right-wing leaderships prevailed.
Moreover, the Fourth International was at various times able to publicise positions and documents coming from critical elements within the Soviet Union itself. It was also able to bring the positions of a left current in Czechoslovakia to the attention of world working class opinion.
The Fourth International intervened in various ways in the Sino-Soviet conflict. All the sections utilised the opportunities available to them for influencing the crisis in the Communist parties. As their differences became sharper, the two leaderships, Soviet and Chinese, each accused the other of playing into the Fourth International's hands.
We have already mentioned the defence of Cuba. On this subject, it should be pointed out that the activity of Latin American Trotskyists contributed a great deal towards clarifying the Cuban positions on Trotskyism. In accordance with the decision of the world congress mentioned above, an international campaign was launched for the defence of Hugo Bianco, a Trotskyist militant and leader of the Peruvian peasants. After a somewhat slow start, this campaign attained considerable proportions. Declarations of solidarity arrived from all over the world; more and more meetings and demonstrations were held in numerous cities everywhere. This campaign was so strong that it reached the reformist trade unions as well as organisations linked to the Communist parties. Never before had the International waged such a world campaign. Undoubtedly this campaign coincided with a development of the objective situation, first in Latin America and then in Vietnam, which assured it of a broader audience. At first this campaign resulted in several postponements of the trial -- a trial at which Hugo Bianco defended himself in masterful fashion. The campaign succeeded in averting the death penalty that the court would most certainly have pronounced, considering the charges against Hugo Blanco, if world opinion had not been alerted and mobilised.
Finally, from the beginning of 1965 -- immediately following the American escalation of the war in Vietnam -- the International alerted all its sections, the entire vanguard, to carry out actions in support of the Vietnamese revolution.
Less than two years after the reunification, the decision was made to call a world congress. Represented at this congress, held in December 1965 with over sixty persons present, were twenty-five countries. The congress demonstrated that the reunification had been effectively consolidated, the centrifugal forces having been largely overcome. The organisation was able to turn most of its forces outward and implement its policies under more normal conditions.
The congress gave top importance to the defence of Vietnam. On the heels of the serious defeats of the masses in Brazil and Indonesia, the congress forcefully proclaimed the need to counterpose a world strategy for socialist revolution to the global strategy of imperialism. It issued the following call for the defence of the Vietnamese revolution:

 'Communists, worker-members of Communist parties, workers, youth, intellectuals of the workers states:
'Initiate and broaden your campaign to compel the Kremlin to end its shady and underhand dealings with the imperialist aggressor while it gives only miserly driblets of aid to the heroic masses of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam. By the millions raise the slogan, "Planes, guns for the Vietnamese people!"
'Workers, poor peasants, militant nationalists in the semicolonial countries:
'Rise up resolutely against imperialism, strike against it everywhere at the same time. Take advantage of the fact that imperialism has engaged its main forces in Vietnam. Open up many new fronts, and strike down imperialism's lackeys and toadies wherever conditions are favourable.
'Workers of the entire world:
'Compel the leaders of all mass organisations, the leaders of all workers states that claim to speak in the name of socialism, to form an unshakable anti-imperialist united front, under whose devastating blows imperialism will be forced to retreat.'

 In addition to a political resolution dealing with several essential points, among others the crisis of leadership in the colonial revolution -- which had resulted in a series of grave defeats -- and the new oppositional currents that had appeared in the United States, several documents were discussed and adopted at this congress.
The development of West European capitalism and the tasks of revolutionary Marxists was the subject of one of these documents. This document, presented by I. Rivera, analysed in detail the development of the economic situation, which evinced different characteristics in different countries, and the contradictions of the Common Market. It stressed the trend toward a 'strong state' and the obstacles countering the trend. It took note of the appearance of reactionary currents and racist tendencies exploiting the immigration of foreign workers, often dark-skinned, in several countries. The document pointed out the thoroughgoing degeneration of the social-democratic and Stalinist leaderships and the danger of integration into the bourgeois state bearing down ever more heavily on the trade union organisations. It pointed out further that in countries where social-democracy dominated the working class movement, left tendencies made their appearance more often inside the trade union movement, because part of the trade union bureaucracy felt constrained to make a show of opposition in order not to lose all credibility with the workers. Finally, the document stated that, contrary to the thinking of numerous currents which maintained revolutionary positions theoretically but proved total sceptics concerning revolutionary possibilities in the present period, the contradictions of capitalism, even in the framework of neo-capitalism, were such that defensive economic struggles of the masses could at certain times lead to offensive struggles to win transitional demands, and to a revolutionary situation with the appearance of organs of dual power. Starting with these considerations and taking into account the international situation, a specific transitional programme for each country had to be formulated. The document on 'The Sino-Soviet Conflict and the Crisis in the International Communist Movement', presented by Livio Maitan, started off by examining a question that had frequently been raised in various places: was there a Stalinist phase in China (and, more generally, would there necessarily be such a phase in every backward workers state)? Replying in the negative, the document pointed out the differences between Maoism and Stalinism, and reaffirmed Trotsky's view that Stalinism was a form of bureaucratisation that would be unique, because it was due to a particular combination of circumstances -- a combination that would never again occur in history. This document then proceeded to a detailed examination of pro-Peking parties and groups, on the one hand, and pro-Moscow parties and groups, on the other. A section of the text was devoted to Castroism.
Another lengthy document dealt with 'Progress and Problems of the African Revolution'. About ten years had elapsed since the old African colonialism had largely given way to new structures. The document distinguished three major sectors in Africa: where colonialism and racism still exist; where there is a distinct neocolonial structure; and where revolutionary transformations have taken place.
The first sector was essentially confined to the southern part of Africa. It did not pose any special theoretical problems, the important matter being the problems raised by the struggle, which would become exceptionally intense there.
In the second sector were to be found countries like Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, most of the former French colonies in West Africa, the Congo, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Somalia, etc. Nor did this sector pose any difficult theoretical problems. Its neo-colonialist nature was perfectly clear, and the tasks of revolutionists could easily be formulated.
The third sector comprised countries like Ghana, Zanzibar, Guinea, Mall, Egypt, Algeria. Generally speaking, these were countries where independence had been won by mass struggle, or countries which had adopted anti-imperialist, sometimes anti-capitalist, measures and which had been in the vanguard of the struggle against the colonial or neo-colonial systems. A goodly portion of the document was devoted to describing what had happened in these countries, their development, their class structure, measures taken, etc. The document dealt with the Algerian revolution at great length, with special attention to the Pen Bella experience and to the new situation that had been created just a few months before -- the coup detat of 19 June 1965, that had carried Boumedienne to power. In addition, the document pointed out the contradictions in these states and endeavoured to formulate the conditions that would assure a mass upsurge capable of transforming these countries into workers states.
The document ended with a section devoted to perspectives and tasks, as well as to several essential conclusions. It highlighted specific characteristics of the African revolution: the existence of very backward sectors; the confrontation between disintegrating tribal structures and the social perspectives of the Twentieth Century world; the extraordinary combined development that marks this continent. The document demonstrated that even where victory was assured by the presence of revolutionary Marxists, there would be no simple solutions to these problems without very substantial and unselfish assistance from the workers states. Such African countries would especially need the help of workers states created in the industrialised countries of Western Europe and North America. The document held it to be the duty of members of the International to help in the formation of African cadres capable of creating genuine revolutionary parties.
This document met with considerable discussion, especially the parts dealing with the Algerian revolution; characterisation of the Ben Bella government; characterisation of the regime in Egypt, etc. The document was adopted by the congress, although the latter felt that while the document could provide a good working basis, various questions needed further and more intensive study. It was therefore decided that discussion of this document should continue after the congress, and that the question of the African revolution would be placed on the agenda of a further world congress.

Footnotes
[1] To mention only a few examples of his most impressionistic positions: he counted on imperialism's rapid retreat from Vietnam early in 1965, which attested to his belief in 'peaceful co-existence'; he saw 'political revolution' in Yugoslavia when Rankovic was eliminated; he made an abrupt change on China, in favour of the Soviet leadership; he made a series of political zigzags on Ceylon, etc.

Next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Fourth International-ch2



The Fourth International
The Long March of the Trotskyists

Chapter 2: From 1923 to 1929 The Bolshevik-Leninist Faction in the USSR


The revolutionary period opened by the Russian Revolution of 1917 was followed from 1923 to 1929 by an ebbing of the revolutionary tide and a period of relative stabilisation of capitalism. The European economy was recovering; American capitalism gained world ascendancy, replacing British capitalism, which experienced its first big crisis in 1926. In China the struggle of the colonised masses against imperialism began its great and tragic course. In the Soviet Union, economic progress was smell; a bitter internal political struggle went on, in the course of which the bureaucracy succeeded in shifting the axis of Soviet policy from world revolution to 'socialism in one country'. In several European countries, Socialist parties were in power, while the Communist International was in crisis, traversing the first stages of its bureaucratic degeneration.
The first period of our movement extended from 1923 to 1929. During that period, there was indeed no international Bolshevik-Leninist movement: there was a Bolshevik-Leninist faction of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, but liaison with individuals or groups of supporters in other countries was confined to correspondence. There was no real, collective international elaboration of political thought and action.
From the moment of its birth, the Bolshevik-Leninist faction in the USSR evinced one of the essential characteristics of our movement -- internationalism. The faction was created in 1923 on the basis of an understanding of the changes in the international situation; its principal battles in the course of these six years bore as much on specifically Soviet questions as on problems of the world revolution.
The point of departure was the turn in the world situation after the defeat of the German revolution in October 1923. The German CP was losing ground, while the Social Democracy was moving ahead. Trotsky, against the majority of the Political Bureau of the Bolshevik Party (the Zinoviev-Kamenev-Stalin troika), maintained that the international situation had changed from top to bottom, that the revolutionary wave of the post-war period was spent, that a period of relative stabilisation of capitalism had started, and that all this imposed new tasks for the Communist international and its sections in capitalist countries -- as well as for the problems of building socialism in the USSR.
From 1923 to 1929 the Bolshevik-Leninist faction in the USSR fought on three main questions:
* The policy of the leadership in the USSR.
 * The Anglo-Russian Committee (1926).
* The second Chinese revolution (1925-27).
Policy in the USSR


We shall limit ourselves here to a few lines on this question, since it has been thoroughly treated by Trotsky in his Draft Programme of the Communist International: A Criticism of Fundamentals, and The Revolution Betrayed.
The establishment of the New Economic Policy (NEP) after the end of the civil war and the waning of the labour movement had a very great effect on social relations in the USSR, as well as on the ranks of the Bolshevik Party. Political passivity developed in the ranks of the workers. Part of the best revolutionary elements had lost their lives on the field of battle. Another part, which had reached command positions in the Red Army, found executive positions in the state and in the economy, where they applied the methods of command inherited from the army. With the NEP as a base, capitalist elements developed in the cities and in the countryside. The relationship of forces was evolving in a direction opposite to that of the revolutionary period. These factors gave the state apparatus increased independence and power. The entire last portion of Lenin's political activity was devoted to denouncing this danger. We have, he said, a workers state with bureaucratic deformations. Just read his report to the Eleventh Congress of the Russian party to see to what extent he denounced these evils![1]
The bureaucratisation of the state was accompanied and abetted by a bureaucratisation of the Bolshevik Party. As a revolutionary instrument, the latter was rusting away. A layer of parvenus, satisfied with what had already been obtained, gained the upper hand. These social layers and the state apparatus found their most responsive political expression in the organisational Secretariat of the party, in the person of that 'old Bolshevik' Stalin. The last conversations between Lenin and Trotsky were concerned with organising a faction to conduct the struggle against this party Secretariat. Lenin's last two letters to the Central Committee, known as 'Lenin's Testament', point out the danger of a split and propose to dismiss Stalin from the post of party secretary.[2]
In October 1923 Trotsky, pointing out the mounting dangers, proposed a 'new course', to be characterised by a struggle against the bureaucratisation of the party and in favour of the following: admitting young proletarian elements, who had proved themselves, into the leading bodies of the party; making these bodies elective; a plan for industrialisation; a certain number of measures to set the poor peasants against the kulaks.
In the beginning, this 'new course' was not openly rejected by the majority of the Political Bureau; but the latter did nothing to implement it. On the contrary, the Zinoviev-Kamenev-Stalin leadership (at that time these names were mentioned in that order) initiated a violent struggle against 'Trotskyism', bringing up -- and distorting -- twenty-year-old differences between Lenin and Trotsky, long outdated by events. Later Zinoviev and Kamenev admitted they had invented 'Trotskyism' for this occasion.
The Moscow Opposition -- the first faction gathered together by Trotsky to struggle for a 'new course' -- which consisted in large part of veteran militants of the revolution and the civil war, and constituted the first organisation of our movement, was prevented by bureaucratic methods from getting a hearing in the party, after having won some preliminary success in the Moscow cells.
Unbeknown even to some of its initial protagonists, the fight on the question of past differences concealed the struggle of the bureaucratic layers against internationalist revolutionary policy. As the policy followed by the leadership of the Bolshevik Party slid more and more to the right, in 1925-26 Zinoviev and Kamenev broke with Stalin, who then pursued that policy with Bukharin, Rykov, and Tomsky as allies. The rightist policy was supposed to 'integrate the kulak into socialism', which would be achieved 'at a snail's pace' (Bukharin); industrialisation was denounced as an absurdity ('the peasant needs a cow, not a phonograph', declared Stalin).
The Opposition formed in 1926 by the Zinoviev-Trotsky bloc, forced to meet clandestinely, struggled to impose an industrialisation programme and a policy directed against the kulak, the Nepman, and the bureaucrat. A five-year plan was finally accepted in 1927 by the Bukharin-Stalin leadership, but the very limited yearly increases projected in the plan indicated the scepticism and hostility of that leadership. Under pressure from the Opposition, another plan was prepared, with higher yearly goals.
Towards the end of 1927, and without any confidence, the bureaucracy launched the first five-year plan. Early in 1928 -- less than three months after having broken party unity and exiled the Opposition to Siberia -- a frightened Stalin acknowledged the kulak danger, broke with the rightist Bukharin faction, made a sudden zigzag to the left, and began an ultra-left policy (the five-year plan had to be completed in four years, agriculture had to be 100 per cent collectivised, etc.). Put into practice in a bureaucratic way, by force of decree, and in a brutal manner by a party shorn of any real political life, this orientation brought the country to the brink of catastrophe.
The old Bolshevik Party -- after elimination of the left and right oppositions -- subsisted only as the political machine of the bureaucracy. The revolutionary cadres were exiled or exterminated. From that date on, the bureaucracy's domination increased and its policy developed in a series of zigzags, ranging from the most contemptible opportunism to the most unbridled ultra-leftism. In the final analysis, however, its general direction was very strongly opportunistic. The ultra-left zigzags have now ceased.
The Anglo-Russian Committee (1926)


The affair of the Anglo-Russian Committee marks the beginning of the Stalinist faction's policy of dissociating the fate of the USSR from that of the world revolution. It was on this question that they began the policy of putting pressure on foreign governments as a substitute for revolutionary struggle in defence of the USSR. This was done particularly through political combinations and subterfuges in which Communist parties abandoned part of their revolutionary programme on the pretext of thus attracting larger masses than they could mobilise by themselves.
The centre of world reaction right after the First World War was still British imperialism, despite the fact that its decline had already begun and despite the phenomenal rise of American capitalism. British imperialism's policy was all the more anti-Soviet in that the Russian Revolution set an extremely attractive example for the colonial peoples oppressed by the Empire. From a political point of view, the British labour movement was developing considerable strength. In 1924 the Labour Party had formed a minority government, although the Tories and Liberals soon found it opportune to oust it. Around 1926 a turn to the left occurred in the British trade unions.
The British CP was very weak -- it still is today -- and the Minority Movement it had activated in the trade unions was also rather weak. In order to counter British imperialism's threat to the USSR, Stalin proposed to the Political Bureau of the Bolshevik Party that efforts be made to establish a committee of English and Russian trade unions under the pretext of working towards rebuilding trade union unity on an international scale. A united front of Russian and British trade unions for the establishment of worldwide trade union unity was politically admissible, although it presented the danger of being mostly a summit operation, difficult for the rank and file to control. For Stalin, however, the real object of this Anglo-Russian Committee was to turn it into the 'centre of the struggle against imperialist war' -- the political centre of the struggle for the defence of the USSR. In answer to Trotsky, who was at the time still a member of the Political Bureau and who stressed the necessity of relying only on the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, Stalin retorted:'What can you do with your English Communists?'
The dispute concerning the aims of the Anglo-Russian Committee did not remain merely a battle of words. The class struggle in Great Britain gave it a tragic content. The leftward swing of the British workers was expressed by the miners' struggle against any wage cuts, giving rise to a strike that was supported by the British working class as a whole. In May 1926 a nine-day general strike forced the British Empire to its knees. This was the first manifestation of the crisis of British capitalism (a crisis that reached full bloom after the end of the Second World War). But British capitalism was able to pull itself out of this grave difficulty thanks to the British trade union leadership's betrayal: they ended the general strike and let the miners continue the struggle alone for several months.
For any revolutionary with the most elementary knowledge of the Leninist position on the united front, this betrayal would have demanded an immediate break by the Russian unions from the Anglo-Russian Committee -- plus an appeal to the British workers to stand up against their leadership. But considering the essential object of the Anglo-Russian Committee to be the 'defence of the USSR', and conceiving the latter as a task separate and distinct from the revolutionary struggle of the masses, Stalin kept the committee -- whose activity for months and months was reduced to nothing but talk, anyway -- in existence. When the militant members of the British Communist Party and the Minority Movement denounced the reformist leaders of their unions as traitors, the latter therefore had an easy reply at hand:'That's not what the Russians think -- and you can't very well accuse them of being reformists and traitors. There they are, in the same committee with us!' This policy disarmed and demoralised the British CP as well as the Minority Movement, which eventually disappeared.
Several months after the general strike, the leaders of the British trade unions, having thoroughly exploited the committee (which was no longer of any use to them) for their own purposes, denounced the financial aid provided to the striking miners by the Russian unions as an interference in the internal life of their organisations, and used this excuse to break up the Anglo-Russian Committee.
The Bolshevik-Leninist Opposition had exposed Stalinist policy on the question of the Anglo-Russian Committee and had conducted a very strong campaign for breaking from this committee at the time of the betrayal of the general strike.
The second Chinese revolution (1925-27)


A big upsurge occurred in the revolutionary movement in China in the period 1925-27. The merchant and industrial bourgeoisie, whose political party was the Kuomintang, tried to exploit this revolutionary upsurge for their own purpose -- the unification of China. At that time the country was divided into a certain number of provinces governed independently by warlords, who were continually at war with each other to extend their dominions.
In the years following the First World War, a Chinese Communist Party had been established around Chen Tu-hsiu, a Peking professor who had been active in revolutionary struggles in China since about 1910. The young Chinese CP lacked experience of any kind, and it was the leadership of the Communist International that bore complete responsibility for the CCP's policies during that period. The Soviet bureaucracy, the political expression of which was Stalinism, was hostile to the development of an autonomous revolutionary struggle by the proletariat and poor peasants, in whom the Stalinists had no confidence. To serve the needs of its nationalist policy, the bureaucracy favoured a policy of alliance with the Chinese bourgeoisie. In order to justify such a class-collaborationist policy, the Stalin-Bukharin leadership elaborated the theory of a 'bloc of four classes' for China (a combination of workers, peasants, intellectuals, and capitalists -- the last-named being considered 'progressive' in a colonial or semi-colonial country), developed the concept of two-class worker and peasant parties, and the necessity for a 'revolution by stages' with the 'democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants' as an intermediate stage between capitalism and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Put into practice, this policy of class collaboration resulted in an order to the Chinese Communist Party to enter the Kuomintang. The Chinese CP thus renounced an independent policy and, in particular, opposed the creation of soviets during the ascending period of the revolution; it was also opposed to the development of the agrarian revolution, so that the landholdings of Kuomintang army officers could remain intact. For months and months the Communist International and its sections praised the Kuomintang leaders to the skies as allies of the proletariat and champions of the anti-imperialist struggle. The head of the Kuomintang armies, Chiang Kai-shek, was particularly singled out for praise, being depicted as the 'hero' of the Chinese revolution (see l 'Humanite, late 1926, early 1927).
As the Kuomintang armies neared Shanghai in their march from the commercial South to the North, the workers rose up and seized the city. Their class instinct led them to refuse Chiang Kai-shek's troops entry into Shanghai. But, on orders from the Communist International, the Chinese Communists prevailed upon the workers to allow Chiang Kai-shek and his soldiers to enter the most industrialised centre of China. No sooner was he installed than Chiang Kai-shek set about the wholesale slaughter of the Communist movement of China.
A little later the Chinese Communists, still under orders from the Stalinist leadership of the Third International, resumed the same policy of collaboration with a wing of the Kuomintang, the 'left Kuomintang' led by Wang Ching-wei, with the same result. When Chen Tu-hsiu, secretary of the Chinese CP, joined the Left Opposition, he revealed that Borodin, a representative of the Communist International, had declared that 'the worker must be the coolie of the Kuomintang'.
The Bolshevik-Leninist faction in the USSR conducted a struggle of increasing intensity against the Stalinist policies in China; the peak of this struggle coincided with the peak of the entire struggle by the Soviet Bolshevik-Leninists against Stalinism.
Permanent revolution vs. socialism in one country


The three principal questions on which the struggle of the Left Opposition in the USSR was based can, on the theoretical level, be subsumed into one single question: the struggle for permanent revolution against the theory of 'socialism in one country'; the struggle for maintaining a policy of world proletarian revolution against the nationalist, reactionary policy of the Soviet bureaucracy. This fight, begun in 1923, had nothing to do with a power struggle between individuals -- as some people, obviously incapable of any political insight whatsoever, still think; nor did it have anything to do with a struggle between two revolutionary schools of thought with divergent views on the strategy to follow for the victory of world socialism -- as certain bourgeois political leaders and journalists still write, whether through ignorance or through their desire to depict Stalinism as a revolutionary bogeyman. This fight was, primarily and above all, a struggle between two political formations representing two different social groups. The Left Opposition consciously represented the fundamental historical interests of the world proletariat; the Stalinist faction represented the interests of the party and state bureaucracy, anxious to stabilise, consolidate, and, subsequently, increase its privileges. Inasmuch as the leaders of that faction had come out of the Bolshevik Party, for most of them the slide did not take place on a conscious level -- in the beginning, at any rate. But they became prisoners of the social layers whose political spokespersons they were, and in a few years this faction became the most conscious, and the most dangerous, counter-revolutionary force inside the working class movement.
The climax of the struggle in the USSR occurred on the tenth anniversary of the October Revolution, in November 1927, when the Oppositionists participated in the official Moscow and Leningrad demonstrations under their own slogans, with their own banners and placards against the kulak, the Nepman, and the bureaucrat. For months the Stalinist faction had been accumulating frame-up charges against the Opposition, which had been reduced to clandestine activity. The former had especially sought to plant provocateurs inside the organisation. To avoid being quietly disposed of, it was necessary to take political action out in the open. The tenth anniversary served as a pretext for the Stalinist faction to consummate the split in the party and exile the Bolshevik-Leninist militants to Siberia. [3]
In the following year, the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union continued its struggle in an organised fashion; its centre was set up by Trotsky, in exile in Alma Ata. That was why Stalin decided to expel him from the Soviet Union.
After 1929, the Trotskyist Opposition in the USSR, our mother section, found itself more and more cut off from its principal leader, Leon Trotsky; as a result, the organisational axis of our movement shifted. From that time on we had but little information about our faction, which was subsequently crushed by the Stalinist repression.
Some information about the political life of Opposition leaders in the Verchne-Uralsk 'isolator', long before the Moscow trials, can be found in Anton Ciliga's Au pays du grand mensonge (In the Country of the Big Lie). This information, however, must be taken with reservations -- considering that it comes from a man who broke with Bolshevism and passed into the camp of petty-bourgeois liberalism.
The most important document of the Bolshevik-Leninist Opposition in the USSR for the period under discussion is The Platform of the Left Opposition (1927), drawn up in agreement with the Zinovievists (whose first capitulation took place right after the Fifteenth Congress of the Bolshevik Party).
One more word about our faction in the USSR: its leading elements included not only old Bolsheviks whose names are well known for their role in the October Revolution, but also an entire group of young cadres trained during the years of the Revolution and civil war, some of whom were well-developed Marxists who never for one moment capitulated. To be cut off from them was a great Loss to our movement.

Footnotes
[1] Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33, pp. 263-324
[2] These two letters were banned in the USSR. Nevertheless, on two occasions, Stalin could not avoid mentioning their existence. Since the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU, publication in the Soviet Union of these letters (see Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 36, pp. 594-96) and other of Lenin's writings, as well as the 'Journal of Lenin's Duty Secretaries' (ibid.. Vol 42, p. 480), has completely confirmed what Trotsky wrote, namely that in the last period of his life, Lenin had sought and obtained Trotsky's support to fight a weakening in the foreign-trade monopoly, the repressive measures taken by Stalin against the 'nationalist' faction of Georgian Bolsheviks led by Mdivani and, above all, to fight the bureaucracy in the party -- particularly its political spokesman, Stalin -- at the next party congress. Illness, then death, prevented Lenin from so doing.
[3] Ten years later, during the Moscow trials, Stalin for the first time made the claim that an attempt at 'insurrection' had been involved.

Read next section | Frank Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



e Frank-Eighty Years Ago



Pierre Frank
Eighty Years Ago




Published: Fourth International, Autumn 1959



Next November 7th will complete eighty years since Leon Trotsky was born. By his theoretical contribution and his militant life, he takes his place in the class of the most eminent proletarian revolutionaries, that of Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Rosa Luxemburg. But if these others are accepted as such in the workers' movement (which does not mean that their teachings are not trodden underfoot), the place of Trotsky, even at the present beginnings of "destalinization," has not yet been recognized. True, the crudest Stalinist lies are no longer repeated, for they would no longer find any listeners; but a number of lies and false ideas continue to drag on, including among those who think that they have been delivered from Stalinism. How many try to get out of it by saying: The struggle between Trotsky and Stalin is ancient history, outlived, a personal rivalry about more or less abstract theories, and Trotskyism -- apart from a few faithful followers -- no longer exists. This was not at all the opinion of Stalin who, after claiming that Trotskyism was dead, went on setting up -- in vain -- the most monstrous judicial machinations to kill it. Nor is it the opinion of Stalin's present successors, either. If they have not rehabilitated Trotsky and the Left Opposition, it is because they realize that it is not outlived ancient history, but one of the burning problems of the present day.
The figure and the teachings of Trotsky will inevitably find the place they deserve in the course of the anti-bureaucratic movement of the masses, and not in the bureaucracy's measures of self-defense to protect its political power and privileges.
Among some who perhaps do not lack sympathy but do lack a sense of history, what contributes to their failure to appreciate Leon Trotsky is the contrast between the last part of his life (from 1928 on) and his period of glory and power in the first years of the Russian Revolution. Max Eastman wrote in a recent article that Trotsky was a man of indecision who did not know how to fight against Stalin -- all this based on a "psychoanalysis" for the American petty bourgeois. Without expressing themselves so stupidly, there are not lacking people who think that if after all Trotsky was defeated by Stalin, it was because he pierced himself with his own sword at a given moment by his vision of the glorious period of the Russian Revolution, without understanding the new situation that was then opening up. It is, however, easy to verify the fact that it was Trotsky who really understood the new situation, whereas Stalin did not have the faintest idea of where he would be led by the struggle he started after Lenin's death. Power not only contributes to corrupt those who wield it; it also sets them on a pedestal which deforms their real stature. If someone like Trotsky lost the power, that must be his fault, and he was not so great a man as all that -- such is the reasoning of petty-bourgeois thinkers. We are convinced that the future will say that the whole greatness of Trotsky was shown most clearly in that last and so dramatic period of his existence -- such a period as none of the other great revolutionaries had to go through. Marx and Engels at the end of their days saw the workers' movement accept the doctrines that they -- for a long time almost alone -- had developed and advocated. Rosa was assassinated in a revolutionary period. Lenin died respected, just It the turning in the Russian Revolution, before he could join battle against the rising bureaucracy. It was to Trotsky, who, together with Lenin, had had the glory of leading the proletariat to power, that it fell to carry on that struggle. In it, the state that emerged from the first victorious proletarian revolution became the instrument of a narrow-minded and reactionary social layer of the new society, who systematically resorted to methods of violence within the workers' movement against the revolutionaries, cite a degree that even the reformists had not reached. In the Soviet Union alone, the number of members of the Bolshevik Party liquidated by Stalin -- according to the statement of Khrushchev at the session of the Central Committee in which he defeated Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich -- reached 1,600,000. This figure alone indicates what was then the power of the bureaucratic reaction. Its hatred was aimed with its full force against Trotsky.
Trotsky's third exile never had an equal not so much because of the agents of Stalin who never ceased to exist around Trotsky and Leon Sedov; but this exile was in practice doubled by a cloistering imposed by various capitalist governments and by the interventions of the Soviet government. True, Trotsky could leave his home, engage in physical exercise (walking, fishing, hunting, etc), but it was in fact forbidden to him to take a direct part himself in the workers' movement. It is necessary to recall the rage poured out by the Soviet press when it was learned that Trotsky had left Istanbul to give a lecture in Copenhagen. The lion had escaped from his cage; few interventions were necessary to make the Social-Democratic Danish government understand what attitude it must take. Trotsky, a man of the masses to the highest degree, a militant the essential part of whose life had been passed in workers' organizations, in fact during this last exile found himself in a sort of prison with invisible bars, for he could communicate with the world and especially with the workers' movement only through visitors under the more or less discreet control of the police of the country he was in.
What is more, he had no exchange of thoughts, no relations, with the workers' leaders of his generation: the Social-Democracy and Stalinism had divided up between them the old leaders of the workers' movement. The more recent strata -- those of the First World War and its postwar period -- provided the elements for the bureaucratic apparatuses. Those who gathered around him were quite young militants, without a past, without training. It is easy to understand that this great difference in age and experience added to his isolation from the big labor formations kept up by apparatuses.
On the occasion of the publication this year of his Diary for the years 1934-35, some persons have discovered a "human" side to Trotsky. That is because they never knew how to read Trotsky. It is not at all hard to see in all his works how much he understands -- because he shares -- the feelings of the masses risen up against all oppression. And with him, as with Marxism's other great ones, these feelings take on all the more force in that they find their source in the understanding of causes and in the conviction that mankind now possesses the means to put an end to those inhuman conditions in which the great majority of them live. Nobody was more sorely tried than he and Natalia by the most hideous manifestations of Stalinism; those who were at their side saw how they suffered each time that their children were struck down by Stalinism. But they also saw the firmness with which they faced it, and how Trotsky in his grief redoubled his strength to carry on the struggle to which he had devoted his existence.
It is not simple to summarize Trotsky's theoretical contribution to Marxism, so considerable is it.
Above all, there is the theory of the permanent revolution, formulated when he was 26, in connection with Czarist Russia, but which, because of the trend taken by the world revolution from the U S S R toward the East, in colonial and semi-colonial countries -- contains its strategic basis for nearly two thirds of humanity in our times. While the Stalinist conceptions about "socialism in a single country" and "revolution by stages" have been swept away by such gigantic facts as the Chinese Revolution, the theory of the permanent revolution is still officially ignored by some, reviled by others, who remain in tow to native bourgeoisies without strength and without future.
The fundamental strategy for the struggle for power in the advanced capitalist countries (united front and transitional programme) had been formulated by the Communist International at its IIIrd and IVth Congresses, in fact by Lenin and Trotsky. It was defended and systematically elaborated by Trotsky against Stalinist revisions (sometimes sectarian, sometimes opportunist, conceptions of the united front -- renunciation of the struggle for power and a transitional programme, and a policy of alliances with wings of the bourgeoisie, such as the Popular Front etc). Trotsky further proceeded to study in a practically exhaustive way declining capitalism's forms of defense (fascism, Bonapartism).
The creation of a first workers' state in an economically backward country and its isolation in the world raised the most complex problems on every plane. The victory of the bureaucracy and its absolute power under the tyrannical leadership of Stalin helped to aggravate all these problems. It is to Trotsky that we are indebted for the greatest clarity about these questions. On the problems of industrialization, planning, the proportions of the various branches of the economy, relations with the peasantry, relations of economic questions with soviet democracy, on political problems in the workers' state (separation of state and party, plurality of parties, etc), on cultural problems, on all problems posed today with a force rendered doubly explosive, both because of the level attained by the Soviet Union and because of the Stalinist methods of repressing independent initiative in any field whatever -- on all these problems Trotsky provided the correct method of approach, and often indeed solutions that are still valid today. That the bureaucracy, forced to take action along lines indicated by him so many years ago, should continue to manifest hostility toward Trotsky, without however resorting to the worst calumnies of the Stalin era, is easy to understand: at the basis of all Trotsky's answers there is to be found as the essential element the intervention of the masses by the reestablishment of soviet democracy.
We are leaving aside very many manifestations of Trotsky's thought in the most varied fields, in which most often he no more than sketched out the way of treating them, but which will unquestionably constitute for future Marxists -- as is the case for very many passages in the work of Marx -- a guide for tackling new problems.

 There is in Trotsky's work one point on which many an admirer of today is skeptical: that is his creation of the Fourth International and his conviction that it was, as early as before the Second World War, indispensable for ensuring the future of revolutionary Marxism and of the workers' movement. We shall not take up this whole question again here, where the militants of the Fourth International have so often had occasion to deal with it. We wish only to insist on the continuity of the international and internationalist activity of Trotsky. He had been one of the representatives of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers' Party to the Second International, and had seen its weaknesses; he had been at the foundation of the Third International, had there, together with Lenin, played the leading role, and had tried to make' it into a genuine international leadership of the revolutionary workers' movement; and had seen that one of the essential factors in its disintegration had consisted of abandoning an internationalist conception in favor of "socialism in a single country." To that it must be added that Trotsky had taken not at all lightly the error he had committed, compared to Lenin, on the question of the party. It was necessary to keep revolutionary Marxist principles intact, including that of the party -- and, after 1914, there could be no question of anything except an international party. It is there that is to be found the explanation of the immense efforts expended by Trotsky in his last years on the turbulent problems of an organization so numerically weak as the Fourth International, efforts which remain incomprehensible to those who do not understand that in so doing Trotsky was showing that he had adopted the Leninist conception of the party. On this question too, we are sure that the future will show that Trotsky was right. No one can yet foresee the forms of organization by which we shall pass from today's Fourth International of cadres to tomorrow's Fourth International of mass parties, but for us there is no doubt that the mass revolutionary Marxist movement of tomorrow will connect up with the Third International of the time of Lenin and Trotsky through the Fourth International founded in 1938 under Trotsky's leadership.

 The error that Trotsky most often committed in more than one circumstance was to be ahead, and even very much ahead, of events. In that also, it may be said in passing, Trotsky found himself in the company of Marx and Engels. Although the brakes of reformism and the Soviet bureaucracy continue to have a strong effect on the mass movement throughout the world, they have lost much of their power. There is very little left of the Stalin cult five years after his death. And so we can, on this eightieth anniversary of Trotsky's birth, affirm with the greatest confidence that on his ninetieth anniversary his memory and his work will be honored by the great masses of the entire world.




Pierre Frank Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



re Frank: The Politics of French Stalinism (June 1952)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
The Politics of French Stalinism
(June 1952)

From Fourth International, Vol. 13 No. 4, July–August 1952, pp. 108–113.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.
Proofread by Einde O’Callaghan (January 2013).

The situation in France has been marked by a whole series of events at the end of May and the beginning of June 1952 which were widely commented on in the world press but most often in a specious manner. The real relationship of forces, the perspectives in view were generally distorted. So too with the shifts of policy of the Communist Party of France. The object of the following remarks is to clarify several essential points.
 
France, Nerve Center of Western Europe
It is a commonplace that France is the most sensitive. spot of the Atlantic coalition in western Europe. Not only is the majority of the working class under the leadership of the Stalinists (who have obtained 5 million votes in all elections since 1945 – and the CGT, Stalinist-controlled trade union federation, obtains some 60 to 70% of the votes in the elections of delegates in the industries). But a defeatist and anti-American feeling is harbored by the bourgeoisie and petty-bourgeoisie and finds daily expression in the newspaper, Le Monde. French capitalism – which takes a dim view of the rearmament of Germany – is dominated by American pressure and .can do nothing but passively wait the advent of the war. It must attempt to disorganize the working class to the utmost and to weaken the hold of the CPF upon it. Hence the imperative need for French capitalism to engage in a series of attacks and provocations against the workers and against the CPF, short of civil war before the outbreak of the war itself. Antoine Pinay, the most reactionary premier since 1945, has atempted to push things furthest in this direction even to the point of running some risks. It should be noted that even some de Gaullists considered the arrest of Duclos an adventure.
However that may be, the government had prepared a conspiracy against the CPF on the eve of Ridgway’s arrival in France and sought a pretext to carry it out.
To get an idea of the importance of France for imperialist strategy, it should not be forgotten that there are around a million workers voting communist in the Paris area where the headquarters of OTAN [NATO – Note by ETOL] and its military arm, SHAPE, are located.
 
Stalinist Policy
The fact that France is one of the weakest rinks of the imperialist chain must inevitably tempt the Kremlin to utilize the workers’ movement and the strength of the CPF to try to break up the Atlantic coalition. The “radicalization” [1] of the CPF must be considered within this framework.
This “radicalization” began to take a particularly palpable form at the beginning of this year. The CPF countered the prohibition of the traditional annual demonstration on February 12 by an appeal for a general strike. The results of the action were inconclusive. Workers’ preparation was not especially intense except at Renault (France’s largest auto plants located in the Paris suburbs). The movement was spotty throughout the country. There was a clash at Renault between the workers and the police who, however, did not seek to push the fight too far.
The 12th of February action was to serve the purpose of an initial radicalization of the CPF membership as was very clearly indicated in the deliberations of the CPF Central Committee which took place around the middle of the month.
The radical note emerging from this session was further confirmed and sharpened by editorial articles in the Cahiers du Communisme, CP theoretical organ (March and May 1952) written by Etienne Fajon and Francois Billoux, members of the Political Bureau; Billoux had just returned from the USSR.
What was the nature of this “radicalization”?
It was pointed out that the political situation in France was marked on the government level by a series of more and more reactionary premiers since 1945, that discontent was general and, consequently that the situation was opportune to reverse the direction of events by means of widespread mass action regardless of the composition of the existing parliament. It was also pointed out that the principal enemy to be overcome for this purpose was the French bourgeoisie which was the main enemy although acting under American pressure; that the bourgeoisie as a class was betraying the interests of the nation, and that even if some individual bourgeois were in favor of east-west trade, it was for individual motives and should not therefore lead to an attenuation of the struggle against them. The need for concrete actions of struggle against the war was emphasized (refusal to transport ‘and handle arms). An impeccable position was taken against the French Union (the French Empire – Ed.) and for the support of the colonial movements. They glossed over the policy of collecting peace petitions (Stockholm) and explained that the struggle for peace was part of the struggle for socialism. They explained that the reversal of political orientation in France should lead to socialism. The question of perspectives was emphasized as a means of insuring the cohesion of the party in action.
In effect, in extreme confusion and under the banner of national independence, the CPF ranks were raised to a higher political level and to greater combativity. On the other hand, the CPF leadership continued its policy of united front “from below,” seeking to set the socialist workers against their leadership solely by denunciation. They retained their slogan of a government of democratic unity, sometimes using the expression of a peace government or a government of honest men, the dominant note being ambiguity. There was not the slightest hint of a united front of the Communist Party and the Socialist Party nor of a struggle for a united front socialist-communist government.
What was most interesting on the organizational plane was that while the CPF leadership formally recognized the right of Stalinist-front organizations (like the Peace Movement) to follow a different policy, in effect it renounced the previous orientation of adapting the party to these organizations and tended – bureaucratically, to be sure – to delineate the CPF in action and as an organization.
As a mass organization, the turn of the CPF and its leadership are not assimilated solely by the reading of resolutions of its Central Committee or of articles by members of the Political Bureau. Like any mass organization, the CPF is educated principally in action, and even if the leadership of the CPF was not bureaucratic in character, it would have been obliged to envisage the means of making its new policy understood through action. For so bureaucratic a leadership, there was no hesitation in precipitately involving the revolutionary vanguard in an action of which most of the participants were uninformed until the moment they were thrust into it. As has been pointed out above, the February 12th strike was broadly utilized by the CPF leadership to begin to radicalize the ranks of the party. (For example, the first clash with the police at Renault, the raising of barricades, etc.).
 
The Events of May 28th
The arrival of Ridgway, fresh from Korea, thus occurred in a situation where the government on its side was preparing a provocation and a conspiracy and a Stalinist leadership on the other side was seeking to raise the level of the struggles.
The government proscribed the demonstration called on the place de la Republique, but the call for the demonstration remained. Tension mounted as the day approached. The government arrested Andre Stil, editor-in-chief of L’Humanité (leading Stalinist newspaper). Local demonstrations were organized by communist branches. Then, as a consequence of the deportation of Messali Hadj (Algerian nationalist leader) from Algeria, North African workers demonstrated on May 23 on French territory; the police opened fire, killing four Algerian workers. On the morning of May 28, the police seized L’Humanité.
In the late afternoon, when the factories let out, only a vanguard was answering the call of the CPF. To outmaneuver the police who had concentrated their forces at place de la Republique and in a fairly large neighboring area, the demonstrators gathered at a dozen different points. The number of demonstrators, which is difficult to establish, may however be estimated at from ten to fifteen thousand, but more important was the extremely combative character of the demonstration. In most cases the demonstrators took the offensive, attacked the police corteges, breaking them up, vigorously assailing the police and even a police station and police wagons in which demonstrators, were being taken off. A large number of police were wounded. There was one dead and many wounded among the demonstrators.
Although only a vanguard had taken part in the demonstration, it had transpired generally amidst the sympathy of the working masses.
This demonstration, and the extremely violent character of the clashes, cannot be considered as accidental, but as the prelude, the general rehearsal for the period in which civil war is ripening in France; it marks an important stage in the development of the class struggle to extremely high levels. It deserves a detailed study, because some of its features will appear in a more developed form in the struggles for power in the future.
Tactically, the communist militants had surprised the police and the demonstration had as its first result the raising of their combativity, their revolutionary potential, a series of questions becoming clearer to them (struggle against the state, arming of the workers ...). But politically matters were to take another turn, for on the same evening the government put into operation its conspiracy by arresting Jacques Duclos, general secretary of the CPF since the departure of Thorez.
 
The Government Conspiracy and the Workers Reaction
The day after the demonstration the government proceeded with the execution of its plans. L’Humanité was again seized. Some days later the police raided the headquarters of the Central Committee and a number of local CPF offices.
On May 29, communist workers attempted to arouse the workers to action in a number of factories. Despite general sympathy, they encountered considerable difficulties even in factories where their influence is very strong. The National Committee of the CGT met quickly to issue an appeal to action for the defense of democratic rights and for action on economic demands which were “to begin on June 4th.” This action was to take broader forms as it proceeded. The CGT’s appeal was extremely skillful and cautious. But the railroad workers federation called for an unlimited general strike.
On June 4th a strike was declared at Renault as well as in several Parisian metal factories, but generally speaking, despite all the sympathy the masses showed for the CPF and despite their hostility to the government repressions, the failure of the movement was almost complete, particularly among the railroad workers where there were not even partial movements as there had been on February 12th. On June 5, the movement also came to an end at Renault. At no times since 1945 had the ranks of the CPF found themselves so isolated in action from the working class.
 
The CPF and the Working Class
During recent years the members of the CPF had experienced the high and the low of their capacity to mobilize the workers, but never had they suffered as heavy a defeat, and this in face of the worst government provocation: the arrest of the principal leader of the party in violation of his parliamentary immunity. It was also evident that their leadership had been taken by surprise by this government aggression and by the absence of working class response to their appeals for action against the repression. Almost a week passed before they organized a mass meeting against the repression, which was attended by 30,000 people.
This situation (these relationships between the working class and the CPF) could not be explained to the satisfaction of the militants by the customary reasons used in defeats: inadequate preparation, faulty application of the policy of the party ... A political explanation was necessary and the principal purpose of the Central Committee meeting of the CPF in the month of June was to give such a political explanation to the members of the party in order as much as possible to divert the members from seeking such an explanation on their own. But before examining the results of this meeting, let us recapitulate what arc the relations between the CPF and the masses and how they were manifested on May 28 as well as in the following days.
The failure of the CPF to mobilize the masses, its isolation in action, does not in any way signify that the broad masses are separating themselves from it or that the fighting potential of the French working class has been seriously impaired. At the very moment when these events were occurring elections for delegates were being held in many industries (Renault, railroad ...). The losses of the CGT were at a minimum, from five to ten percent, while sixty to seventy percent of the workers continued to vote CGT. These votes were cast amidst extraordinary heavy employer pressure. Dismissals had mounted. Thus, at the Renault plant, where a few days after June 4, 63 percent of the workers had voted for the CGT, more than 400 militants had been dismissed since February 12. Under such conditions losses remained slight.
The Force Ouvrière trade unions (a trade union federation led by Social Democrats) did not progress either numerically or in influence. The Christian unions, who are to the left of Force Ouvrière, made very slight gains. The CPF maintained its positions in various municipal and legislative elections.
Generally speaking the working masses of France who, between 1936 and 1945. have in their majority gone over from the Socialist to Stalinist leadership, remained deeply tied to the Stalinists. There is not even the slightest movement back to the reformists despite the many defeats the working class has suffered since 1947. And the events of May–June 1952 have in no way modified the fundamental relations between the CPF and the working class.
This does not mean that the masses are blindly and uncritically following the CPF or that they are ready to reply to any appeal on its part. That had already been evident in the past but now it is necessary to understand why they did not react at the very moment when repression was at its height.
Beginning with 1947, the CPF has been thrust into opposition to the government; at times it had been sharply in conflict with the state, especially during the miners strike of 1948. However, from 1947 to the beginning of 1952, its general activity remained within the framework of propagandist opposition and consisted only from time to time of general mobilizations at an extremely low level (Stockholm petitions, mass meetings ...). Its general policy was that these petitions and these rallies would stop the warmakers ... During recent years the masses have not heard any propaganda for struggle.
The stiffening of the CPF and its “radicalization” occurred bureaucratically and was not apparent to the masses. We have already pointed out that the large part of the membership of the CPF only became aware of the turn in the struggle itself. Because of this fact, the masses – whatever their sympathies toward those who were fighting the bourgeois state and the employers – were not politically prepared for action, above all because of the past policy of the CPF. But this was also due to its present policy.
Discontent is general among the working masses. Grievances are numerous. But more or less instinctively the masses feel that they cannot obtain satisfaction of their demands in limited struggles. They feel the question to be tied to the question of power and that any real change for them must result from some real change in the government. But this sentiment of the masses is not stimulated and not transformed into action because the CPF’s position on the problem, to say the least, is equivocal.
The CPF does not carry on any campaign on the question of power. The Central Committee adopts resolutions which close in a ritualistic way by a call for a “government of democratic unity,” which has no meaning for CPF members or for the masses in general. Three or four years ago when the formula of a “government of democratic unity” was first issued – about a year after the end of the Stalinist coalition with the petty bourgeois parties – the slogan could have given the appearance of seeking for a new period of collaboration. Under present conditions, such an eventuality being excluded by the very nature of things, the slogan loses all real meaning and in fact presents an obstacle to the only real slogan, that of a united front government of the workers, a communist-socialist government issuing from the joint struggle of the two big working class parties.
The broad masses do not rally today to the appeals to action, of the CPF. Although isolated in this sense, the militants of the party remain the leaders of the working class of the country. The. masses will inevitably begin to act because of their absolutely intolerable conditions which will be worsened by preparations for the Third World War and by the war itself. This development can be aided or hindered by the CPF’s policy but it cannot be eliminated by it. When the masses take their own road to radicalization they will inevitably turn to the communist militants for leadership. They will choose as leaders those who have had the courage to be in the vanguard of the struggle and they will not begin by a careful scrutiny of the policy of their party. Any other conception would be an anachronism.
 
Fajon’s Report and the Central Committee Meeting
What is the significance of the June 19–20 Central Committee meeting?
The general opinion of the bourgeois press was that there was a turn of the CPF dictated by Moscow. Why the turn? It cannot be theoretically excluded that Moscow ordered a turn, but for. the present serious international objective reasons are lacking to substantiate such a hypothesis. The left emphasis, particularly given by Billoux’ article, undoubtedly originated in directives from Moscow. It is to be explained objectively by the development of the situation. For the moment, the factors are lacking which would permit the conclusion that Moscow has reversed itself. On the contrary, a study of the minutes of the Central Committee meeting give rise to a much more plausible explanation. One cannot and should not explain all the actions of a Stalinist leadership solely by orders from Moscow. Especially when a mass party is involved such a leadership cannot but take into account the relationships of the party with the masses. Moreover it possesses a margin of maneuver within the general line established by Moscow.
What is even more striking in Fajon’s report than its differences with Billoux’ article, which are not to be discounted, is its self-criticism. And when we speak of self-criticism, we can say, regardless of its political content, that for the first time this word can be used without quotation marks. In effect, Fajon says that the Political Bureau is responsible for the “insufficiently clear and incomplete” article by Billoux.
Jeannette Vermeersch (Maurice Thorez’ wife) speaks of “errors of estimation” in one of her articles. The Political Bureau also declares itself party responsible for errors committed in important instances: an article in L’Humanité, a headline in Liberté, organ of the Communist Federation of the North, are called sectarian. The Railroad Workers Federation and the Union of Trade Unions of the Seine are also criticized.
All in all, the self-criticism is certainly still very guarded, but what is inescapable is that the leadership does not shift the blame, as is its custom, onto a scapegoat. This self-criticism needs explaining, for the leadership does not beat its breast without having serious reasons for so doing.
It did so for many reasons. First, there is the idea, widespread in the party, that they were too far ahead of the masses. The leadership as well as the ranks understood that the first need was to re-establish contact with the masses. Moreover, this is unquestionably a real problem for any leadership and presupposes a whole series of measures to which we will return later. The greatest danger for the leadership would, be if the party members began to seek their own political solutions on the basis of their political development of recent months, the line set forth by Billoux, and the radicalization ensuing from recent struggles. On this basis, there was the risk that the militants would orient themselves outside of the roads mapped by the bureaucracy and would tend politically toward a more or less finished revolutionary conception. Under these conditions, the leadership shouldered part of the responsibility and outlined its political answer.
What are the principal differences between the Billoux article and Fajon’s report?
None of the ideas expressed by Billoux is openly condemned or contradicted, except on the point of the socialist perspectives of the struggle, but the accent is placed on something else. Fajon’s report insists on the contradictions existing within the French bourgeoisie. He no longer speaks of the need to defeat it as a class, but he also no longer says that it is necessary to support one faction of the class against another or something of the kind. The problem of a change of orientation in the policy of France is mentioned in passing instead of being the central theme. There is no change on the need of struggling side by side with the colonial peoples. He continues to emphasize the need of specific actions against the preparations of war. In order to continue to carry on the “struggle for national independence and peace,” he emphasizes the need of linking a campaign for the freeing of Duclos, which would be a campaign in defense of democratic rights, to the struggle for the immediate demands of the workers and the middle classes. But the change occurs on the question of perspectives.
The struggle for peace, “which is the decisive question of the present, which overshadows all others,” is dissociated from the “struggle for socialism which is our program for the future.” How different from the editorial of the same Fajon in Cahiers du Communisme (March 1952) in which, explaining the February Central Committee decisions, he wrote that world socialism could be considered as a perspective for the near future. It follows from this change that “what is essential is the broadest possible unity to safeguard peace of all those opposed to war” which means a re-adaptation to the position of the fellow travellers. Finally, says the Fajon report,
“it is to the degree that new strata of the population take part in the battle for peace and national independence, to the degree that this battle rises to a higher level ... that a policy of peace ... will triumph ... under a broad government of democratic unity.”
The change, as we see, while not unimportant in presentation or in emphasis, is hardly fundamental in nature. There is no repudiation, even in the Stalinist way, of the line defined in the Billoux article; no different line is presented. It is undeniable that the leadership in its own way is seeking to re-establish contact of the CPF with the masses so as to find a better opening for the application of the line defined in Billoux’ article.
Obviously this is a Stalinist leadership, i.e., it is profoundly empirical and opportunistic. It could not subject its past policy from top to bottom to self-criticism; it is constrained to remain within certain limits, i.e., to a number of current decisions and articles.
What were the factors which were at play in the readjustment of the tactics of the CPF? Nothing clear on this score is to be found in Fajon’s report and therefore one can only make certain presumptions. Did they take into consideration certain signs of wavering in the Atlantic coalition over the ratification of the general contract with Germany? It is possible, but this would prove that as a typical Stalinist leadership it still has illusions in the possibility that inter-imperialist contradictions can play the same role they did in the second world war. It certainly can count on the development in France of a broad expression of public opinion against the police regime being created by the government, which is already apparent in a whole series of verbal protests, resolutions, etc., arising from circles outside those controlled, animated, or influenced by the Stalinists.
Naturally a revival of contact with the masses requires a policy which takes the immediate demands of the masses and the defense of democratic rights as its point of departure. The Central Committee decision to carry on a campaign for the freeing of Duclos is not erroneous in itself. (This article was written prior to the quashing of the charges against Duclos – Ed.) And, as we have pointed out above, the climate is favorable for such a campaign finding a real echo.
But a campaign for such elementary objectives, must first of all be conducted through the medium of agitation for the united front. In this connection, in the trade union sphere, the CGT leadership has revived the proposals it has made since September 1951 on various occasions for unity of action to the other trade union federations. Nevertheless, the proposal is implemented in its usual way merely as a formal approach from the top without any systematic. campaign addressed to the ranks popularizing its objectives, as though it were merely a futile gesture.
On the other hand, the necessary scope can only be given by a struggle on a broader scale than the trade union field, i.e., by a political struggle involving all the working people of the country. But here the leadership of the CPF is much less at home. At the close of 1951, there were articles by Fajon in L’Humanité beginning a campaign for the socialist-communist united front. But this campaign never got beyond the local scale. And then it was suddenly stopped short. Then there was discernible a resumption of the practice of appealing to the ranks of the socialists against their leaders (particularly in Billoux’ article).
In recent days there have been signs that the question of this campaign, has been raised in the CPF again. In the campaign against the incarceration of Duclos, importance is given to the participation of socialists (notably of delegates from socialist organizations). Mention should be made of a proposal of the “Progressive Union” addressed to both parties and also to capitalist parties for a new “Peoples Front.” An article by Lecoeur (a member of the Political Bureau) in L’Humanité warns against rejecting the united front on an organizations level. In a general way, what emerges from the conduct of the Stalinist leadership since the beginning of June is an empirical search to find a solution to the problems of establishing ties with the masses for action.
The weakest point is the question of government. According to Fajon’s report, what is required is a struggle which by extending its scope eventually poses the problem of power. But the obverse is true. A systematic campaign in its many forms for a united front socialist-communist government is necessary because this conception, once accepted by the masses, becomes a means of launching partial struggles as an opener to broader battles. The withdrawal of perspectives by Fajon in his report that were contained in the Billoux article is precisely the important retreat that will hinder the communist militants the most in their search for a solution to the problem of their party leading the masses.
Although, in our opinion, Billoux’ article was also “insufficiently clear and inadequate,” but for different reasons than those of the Stalinist Political Bureau (the defeat of the bourgeoisie as a class, the changing of the political orientation of the country by a struggle which would unfold the perspective of socialism) this article could have had the effect of making the communist militants more susceptible to questions of united front and of the government of the united front as concrete means for winning the masses for a struggle for such a perspective. In conclusion, the obstacle to the progress of CPF militants in the Fajon report is not its attempt to find slogans to revive contact with the masses, but the elimination of what Billoux had presented as a perspective.
 
A General View of the Situation
But what is happening in the CPF should also be viewed on a more general plane.
France is facing growing tension, more frequent shocks and convulsions. Precisely because it is weak, very weak, the French bourgeoisie will seek through such devices as the Pinay conspiracy to create difficulties in the workers’ camp. Duclos’ arrest has not fundamentally changed the relationship between the classes in France any more than the arrests in Tunisia have fundamentally changed the relationship of forces between imperialism and the Tunisian people. But these arrests, by provoking premature actions of the vanguard, serve the purpose of gaining time for the bourgeoisie and of interfering with the normal progress of the masses.
The upsurge of the French proletariat under pressure of the conditions created by war preparations is proceeding slowly. A first start occurred in May-April 1951 but since then the bourgeoisie has succeeded in preventing a new outbreak.
Because of this situation and of a whole series of events, the radicalization of the CPF militants, which follows its own course of development appreciably different from the evolution of the broad masses, induces differentiations in the ranks of the CPF which cannot be normally expressed in a political form because of the bureaucratic regime. Nevertheless these stirrings do find forms of expression. It is noteworthy to recall the polemic last year of two Political Bureau members against a Central Committee member who had proposed the reestablishment of the Communist Youth. The events of May–June 1952 obliged the Political Bureau to indulge in self-criticism which for the moment serves the needs of the bureaucracy but in the long run undermines belief in the omniscience of the supreme leadership.
The reactions of the CPF to these events provides us with a close-up of the processes at work in mass Communist Parties as a result of the aggravation of the world situation. It was only after the event that we could grasp the overall consequences of what had happened to the Communist Parties of China and Yugoslavia. In France, we are now living at the onset of this process, which will still be a very complicated and tortuous one.
The radicalization today encompasses the vanguard elements and not yet the masses. Other events will shake up Stalinist monolithism even more. But these processes will develop within the ranks of the CPF. The militants will not seek a solution to their problems on the outside. Basing themselves on this or that phase of the searchings and groping of their top leaders their political thought will take shape and mature. The development of the situation will provide the Trotskyist vanguard, on condition it takes the work of the Third World Congress seriously, with numerous opportunities to influence the poltical evolution of the best cadres of the French working class who are outstanding Bolshevik elements despite the Stalinist hoop that now binds them.
June 27, 1952

Footnote
1. Radicalization is the nearest we can come in conveying the meaning of the French gauchissement which literally means to become more left.

re Frank: The Marty-Tillon Affair ... (December 1952)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
The Marty-Tillon Affair Reveals
How Our Ideas Have Penetrated the PCF
(December 1952)

Source: La Vérité des Travailleurs, December 1952.
Translated: for marxists.org by Mitchell Abidor.
Proofread: Einde O’Callaghan (January 2013).
CopyLeft: Creative Commons (Attribute & ShareAlike) marxists.org 2010.




Translator’s note: André Marty and Charles Tillon were two of the most important leaders of the PCF. Leaders of the Black Sea mutiny in the French navy against intervention against the USSR, Marty was the Comintern’s representative to the Republican army and political commissar of the International Brigades in Spain, where he ruthlessly purged the politically suspect (and it is in this character that he appears in Hemingway’s For Whom the Bell Tolls), and Tillon was the leader of the French Communist Resistance to the German Occupation. For reasons still unclear, both became suspect after the war – Tillon perhaps because he had had a violent disagreement with Jeannette Vermeersh, wife of PCF secretary Maurice Thorez – and in 1952, in the heart of the post-war purges in Eastern Europe, they became victims of what Tillon later called “A Moscow Trial in Paris.” An internal PCF investigation was carried out led by Léon Mauvais, and both men were stripped of their leadership positions. Despite Marty’s appeals to Stalin, the decision stood. Tillon remained a member of the PCF but was expelled in 1970 after opposing the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.





Two days ago the Central Committee (C.C.) of the French Communist Party (PCF) announced a decision concerning André Marty and Charles Tillon. The CC, which only heard a reading of Marty’s texts (it didn’t have the written copies) decided that these documents will not be published by the party. In other words, their publication and distribution to members of the PCF would result in expulsion.
In the meanwhile Tillon has been returned to the base.
Marty’s fate has been turned over to his cell, which must decide on “his relations with police elements” and on all the faults the have suddenly been discovered in him, notably his “capitulationism and panicked comportment.” (L’Humanité, November 19) Expulsion is not far off.
And so the members of the PCF will judge Marty based on accusations he has refused to counter-sign, and not on political positions he has expressed in writing.
In the intense campaign carried out against him as well as in the Mauvais report, political accusations were made against him that cannot be dodged: the role of the Soviet Union, the role and the national policy of the party during the war, action in defense of peace, the youth question, the colonial question, the concept of the party, and the question of the united front with the Socialist Party.
And also deviations on the question of Trotskyism: “It is certainly not by chance that André Marty, referring to Trotskyism, spoke of ‘a party (Trotskyist) in opposition to our PCF,’ thus leading people to believe that Trotskyism is a current of the worker’s movement instead of expressing himself in keeping with our usual policy on that gang of police agents and provocateurs in the pay of the enemy.” (L’Humanité, November 19)
Up till now Marty’s ideas are unknown to working class opinion, and we can’t take political grievances formulated against him as an indication of his orientation. In general, he is supposed to have been against the submission of the polices of the PCF to the changes in Soviet diplomacy, against participation in capitalist government at the end of the war, and against the policy of “production first”, i.e., against a policy of stabilizing the capitalist state and economy and for a policy of mass mobilization for the seizing of power. He is supposed to have been against the policy of fighting for peace being reduced to petitions and signatures. He is even supposed to have been for a party to party policy of a united front.
All of these positions and those similarly oriented are close to or identical with those that the Parti Communiste Internationaliste (PCI), the French section of the Fourth International, has defended for several years. In the previous issues of this newspaper we have demonstrated the correctness of these positions as opposed to the so-called demonstrations of the leadership of the PCF.
But these positions were not only those of the Trotskyists or those Marty is said to have defended in private. They were also shared by many Communist militants. Doesn’t the Political Bureau’s October 3 say “excellent comrades might believe that the working class should have seized power at the moment of the Liberation”?
It is also well known that many militants, while voting in 1945 for the resolutions of the C.C. at Ivry nevertheless sought the means to keep their weapons. (In the same way that today many will vote for the sanctions against Marty and Tillon while thinking the same way as them politically.)
And how many militants, despite what Mauvais calls the Stalinist “political characteristic” do indeed consider the Trotskyists a current of the revolutionary working class movement?
The Marty-Tillon Affair has demonstrated that for more than eight years the ideas defended by us were the same as those that animated a current of Communist militants, many of whom knew nothing about Trotskyism other than the slanders spread about them, and that this left current was so powerful politically that it reached the very leadership.
And now? Marty and Tillon’s attitude could have serious repercussions. They might stimulate the revolutionary ideas of thousands of Communist militants by developing a Communist policy or on the contrary, as was often the case with past splits, lead them to believe that outside Stalinist obedience there is only a political void and class enemies. The future will answer this question, and let us hope the answer will be positive.
But it is not the only the attitude of these two men that will count. The situation that led to the maturing of a left current in the PCF will grow more acute. The coming war and the revolutionary rising of the masses on all continents will more vigorously lead a growing number of Communist militants towards the positions of the Fourth International, of world revolution.
 

re Frank: France Under the Fourth Republic (1947)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
France Under the Fourth Republic
(January 1947)

From Fourth International, Vol.8 No.4, April 1947, pp.104-108. [1*]
Originally published in Quatrième Internationale, January-February 1947.
Translated by Margaret Stewart.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Following the collapse of the Third Republic in 1940 and
the termination of World War II, the year 1947 was supposed to
inaugurate the definitive era of the Fourth Republic, with a
Constitution adopted by referendum, with a Chamber elected by universal
suffrage, with a Council of the Republic, a President of the Republic,
a French Union embracing the colonies with or without their consent,
and a Monnet four-year plan for the reconstruction of French economy.
But this “definitive” era has had very precarious beginnings. It is
much easier to elect Deputies and Councillors of the Republic than to
form a government; the French Union is being realized in life by
plunging the Viet Nam in fire and blood; the application of the Monnet
Plan presupposes many conditions, none of which is present.
Whither is France heading? On the day after the world war the
economic situation is literally disastrous. The material losses are
huge, as the most optimistic admit; and the setback cannot be recouped,
for the day of small countries with limited national economies is over;
the productive forces of the [last century no longer suffice for the
maintenance of a colonial world and against the great working class] at
home. But with all their colossal resources and power,  these 
Moreover, French capitalism, in assaying its own perspectives,
entertains no illusions about its real capacities. The Monnet Plan —
whether it will be realized or not — does not set high objectives; on
the contrary, its goals are comparatively modest. In the report
submitted by Blum to the United States in order to obtain a loan, it is
stated:
France will devote all her efforts to modernize her
industry and agriculture in order to attain by 1950 this level (25 per
cent above that of 1929, if possible).
Even this will raise the consumption of energy, in terms
of tons of coal per capita, only to 2.9 as compared with 4.15 for Great
Britain and 5.1 for the United States. This would bring the per capita
production of steel only to 240 kilograms as against 285 for Great
Britain and 351 for the United States in the depression year 1937!
In brief, French capitalism, feeling too old to plunge into
adventures, clings to its “Maginot Line” mentality; it would be quite
content if it is able to preserve the larger part of its [inheritance
from the previous generations which would enable double-talk was
supplemented, a few weeks before the Moscow] Conference, by Stalin’s
demonstrative withdrawal from the post scene and which would justify
its having a small folding chair alongside the large arm chairs of the
“Big Three.”
But even these modest ambitions are far from being assured. The year
1946 was supposed to be a special year, not included in the plan,
during which the economy was to be reconverted on a peacetime basis and
the levels of 1938 would be regained. (Let us recall that 1938 was a
depression year for French economy.) But to obtain these results, a
great deal is still required. In an article devoted to the importation
of coal, Le Monde, November 16, 1946, arrives at the
following conclusions:
... Despite a rather bad situation, which is
undoubtedly temporary, our industry, while far from attaining the
necessary rate of expansion, will nevertheless be able next year to
stabilize itself at an average rate of approximately 80 per cent of
1938; but this effort can probably be sustained only by maintaining
severe restrictions on home consumption and by utilizing in large
measure the second-grade coal which is being extracted since the war
from our mines.
The Monnet Plan pretends to ignore the international
conjuncture. But in reality it is based on the hope that there will be
no crisis in American or world economy before 1950, and that by that
time French capitalism will be in a condition to sustain such a shock.
But for several months the economists and business circles in both
England and the United States have become rather dubious that American
and world economy can avoid a crisis before 1950. There are various
ominous signs (declines in commodities such as cotton, accumulation of
inventories among manufacturers, wholesalers, and so on).
 
Monnet Plan
A few weeks ago the English Minister of Foreign Trade
declared in the House of Commons that he expected a “crisis of
readjustment” in 1947, which, according to him, would be like that of
1921, brief and of no great depth. The price-cutting experiment,
introduced by Blum, which is a temporary measure primarily designed to
divert the demands of the workers (for higher wages), is itself a
speculation in part on an eventual decline of world prices sometime in
1947. But a drop in prices, bound up with a world “readjustment”
crisis, would confront France with new problems and would probably
entail the gravest consequences.
One of the conditions for the realization of the Monnet Plan is the
stabilization of currency. The leaders of world finance, notably the
directors of the International Monetary Fund set up at Bretton Woods,
apparently consider the exchange rate of the franc as too high. About a
week before it hailed Blum’s experiment, Le Monde had
the following to say both about prices and currency:
It appears that a rise in the rate exchange can be
avoided only by the introduction of lower prices. But no matter from
what angle we approach the question, the solution remains unclear. The
prices of manufactured commodities, which are virtually the only ones
concerned in exports, lag far behind agricultural prices, which are not
permitted to decline out of political considerations and because of the
impotence of economic controls. Any lowering of industrial prices,
assuming this were technically possible, would therefore aggravate
still further the imbalance of French economy ... Finally, it ought not
to be forgotten that the rise which we have been experiencing without
interruption for 11 years and which has recently become accelerated,
cannot be checked at a single stroke. A great deal of courage coupled
with favorable circumstances is required to curb it little by little.
But the factor that dominates the whole situation in
France, both as a consequence of the economic decline and as an element
aggravating this decline, is the social and political condition of the
country.
The patient’s temperature can be easily charted. There was a
succession of elections and referendums. More than a year after the
“liberation” and a few weeks after the war ended, in October 1945, the
first elections to the Constituent Assembly took place. The majority
was gained by the Socialists and the Communists. As a parliamentary
force, these two parties were practically equal. The old bourgeois
parties had collapsed; the reaction did not dare show its face; the
Radicals were in full retreat. In order to achieve the mobilization of
all those who recoil from socialism and communism, big capital built
the MRP, with any kind of material. This party masqueraded as socially
minded (its leaders participated in the Resistance movement, accepted
nationalization and announced their readiness to collaborate in the
government with the workers’ parties).
 
Electoral Fever Chart
By means of a referendum held on the same day and thanks
to the compliance of the Socialists, the powers of the Assembly were
limited in relation to the powers of the government. De Gaulle, still
wearing the halo of “liberation,” saw himself entrusted with the
leadership of the government. But with the termination of the war, in
the struggle between the tendencies of the bourgeoisie, toward a strong
regime and the aspirations of the masses after all these years of
suffering, the advantage was not on the side of the bourgeoisie. There
was a growing clash between de Gaulle, who personifies the tendencies
toward a strong regime, and the parties who distort and misdirect the
aspirations of the masses. The parties did not bring their differences
into the open; they issued no appeals to the country; they showed no
militancy. But de Gaulle, finding no solid ground under his feet,
walked out himself in January 1946, slammed the door behind him, bade
farewell to politics, received the homage of all parties and retired to
the provinces, there to wait and prepare, while the existing parties
disintegrated, for a favorable moment to install the strong regime.
With the departure of de Gaulle, the three-party coalition continued
under the leadership of the Socialist, Gouin. The Stalinists, who
secured the disarmament of the militias and the dissolution of the
committees, launched an appeal for increased production and extolled
the wage-freeze, while the MRP started opposing any measure that might
adversely affect capital in the slightest degree. To the right of the
MRP there was constituted the avowedly and traditionally reactionary
PRL, which is the culture medium for fascist elements, but which is not
an actual party of fascism.
The friction within the three-party system kept growing, as the date
for the Constituent Assembly drew closer. After obtaining numerous
constitutional concessions from the SP and CP, the MRP — without
leaving the coalition government or being forced by the other parties
to leave it — repudiated the draft, and with the aid of the entire
reaction succeeded in the May referendum in defeating the draft of a
bourgeois constitution that had been already adopted by the Communist
and Socialist deputies. Then came the June 2 elections for a second
Constituent Assembly. Big capital, forcing the PRL to withdraw in many
electoral districts, gave its backing to the MRP, which succeeded in
taking the lead among the three major parties. The Socialist Party —
which compromises itself on each occasion in its role as intermediary
in the three-party coalition — lost as much on the right as it did on
the left, despite the jingling dollars of the Blum loan. The CP made
gains in the countryside, but stagnated or lost ground in the large
industrial centers, although it came out in favor of removing wage
controls three days before the elections.
Henceforward the formation of a government proved difficult.
Workers’ demonstrations multiplied and it was impossible to leave the
CP out of the government. Following its defeat, the SP tried to make
itself as inconspicuous as possible and left the direction of the
government to the leader of the MRP, Bidault. The three-party regime
was brought back again. In the interval between June 2 and November 10
the crisis of the three-party regime deepened. Prodded by the PRL, by
the Gaullist Union and by de Gaulle himself, the MRP became more and
more exacting in its demands. The SP and CP made more and more
concessions on the Constitution (on the issues of the President of the
Republic, Second Chamber, and so on), as well as on the workers’
demands. The discontent of the masses found a pitiful expression at the
Convention of the SP where the left wing did not know what to do with
its majority. On the other hand, it found a virile expression in the
mass movements that rolled over the heads of the trade union leadership
(strikes of the postal and Treasury employes, and so on). The CP, while
continuing to call for increased production and while continuing to
engage in the most systematic class collaboration, resorted to all
sorts of artifices in order to unload the responsibility for the
three-party system on the Socialists and to pose as champion of the
workers’ demands (demonstrations for the 25 per cent wage increase,
demonstrations against the high cost of living, and the like).
 
The Impasse
The draft Constitution, supported this time by the three
major parties, was adopted only by a slim majority. In the November 10
elections, despite the repeated elections, the number of absentions,
although on the increase, was not, however, very considerable. The
polarization became accentuated. The center parties lost while the
extremes benefited. In the bourgeois camp the MRP lost to parties on
its right, while the leading political circles of French imperialism
pushed the petty bourgeois masses toward the MRP. [1] We witnessed a shift of half a million petty
bourgeois to the right, but at the same time we saw the inability of
the big bourgeoisie to exploit this shift for the benefit of a more
reactionary policy. On the other hand, the SP suffered a complete rout,
losing about 750,000 votes and being literally ground to pieces between
the MRP and the CP. The latter gained 250,000 votes, not only
continuing to make further gains in the country as in June, but also
regaining the lost ground in the great industrial centers. This is the
way in which the desire of the working masses for a change finds its
expression; they cast their votes for a party which under the existing
conditions appears to them to be in the best parliamentary and
governmental position to satisfy their demands.
What have we witnessed since these elections? The party, which in
its press and in the Parliament advances demands for the Presidency of
the government, finds itself refused not only this post, but all other
important functions in the new Republic. This party, whose capacity for
action is so great, is made the target of a veto so far as key
ministerial posts are concerned. The French bourgeoisie is not powerful
enough to hold the working masses in check with its own forces. But
since the November 10 elections, the CP has not dared to call upon the
masses to intervene even in the same limited way, quite harmless to the
bourgeoisie, as it did last June in connection with the decontrol of
wages.

 
Post-Election Developments
The governmental crisis has unfolded solely within the
framework of a struggle at the top. It has involved such grave
political problems as the defense of the franc, cuts in the budget, new
burdens, maintenance of the French Union in Indo-China. But on these
questions there were no fundamental differences between the parties,
including the Stalinist party. The government crisis, which is
officially scheduled to reappear after the election of the President of
the Republic, will not involve any basic differences in program. But
the tension becomes obviously acute when it comes to permitting the
Stalinists in the government and assigning portfolios to them. However,
the French capitalists are aware that the presence of the Stalinists in
the government has been a valuable asset to them during the last two
years; they know that under the existing relation of forces, it would
be impossible for them to govern in opposition to the CP and the CGT
which is under CP control. Finally, they understand very well that the
CP is no longer any threat at all to the capitalist system.
In the Chamber, Jacques Duclos — falsely identifying his party with
the class he is betraying — complained that the workers were good
enough to die in battle and to produce but not to govern. True enough,
the bourgeoisie knows how to assay the ability of the CP to impel the
workers to produce or to fight for them, but they will avoid, if they
can, giving it places in the government, because they know that the CP
leadership, while respecting private property and the capitalist
regime, just as the traditional reformists do, is a tool of the ruling
Kremlin bureaucracy. In the key international questions, the interests
of the Moscow bureaucracy are placed by the CP leadership above the
interests of French capitalism. A glance at the international situation
suffices to understand how important this consideration is in
connection with the composition of the French government. The fact that
the CP holds the position of the most extreme chauvinism on the German
question counts for little, inasmuch as there is no assurance of the
constancy of these views. The SP which holds a much more moderate
position toward Germany merits far greater confidence. Blum has just
demonstrated that he will not hesitate to hold his own views while
preparing the annexation of the Saar as a “loyal director” of French
capitalism.
The preparations for the coming Moscow Conference unquestionably are
a dominant consideration in the composition of the French government.
While she lacks the authority of the three partners by whose side she
sits, France can, by casting her vote either on the side of the United
States and England or on the side of the Soviet Union, swing the
compromise one way or the other. Let us recall how eagerly Thorez
sought to reassure the Anglo-American capitalists by his statements in
the press and to the British news agencies on the day after the
elections when the CP advanced his candidacy for head of the
government. Supporting this candidacy in the Chamber, Duclos pointed
out that the comments in the English and American press were not
“unfavorable.” The United States and Great Britain who follow the
developments in France very closely, did not fail to exert considerable
pressure to eliminate or reduce the participation of the Stalinists in
the government.
Despite the existing difficulties, “national unity” — in one guise
or another — is excluded. It must be kept in reserve for much more
serious situations. A government simultaneously in opposition to both
the CP and SP is impossible; the MRP itself would not countenance this
right now. An anti-Communist government with the Socialists
participating, is equally impossible, for the SP cannot allow the
Stalinists to remain in the opposition. The three-party system or its
extension through the inclusion of other “left” parties presents very
great difficulties. So far as normal solutions are concerned, the
Parliament that emerged from the November 10 elections cannot maintain
a government. But if they do not wish to resort to the “strong state”
(they cannot do so as yet), if they wish to avert troubles which may in
one sense serve Bonapartist ends but which may also develop in just the
opposite sense, then they must at all costs find a solution by which
some time can be gained. The trick consisted in replacing an impossible
coalition of the major parties by the weakest party, leaving nothing of
the coalition except its hinge, already considerably worn out, and thus
forming a government composed exclusively of the party which emerged
the most enfeebled from the elections. This solution, in its own
fashion “extra-parliamentary,” presents some advantages for all.
 
A Tricky Solution
Blum is assuredly favorably regarded by Washington and
London, who know that he will not lean internationally toward Moscow.
From the domestic standpoint, it permits the two big parties, the MRP
and the CP, to avoid the three-party system and all governmental
collaboration and this is useful to both of them with regard to their
respective clientele: they can offer Bidault without Thorez, and Thorez
without Bidault. The bourgeoisie is enabled for a while to have a
government without the Stalinists, without its being a
government against the Stalinists. As touches the CP, despite
its repeated declarations in favor of a “united” Republican government,
the Blum solution does not displease it too much; for it is thus
enabled all the more easily to pluck the Socialist fowl and to appease
the malcontents within. It is likewise enabled the better to retain its
control over the masses, by remaining, if not in the opposition then at
least outside the government. This set-back may even permit it a little
later on to return with even greater demands as the pressure of the
masses increases.
But how do matters stand from the standpoint of Moscow’s interests?
In the first place, a party wielding such influence over the masses,
cannot follow the Kremlin’s directives as automatically as a weaker
party which is able to shift positions without any major repercussions.
When Moscow executed a certain left turn among the Communist parties in
1945 and 1946, the French CP was actually the last one to engage in it
and did so with greater reservations than any other. It is very
difficult for it to move leftward, because behind it is the majority of
the French working class and while it disposes of a rather large field
for maneuvers, it cannot permit itself everything. However, since the
end of November 1946 we have witnessed a retreat by Moscow on the
international field. Beginning with Stalin’s declaration, it became
manifest during the last days of the conferences in New York. It was
seized upon by the Turkish and Iranian governments who immediately
employed repressive measures against Moscow’s supporters in these
countries.
Will this retreat have an effect upon the policy of the Stalinist
parties? We have no exact indications as yet, but it is quite likely.
Right now, it is already noticeable that while the question of the
government is still being posed, how reluctant the CP leadership is —
whether directly or indirectly through the CGT [Confederation of Labor]
leadership — to put forward any workers’ demands and how it abstains
from any demonstrations to force the hand of the bourgeois parties.
As for the SP, up to the last minute of its existence it continues
to show itself as the “loyal manager” of capitalism. Defeated at the
last party Convention, Blum nevertheless retains the leadership and
ignores the program that was adopted. Defeated in the elections, as
they were inside their party, the leaders of the SFIO set what the left
Seine Federation calls an “example of courage” by adopting the program
of Schuman and creating a ministry that one journalist has described
“as homogeneous as the SP.” The post of Minister of State was entrusted
to a leader of the “left” in order to associate him in all the services
rendered to French capitalism.
 
Is Stabilization Possible?
Can the present unstable situation be ameliorated in the
sense that there will be a marked increase in production, an
improvement or even stabilization of the franc, and so on? Nobody
really believes in such a development which would offer the SP a chance
to save itself. On top of all the already existing difficulties has
been added the Indo-China affair. It prevents cuts in the military
budget, necessitates the use of transports, diverting ships from
commerce with the rest of the world, to carry reinforcements and arms
against the Viet Nam. And finally, it is not at all certain that French
imperialism possesses sufficient military forces to enforce a
compromise more favorable than the March 6 agreement, signed by people
more compliant than Ho Chi Minh. The experience of the Blum “kiss” may
defer for a while the working class actions which are threatening, as
Tanguy-Prigent, the Minister of Agriculture, believes. But barring a
miracle, conditions do not exist in France for even such temporary
results as were obtained in Belgium; there are no stocks on hand and no
possibilities of large-scale imports, the Belgian franc was not
threatened, nor was the Belgian government at the same time constrained
to undertake substantial increases in transport, gas, electricity,
postal services and so on.
In spite of all the assistance afforded by the treacherous leaders,
the bourgeoisie is in no condition to impose its solutions on the
working masses. The bourgeois parties, especially the largest ones, are
merely artificial structures doomed to fall apart under strong social
tension. Their great man, de Gaulle, after a few brusque remarks, has
confined himself to a short declaration in betaking himself to his
winter headquarters. The three-party system has been cleverly
exploited, the SP has been deflated and will not be reinflated again.
But it is still necessary to utilize the Stalinist party and to exhaust
the working class before the bourgeoisie, whose champion is de Gaulle,
can dream of assuming the initiative.
Neither the bourgeois parties nor the SP nor the CP nor the CGT wish
to pass through the experience of a government by the workers’
organization. The leaders who flatter themselves as representing the
working class dream only of combinations with bourgeois parties on the
basis of bourgeois programs. The Stalinists have insisted in words on a
government of “Republican Defense,” a second edition of the People’s
Front. But the situation continues to develop in a direction different
from the one they desire. They found themselves compelled to take up,
and at the same time to distort, one slogan after another advanced by
the French section of the Fourth International. After slandering the
Trotskyists for months as agents of the corporations for their advocacy
of wage raises, the Stalinists were forced on the eve of June 2nd to
declare themselves in favor of lifting the wage controls. After
shouting that a wage victory had been won, and after issuing appeals to
struggle against price rises, they were driven to take up the slogan
for a minimum living wage. They set this at a ridiculous figure of
84,000 francs, which, however, was accepted as reasonable by Le
Monde. And they did so in face of the fact that the sum of
120,000 francs is far closer to the actual needs and corresponds even
to the calculations of the CGT made in February 1945 and adjusted to
the official rise in living costs since that time. The Stalinists have
denounced the slogan of the sliding scale of wages, but they are now
compelled to play cunningly with this slogan by declaring themselves in
favor of “re-examining” the minimum living wage in view of changing
living costs. For their fictitious “struggle against price rises,” they
have set up supervisory committees which have at the most embarrassed a
few petty merchants in the local markets. After all the battles that
have been waged and all the “victories” that have been won, the living
conditions of the working class are such as make necessary the adoption
of workers’ control of production, as the Trotskyists advocate.
Two years after the “liberation,” we are approaching an experience
with Stalinism, stripped of those circumstances which have hitherto
provided the Stalinist leaders with alibis. Parallel with this, or more
accurately leading toward this experience, there impend struggles which
will tend to pass over the heads of the Stalinist leadership. In 1946
we witnessed only skirmishes (printers, postal and treasury employees).
The traditional organizations and leaderships have been by-passed
only to a very limited degree and in isolated instances. But these
skirmishes have certainly not been without a profound effect. This is
certainly true of the movement of postal employees, with its central
and local strike committees, all elected in the course of the struggle,
despite and against the official leadership of the Postal Federation.
 
Revolutionary Perspectives
If from the standpoint of world economy France lags
lamentably, then her role in revolutionary politics can be of
first-rate importance in Europe. Her working class movement, despite
its glorious revolutionary traditions, has known the most abject
opportunism. But since 1934 France has once again tended to become the
classic country of political struggles, a country where these struggles
are carried through to the very end.
Since the victory of the democracies, the European countries are
confronted more than ever before with an alternative. They can choose
to be engulfed by decaying capitalism, under a “strong state” installed
to the detriment of the masses, amid an increasing Balkanization of
Europe which would facilitate the outbreak of World War III, ending up
literally in the annihilation of the continent. Or they can choose the
victory of the masses who, despite their old treacherous leaderships,
will smash the iron chains of capitalism and assure prosperity and
peace through the establishment of the Socialist United States of
Europe. Europe’s choice will in large measure depend on the development
of the class struggle in France and on the French proletariat’s ability
to reorient itself in the course of these battles around a new
leadership, that of the Fourth International. However weak the PCI may
still be, the encouraging indication is that the PCI has been able to
make considerable progress during the last two years, in spite of the
handicap of virtually having to renew its ranks during the war. The
unification of the Bolshevik-Leninist ranks in France; the conquest of
legality for the Party and its press, despite the Stalinist Ministers;
its participation in almost one-fourth of the country in two electoral
campaigns within the space of six months; the results gained which
attest to the existence of a class-conscious revolutionary minority in
the big industrial centers and even in the countryside; the rise of a
revolutionary trade union minority that rallied the votes of 1,200
unions at the April 1946 Congress of the CGT; the steady progress
recorded by the Party in recent months; the growth of an independent
organization of International Communist Youth — all this is evidence
that the maturing of the revolutionary crisis in France has not failed
to find a conscious expression to a degree unknown in France as well as
in other countries since the creation of the international faction of
the Bolshevik-Leninists.
January 7 1947

P.S. After this article was already set up, news came of
the formation of the Ramadier Ministry, which is predominantly
Socialist, and into which the Stalinists, the MRP, the Radicals and
independents have entered. The frailty of this combination and the
reasons for it are given in the following comments of Le Monde,
which at the same time confirm the importance of the international
problems referred to in our article:
Everyone knows that one of the reasons, if not the
main reason, for the creation of this government, as well as its chance
for survival, if not the only chance, lies in the approaching Moscow
Conference. The economic experiment could be carried out without the
MRP, which, moreover, has great reservations on this score. It could be
carried out with far greater difficulty without the Communist Party.
But neither the latter nor the former wished or was able to retire from
the scene at the hour when the future of Germany and Europe is to be
decided.
 
Footnote
1. This became even
more apparent two weeks later, when on the occasion of elections to the
Council of the Republic, everything possible was done to regain for the
MRP the position of “first party of France” which it lost to the CP
during the November 10 elections.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. The original
from which this text was transcribed is slightly damaged and the words
in square brackets in paragraphs 3 and 7 were difficult to decipher and
had to be reconstructed from the context. We are reasonably certain
that they are correct.

re Frank: Imperialism Beckons "Third Camp" (1951)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Under Pressure of the Coming War
Imperialism Beckons “Third Camp”
(December 1951)

From Fourth International, Vol.12 No.2, March-April 1952, pp.57-63.
Translated from Quatrième Internationale.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The preparations for the third world war do not consist only in an enormous material arms production. In order to mobilize the greatest possible mass of people in the service of imperialism, the most varied ideas and arguments are set to work, reflecting the extraordinary material and ideological pressures bearing down upon individuals and organizations. A few dreamers are still able to muse about an impossible neutrality. The capitalists of Western Europe are beside themselves because they have to follow the directives of Washington, but they have no other choice. The conflict in preparation is developing such scope that it is already smashing century-old traditions. The idea of the bourgeois fatherland – for which millions of men went to their death in the course of two preceding world wars – can no longer serve to deceive very many people in Europe. More subtle ideologies are required. The simple booby-trap of “Stalinist totalitarianism” also serves the same end.
In any event, from now on every one is taking his place more or less openly in the struggle. The Kravchenkos have chosen “freedom” in order to don the American uniform with the hope of re-establishing private property in the USSR. At the same time the bourgeois world finds itself abandoned not only by the greater pant of the laboring masses in a growing number of countries, but also by wide layers of intellectuals. Even bourgeois are deserting their class. Can there be a more striking symptom of the decline of the bourgeoisie than the case of those officials of the British Foreign Office, one of the most selectively staffed of institutions, deserting their world? But in the milieus of the working class and the revolutionary vanguard, or where claim is made to a place in this vanguard, the struggle is similarly going on, the class pressures are likewise in motion.
 
We Are “Buried” Once More ...
The Third World Congress of the Trotskyists has clearly drawn the positions of our movement in the coming war. We are in the camp of the USSR, of China, of the people’s democracies against the camp of imperialism. This position has not emerged unexpectedly. It is the traditional line of our movement. It was ours during the course of the Second World War. It has been particularly emphasized and more precisely defined since the beginning of the war in Korea and since the preparations for the third world war have taken on an intensive character.
This position has caused a great hue and cry. It has brought us once more the accusation launched almost periodically against us: We are capitulatirig to Stalinism! For some we are even tools of the Cominform. For others, good souls, the Fourth international which might have played such a great role in history has taken the fatal road leading to its ruin. Once again we are being buried, with or without flowers. To tell the truth, Stalin and his gang, who have had other means to employ against us, have so often boasted of slaying us that we are no longer awed by hearing such funeral orations. We are periodically “buried” because periodically certain people experience the need to bury Marxism.
We will say nothing here of those within the working class who have openly and without circumlocutions placed themselves in the camp of American imperialism, as in France the collaborators in that magazine which is still mockingly entitled The Proletarian Revolution [1] We want to deal with those who have defended, and with those who, still defend, the so-called position of a “Third Camp” or of a “Third Front,” with those who advocate equal independence of the two camps facing each other and a struggle directed simultaneously against the one and the other of these camps.
 
Various Types of “Independence”
The idea of “independence” of the two camps or the two blocs exists not only in the ranks claiming to be part of the working class, but in certain bourgeois groups as well. Even certain bourgeois governments claim to follow an international policy based on such a consideration. We will deal only with organizations of individuals claiming to belong to the working class. Among them we can observe these ideas in tendencies that move in various directions. Recently a common statement was signed by the Socialist Parties of Japan and India in favor of a policy independent of the two blocs. These organizations, as is evident to those who have followed their evolution, have not at all reached the stage of crystallization on the basis of clearly defined positions. They have broken, or are on the road to breaking, with the bourgeoisie and with the right wings which directly expressed the pressure of the bourgeoisie within their organizations.
We must neither pass judgment on these parties on the basis of these statements nor accept these positions as conclusive for these parties. The signing of such a statement by these parties expressed a stage in a progressive evolution which is, however, inadequate, incomplete, and replete with dangers. We must turn elsewhere in order to see the inherent dangers in this position of the “Third Camp.” Either toward such organizations as the Yugoslav CP which, after an excursion to the left, passed through this position in its evolution to the right; or to such organizations or tendencies relatively crystalized politically, such as the POUM (“Marxist Party of Workers Unity,” in Spain) and the Shachtmanites, who have been and still are the most systematic defenders of the “Third Camp.”
 
The Yugoslav Case
There is not much to be gained in pursuing this subject on the Yugoslav side. Immediately following their break with the Cominform, the Yugoslavs made an obvious theoretical effort toward a political orientation. Then, when the pressure of the international situation became too strong and they saw their sole hope in important material assistance from the West, they remembered what they had learned at the Stalinist school: that principles were made to be scoffed at and that there were always theoreticians available to justify the worst compromises in the name of Marxism. Tito discovered the blessings of the West, concluded a military agreement with the USA, and now condemns every idea of a “Third Camp.”
For the Yugoslav communists whose uneasiness requires some theoretical explanations, Djilas proclaims the bureaucracy a new class and the USSR as state capitalism. If that isn’t enough, the Yugoslav State, which is “on the road to withering away,” certainly possesses some more powerful arguments in the person of Rankovitch, the Minister of Internal Security. But the practical evolution in Yugoslav diplomacy is most striking. Breaking with Stalin, the Yugoslavs first claimed, and justly so, the right to decide for themselves what their policy shall be within the anti-imperialist camp. As pressure of the Soviet government and of its satellites became increasingly onerous, they declared for an “independent” position, and for a period walked upon this tightrope. Unquestionably their situation was a very difficult one.
But refusing to turn toward the workers of the world, and having far more confidence in the jet planes which might come to them from Washington, they sold their principles along with their merchandise. They abandoned Korea to American aggression. They came to the last session of the United Nations to deny even their principle of the equality of all nations, large and small, for which they had dared rebel against Stalin. In his speech Kardelj, for the first time, took a position for a Pact of the Big Powers ... in order to insure peace. Up to then the Yugoslavs had denounced this kind of agreement as made at the expense of the small nations, and as not aiding .the cause of peace. However, the Yugoslavs are now ready to accept not just any kind of a pact among any combination of “big powers.” Kardelj favors a “Four Power Pact” such as Washington might perhaps allow, but not a “Five Power Pact” such as Moscow, desiring to associate China in its game, is demanding. In this current Yugoslav policy .principles play a very small part. An “independent” position, a “Third Camp” are very difficult positions to hold when there is a State to run ... Shall we have better luck when we turn to those who only have slighter responsibilities or no responsibilities at all on their shoulders?
 
With Whom Can a United Front Be Made?
In fairness to the POUM, let us note that of all the centrist organizations born between the first two world wars it is the only one to survive. Burnt by its experiences with the London Bureau, the International Workers Front, and other ephemeral creations which the POUM supported, the leadership of this organization had practically abandoned the idea of being an integral part of an international movement and was content with attending all possible meetings in the role of “observer.” Violent debates may have taken place at these meetings but the POUM “observers” remained silent. La Batalla subsequently published reports with the minimum of political comment, the leadership of the POUM appearing to exist above all the difficulties which beset working class and would-be socialist organizations.
But the approach of war has brought about some changes. On the Third World Congress of the Fourth International, La Batalla expressed itself unequivocally:
“The three adopted resolutions and in general all the decisions taken confirm that the Trotskyist movement has radically changed the line followed for some months and is orienting towards a policy of capitulation to Stalinism.” (October 10, 1951).
Capitulate to Stalinism? The accusation could have grave consequences not for the Trotskyists, at whom it has already been repeatedly levelled, but for those hurling it. For it is self-evident that, not to be politically inconsistent, one must adopt the same attitude towards those who capitulate to Stalinism as towards the Stalinists, and we will see further on that the POUM has a well defined attitude on this last point.
A national conference of the POUM recently held in Spain took a certain number of positions. On the coming war the conference took a position simultaneously against Washington and Moscow. According to this conference the third world war will not be what the Trotskyists call it, namely an international civil war, but “a struggle for world domination” between Yankee imperialism and the Russian bureaucracy. In the working class movement
“the socialists who have gained strength at the expense of the Stalinists in certain countries (Belgium, Germany, Scandinavian countries) are acting almost without exception as a wing of Western capitalism. On their side, the Communist parties are behaving like what they are, instruments of the political and military strategy of the Kremlin.”
As for the POUM, it sets itself the following tasks:
“1) To intervene actively in all actions and all independent movements against war. 2) Collaborate closely with all forces independent of capitalism and of Stalinism. 3) Support the unification of all revolutionary socialist tendencies and organizations.”
We find no theoretical basis in the document of the POUM sustaining this position, and we do not want to quibble over the “active intervention” of POUM observers in “independent” movements which the POUM will have ever increasing difficulty in finding, judging by its attitude toward us. But for a better evaluation of the position of the POUM, let us see how it is applied on the national scale. For the “Marxists” of the POUM will certainly not dispute with us over the fact that there is a connection between the international policies and the national policies of an organization as well as of a State. The resolution of this conference on the Spanish situation contains this directive:
“To establish an organ for united action with all working class and republican organizations with the single exception of the Stalinists.”
With the single exception of the Stalinists! An impassable barrier is raised – which, moreover, will render the greatest service to the Spanish Stalinists. But in the same number of La Batalla in which the resolutions of this conference are published is to be found an article criticizing the Spanish social-democrats for having made a pact with the monarchists, and in which we read:
“(The monarchists) forged the military uprising of July 1936, supported Franco with the greatest energy, have mingled and even identified themselves with Franco fascism. Nevertheless, one might for the moment put this aside, while never forgetting it, with the object of constituting a common front of struggle with them against Franco and his regime, hoping that the progressive forces would later go beyond the objectives of the monarchists: But all the monarchists, from the pretender and down the line, have never shown the slightest desire to struggle, to act, to want to overthrow Franco fascism.”
Thus, according to the leadership of the POUM, a united front which must include all working class and republican organizations (with the sole exception of the Stalinists) could even be considered with the monarchists if there were even the slightest leaning toward struggle among the latter. Why? Because – one might hope “that the progressive forces would later go beyond the objectives of the monarchists.” But we, who are for a united front with the Stalinists (whose objectives may be condemned, but of whom it cannot be said that they are not struggling), “hoping that the progressive forces (mainly the workers) would later go beyond the objectives” of the Stalinist leaders, we vulgar Trotskyists, are on that account capitulating to Stalinism. You can point to the examples of Yugoslavia and of China where the class struggle under the leadership of the Stalinist chiefs went beyond the plans of the Kremlin. It will be of no use, for the leadership of the POUM, shut up in its national boundaries, does not recognize the Spanish CP as a working class party ...
Why is the leadership of the POUM so flexible toward the bourgeois camp and so intransigeant toward the Stalinists where Spain is concerned, and why does it manifest an equal hostility to both the camps on the international plane? (The political friends of the POUM, notably Shachtman as we will see later on, are far from being so “equidistant” on the international plane.) It is necessary not to forget that Washington persists in supporting Franco, and not those with whom the leadership of the POUM is bent upon agreement. For the moment there is an insurmountable wall, just as on the Stalinist side – but it is Washington and not the POUM which has erected it.
 
Shachtman Studies Lenin
The “Third Camp” in the pure state, if one may use the phrase, is Shachtman himself. Ever since he broke with Trotskyism, he has constructed innumerable theories on innumerable subjects. He has abandoned the idea of building a broad organization embracing “all tendencies in revolutionary thought” for the far more modest role of an educator of the working class without political ambitions. In addition, he also dispenses priceless advice to working class militants and others throughout the world, but his advice is of precious little use to them. In all his flip-flops over more than ten years we must concede his consistency on one point: he has remained loyal to the “Third Camp” (although the latter has undergone several variations in the process of aging). He has, moreover, had to defend this idea tenaciously against his own followers, who at fairly regular intervals have deserted him and gone over openly to the camp of imperialism, abandoning forever the building of the “Third Camp” in order to struggle against their enemy number one, Stalinism.
In the course of the second world war, Shachtman took an attitude which we condemned on the question of the defense of the USSR and of the colonial countries entangled in this war. For him the war made an indivisible whole: the USSR, China and India were fighting for the imperialist cause. As a logical consequence he was a defeatist for these countries. But in spite of this error and although he could not build a hypothetical “Third Front,” he did display an intransigeant hostility to the bourgeoisie of his own country, and that was unquestionably something to his credit. It is always hardest to be a revolutionary in one’s own country.
Unfortunately for him, the pressures bearing down today are incomparably stronger than those which prevailed all the way through the second world war. This cannot surprise those who understand that this time we are facing primarily an international civil war and that this is something different from the inter-imperialist war into which the USSR was drawn ...
Subjected to far greater pressures today, the champion of the “Third Camp” is, as a consequence of his ideological weakness, slipping so fast as to foreshadow only the worst for the future. In the May-June and July-August 1951 issues of his magazine New International he has revealed his positions in a 22-page long article entitled Socialist Policy and the War. The article is more than a significant retreat from his previous positions, more than a continuation of the backward march he has been pursuing. Capitulation to imperialism is virtually inscribed therein.
Like all of Shachtman’s outpourings, the article twists and turns dizzily all over the landscape. It is painful to follow the author’s train of thought. First observation: He quotes Lenin in these terms: “To be a Marxist, one must appraise each war separately and concretely.” But Shachtman himself at no point undertakes more than the most superficial analysis of the social character of the forces and movements confronting one another. The question is treated at times as if it had already been settled once and for all, at times by some brief remarks which carry little weight in the article as a whole. More than half the article is devoted to historical precedents. More particularly, Shachtman pounces upon the first world war and recalls the positions supported by Lenin in that period. From there he makes a prodigious leap to the third world war, completely forgetting that there has been a second world war and that at the beginning of the latter he was somewhat at odds with Trotsky on the attitude toward the USSR and on the question of the “Third Camp.” Shachtman’s historical recollections are capricious.
 
Lenin “Abandons” a Slogan
But let us return to Lenin and to the first world war. After all, it is not bad to delve into Against the Stream, into those articles which have been basic in the education of the revolutionary generations after 1920. Shachtman, at the end of wearisome dissertations, recalls the main political conclusions of Lenin in this first inter-imperialist war: revolutionary defeatism, transformation of the imperialist war into civil war. But having said that, Shachtman suddenly launches out into a very long disquisition on the theme: Lenin abandoned transforming the imperialist war into civil war. Shachtman indicates, without learning anything therefrom at all, that Lenin did not thereby make any concessions whatever to the so-called “revolutionary defensists.”
Those alleged socialists called upon the masses to continue to get themselves massacred in order to “defend” democracy’, while – as Lenin relentlessly emphasized – the provisional government was continuing to serve the same imperialist interests as were defended up to then by overthrown czarism. What Lenin did was to show that the problem had to be posed in another form for the masses. The masses had themselves begun to execute the Leninist strategy, that is to say, to “transform the imperialist war into civil war.” Shachtman writes as though he is unaware of this in his article. But it was because of this fact, that Lenin’s strategy required a formulation suited to the new conditions.
In the former empire of the czars a “dual power” had been set up, that of the bourgeoisie (the provisional government) and that of the masses (the Soviets, under a leadership of Mensheviks and S-Rs anxious to collaborate with the bourgeoisie). These two powers went through a highly unstable coexistence at the beginnings of the revolution. The task of the revolutionists consisted in aiding the masses to go through their own experience with this dual power on the plane of domestic policies as well as on that of the war (which the bourgeoisie wanted to continue, whereas the masses longed for peace). It was necessary to aid this experience until such a time as it became possible to pass over to a new stage of the revolution, in which the dual power would be liquidated by the rise of a workers’, peasants’ and soldiers’ power.
But Shachtman, who quoted the sentence of Lenin on “concreteness,” no longer remembers it, any more than he bothers with the very special characteristics of this dual power. Me has brought out this example only to retain one thing: Lenin modified his tactic, abandoning the transformation of the imperialist war into civil war. [2] Only later on in his article will we understand why Shachtman has been on the hunt for this example. With history thus clear in our minds, let us follow Shachtman as he passes to the third world war. He defines this war as follows:
 
A Definition of World War III
“The powers that will dominate and direct the Third World War are those that are dominating the preparations for it, the United States and Russia. Their relations make the conflict irrepressible. The conflict is imperialist on both sides, and that is what determines the predominant character of the war they will be (and in a sense are already) waging.” (p.195).
There follows what serves as analysis for Shachtman. We now find several pages demonstrating that the United States is an imperialist country. Apparently, some have to break through an open door in order to appear strong. As for Stalinism, here is what we find as a social analysis:
“The imperialism of the bureaucratic-collectivist states is different from that of the capitalist states. But the economic motive forces beind the one are no less powerful than in the case of the other. Only ignoramuses – people who know nothing about history and nothing about Lenin’s theory of imperialism – can conceive of imperialism as a phenomenon unique to capitalist society.” (p.200).
We have learned to distinguish societies on the basis of the mode of production and of their property relations. We knew about a slave society, a feudal society, a capitalist society, and we did not think that one could usefully put ancient Rome, the Germanic Holy Roman Empire and Great Britain under the same label of “imperialism.” We are very willing to concede our ignorance, but Shachtman should also in all fairness attribute it to Lenin, who wrote:
“Colonial policy and imperialism existed before this latest stage of capitalism, and even before capitalism. Rome, founded on slavery, pursued a colonial policy and achieved imperialism. But ‘general’ arguments about imperialism which ignore, or put into the background the fundamental difference of social-economic systems, inevitably degenerate into absolutely empty banalities, or into grandiloquent comparisons like ‘Greater Rome’ and ‘Greater Britain.’ Even the colonial policy of capitalism in its previous stages is essentially different from the colonial policy of finance capital.” (Imperialism, Little Lenin Library, pp.81-82).
Although forewarned that he would degenerate inevitably into empty banalities or into grandiloquent comparisons, Shachtman set out on a road which, as we shall see, caused him to degenerate much more.
 
Still Another Definition
We cannot however hold it against Shachtman that he has remote and confused recollections about this work of Lenin, for his mind has a tendency to confuse everything. Several pages after having written that the third world war would be an imperialist war “on both sides,” he gives a somewhat different definition:
“The Third World War will differ radically from the First and even the Second in that the two main belligerents find in one another not only imperialist rivals but class enemies representing antagonistic social systems” (p.201).
It will then be something other than an inter-imperialist war, at least in the minds of the belligerents; for the formulation of Shachtman is, to say the least, ambiguous. In any event, we will see two systems confronting each other which have different property forms. This being granted, Shachtman says that when the American ruling class speaks of a war against communism this is “not so stupid” from its own point of view, but it is “arch-stupid”, from his point of view for “there is nothing in common between communism and Stalinism” (p.202). Shachtman is here referring to societies, the society of his dreams and Russian society. There is nothing in common between them except “the centralization of the means of production and planned production and distribution” (p.200). Only a Trotskyist could maintain the Marxist conception that only one social regime, and not two, corresponds to a given set of production and property relations. For Shachtman, production relations, property relations, are not very concrete; otherwise one would be compelled to accept the Trotskyist theory of the USSR as a workers state. But wanting a fundamental analysis, Shachtman decides his policies by means of statements of a psychological and subjective order:
 
In Place of Analysis – Stalinophobia
“Far overshadowing all other obstacles to the realization of the American imperialist objective – nothing less than domination of the world – stand the forces of Stalinism. Without hesitation or ambiguity, we can say that the only greater disaster that humanity could suffer than the war itself ... would be the victory of Stalinism as the outcome of the war.” (p.198). “We repeat: no greater disaster can be expected in connection with the Third World War than the victory of Stalinism ... Until it has been utterly destroyed as a political force, the victory of the working class is impossible” (p.200).
Shachtman is so blinded by the possibility of a worldwide victory of Stalinism as to think that capitalism cannot be vanquished by the working class throughout the world unless Stalin is first overthrown. He has learned no lesson from the revolutionary struggles which have marked the world since 1943. He shuts his eyes to what took place in Yugoslavia, to the nature of the relations between the Kremlin and China. What is taking place in the countries of Eastern Europe is unimportant to him. He fails to see the revolutionary upsurge of the masses wearing away the foundations of Stalinism right within the Communist Parties themselves. So long as Stalin will be there, no victory is possible for the working class. [3]
 
Shachtman “Transforms” Lenin’s Strategy
At this point, whoever will have followed Shachtman in his intellectual tribulations will be led to conclude: we must first support the United States in order to vanquish Soviet imperialism; only then can we think of fighting for socialism. This follows so logically that it explains why the Shachtmanite organization has above all been a passageway for intellectuals between the workers’ camp and the imperialist camp. Shachtman himself raises the question. He begins by conceding that a victory of American imperialism would not be quite so disastrous:
“If the United States were to win the war, in all likelihood it would not mean the automatic and immediate establishment of totalitarian rule that would result directly from a victory of Stalinism. It is far from certain but it is quite probable that an American victory would leave at least some degree of democracy under which the working class and socialist movements could continue to develop with greater or lesser freedom” (p.200).
Is it freedom of the type which the South Koreans are experiencing or of the type promised by that famous issue of Collier’s? Shachtman does not tell us and he is not ready (not ready as yet) to go so far. He does not want, he protests, to march with American imperialism because the latter bases itself on the worst forces of reaction throughout the world. For want of more arguments, Shachtman proceeds to define his position in the last three pages of his article in the following way:
“The labor movement in this country is today a minority politically. The socialists are a much tinier minority. We have our responsibilities; the ruling class has its responsibilities” (p.204).
Shachtman’s evaluation of the American working class is a bit summary and very static. But let us proceed further:
“The bourgeoisie is at the head of the nation. It is genuinely concerned with defense of the nation. But it conceives of it in the only way it can: as identical with the defense of capitalist property and imperialist power” (p.204). “The working class, too, is concerned with the defense of the nation. Unlike the bourgeoisie, it does not identify this primarily with the defense of capitalist property and imperialist power. Its patriotism is of a fundamentally different type, no matter how heavily overlaid it may be with bourgeois ideology. It identifies national defense essentially with its own class interests: with the preservation of its organizations, its relatively high standard of living, its hard-won democratic rights, as well as the right to rule as a free and independent nation. One of the outstanding differences between the coming war and the First World War is that all the things that the working class identifies with national defense are actually threatened by Stalinism. The triumph of Stalinist arms would completely change the social and political regime in the United States, a fact which we can state with as much firmness as Lenin insisted upon the opposite with respect to the main belligerents of the war of 1914. We socialists are as one with the working class in wishing to resist this threat and overcome it. We differ with the working class, as it is now, in that we cannot and will not support the American capitalist side in the war which aims at violating the rights and integrity of other people. Socialist policy in the corning war, then, does not put forward any such slogans as ‘revolutionary defeatism’ or ‘transform the imperialist war into a civil war’.” (p.205)
Thus the American labor organizations are not threatened by American imperialism (which aims merely at “the rights and integrity of other people”), but by Stalinism. At the same time the social and political regime of the United States – the capitalist regime – would fall with a defeat of the arms of American capitalism. Stated another way, the American working class organizations and American capitalism have a little something in common: they have the same enemy, Stalinism. If the latter wages war, an American worker cannot desire the defeat of his boss. Shachtman makes it even more explicit in these words:
“... To prosecute the class struggle in such a way that it would clearly ‘imperil the military position of the government, even to the point where it may be defeated by the enemy and lose the war’ – that, in the conditions of the Third World War, would be disastrous to the working class and to socialism. Instead, socialist policy must be based upon the idea of transforming the imperialist war into a democratic war, that is, adopting broadly the view put forward by Lenin in 1917, with all the changes required by the differences between the situation then and now, and working for its adoption by the labor movement as a whole.” (p.205).
 
Bowdlerizing Lenin’s Ideas
It now becomes clear why Shachtman began by seeking out that example from Lenin. He has given it a broad, a very broad interpretation. Under what conditions did Lenin modify his position? Let us see:
“We have been advocating the turning of the imperialist war into civil war, and now we have reversed ourselves. We must bear in mind, however, that the first civil war in Russia has come to an end; we are now advancing toward the second war – the war between imperialism and the armed people. In this transitional period, as long as the armed force is in the hands of the soldiers, as long as Miliukov and Guchkov have not resorted to violence, this civil war turns for us into peaceful, extensive, and patient class propaganda. To speak of civil war before people have come to realize the need of it, is undoubtedly to fall into Blanquism” (The April Conference, Little Lenin Library, p. 19).
The imperialist war having begun to change into a civil war, the masses being armed, to speak of civil war would no longer be a question of strategy; it would become a slogan, it would mean calling for an armed struggle against the government. The majority of the people must first become convinced that this is necessary before they will take such an action. Lenin temporarily abandoned speaking of civil war as a slogan of action, at a time when “it is the soldiers and not the capitalists who are in possession of the guns and cannons” (Lenin), and while the Bolsheviks were in a minority in the class. Shachtman abandons it as a strategy at a time when, according to him, “the labor movement is a minority, politically,” while American imperialism is slaughtering the revolutionaries of Korea, of the Philippines, is helping to slaughter those of Vietnam, and is preparing to plunge the whole world into war. In order to take into account so vast a difference in situations, Shachtman changes Lenin a little bit more. Lenin wished to propose “a democratic peace to all the nations” in order to help the masses go through their experience with the provisional government. Shachtman wants to organize “a democratic war” against the USSR and the nations which may be allied with the USSR.
Not only is this one of the most impudent examples of bowdlerizing Lenin’s thoughts; it also discloses in Shachtman the scarcely refurbished ideas of the social patriots and centrists which Lenin castigated during the first world war. When Shachtman speaks of the democratic rights and workers organizations he wants to defend against Stalinism, this is only a belated echo of the German social democrats of those days who carried out their betrayal under the pretext of protecting their organizations against czarism, and of the French Guesde socialists who did their betraying under pretext of defending their country’s revolutionary traditions against the Kaiser.
 
The “Third Camp” to the Rescue
How is Shachtman going “to transform the imperialist war into a democratic war?” He calls upon the labor movement to champion a series of economic and political measures, such as control of production, of the distribution of commodities, of prices and profits, abolition of all measures of racial discrimination, economic aid to backward countries, etc. And, he adds, since only a workers’ government would carry out this program, such a government
“... could mobilize such an international force – the force to which we refer as the Third Camp – as could be counted upon either to postpone the outbreak of the Third World War or, if it is precipitated by a desperate Stalinism, to bring it to a speedy, democratic and progressive termination” (p.206).
The “Third Camp” thus appears on the scene for the first time in the last twenty lines of Shachtman’s article. There are the people who are not as yet ready to die for Wall Street today. Shachtman is presenting a political line for enlisting them under the stars and stripes.
But while one thing is clear in this political line, namely that Shachtman is set upon a war to the death against the USSR, he has omitted to tell us how and by what means he contemplates replacing the capitalist government of Washington by a workers’ government. We know that he does not want to carry on the class struggle disturbing to the schemes of the Pentagon. What does he propose? In the history of the international working class movement we have heard of only two proposed roads: the (realistic) revolutionary road and the (Utopian) reformist road. Shachtman is abandoning the revolutionary road. Has he discovered a “Third Road,” just as he invented a “Third Camp”? No, he has sunken jnto shame-faced reformism and does not want to admit this even to himself. His “Third Camp” has led him in practice to capitulation to American imperialism, for which he does not want to cause any serious difficulty in wartime and which he is trying to change gradually ...
 
From the “Third Camp” to the Imperialist Camp
We have had occasion to point out in passing examples of incoherence in Shachtman’s thinking, but his own evolution and that of his concept of the “Third Camp” are not at all incoherent. For a long time he was with us in the camp of the working class, with all its imperfections, despite its miserably inept and scoundrelly leaders, aware that that was the only road to the unfolding socialist showdown with capitalism. At that time he unconditionally defended the USSR, despite the criminal policies of the Kremlin. When great social pressures began to bear down, that is to say, at the beginning of the second world war. when the petty bourgeoisie was shocked by the Hitler-Stalin pact, he took a stand for several weeks for “conditional defense” of the USSR, and called on the Polish masses to organize an insurrection simultaneously against Hitler and Stalin. Then he invented his “Third Camp,” and abandoned the Trotskyist conception of the USSR in order to adopt the theory of “bureaucratic collectivism” which Burnham had whispered in his ear. Somewhat later, when Stalin and Roosevelt became allied against Hitler, his “Third Camp” had to find a reorientation. Incapable of distinguishing between the war which the USSR was fighting and that being conducted by imperialism he sought refuge in abstention. Now that a life and death struggle is developing between world capitalism girding for a decisive test and the organized masses which are under the command of the bureaucratic leaderships, his “Third Camp” is undergoing a new transformation: this “Third Camp” is also for a life and death struggle against the USSR, and while it must not jeopardize the decisions and the actions of the White House and the Pentagon, it must wait until the American camp has received a good coating of democratic paint. Again we find behind this position, just as in 1939, the same social force, but with greater intensity: that liberal petty bourgeoisie which chokes at the unsavory aspects which history assumes; which dreams, if not of an ideal development, then at least of a nice orderly camp, in which one could take one’s place without the danger of getting dirty. This liberal section of the American petty bourgeoisie cannot determine the march of history, but it is sufficiently powerful to push Shachtman into the camp of imperialism.
The “Third Camp” of Shachtman has had its evolution – a rapid one in the case of its adherents (the erstwhile R.D.R.) in France where the situation hardly lends itself to equivocation, slower in the United States, just so long as the war did not take on definite form. But rapid or slow this evolution has led inexorably into the camp of imperialism. The Shachtman case illustrates, on a microscopic scale, the inevitable evolutions which the gigantic forces now prevailing and criss-crossing one another are provoking and will continue to provoke. For the petty bourgeoisie socialism has merit only as a moral idea and becomes odious when it takes on the form of an attack against the foundations of capitalist society. Under the pretext of not “capitulating to Stalinism,” and yielding to the pressure of petty bourgeois public opinion these alleged revolutionaries, who cannot adjust themselves to a working class which is not dressed in a style they like, enter the “Third Camp” which brings about their capitulation to the imperialist camp.
The search for quotations from Lenin, the subtleties of thought or alleged subtleties of thought employed to prop up a theory of the “Third Camp” which abandons the fundamental Marxist concept of the class struggle carried on by the two main social camps – all these verbal acrobatics have led and inevitably lead those who are taken in by them right into the arms of the bourgeoisie. Stalinism, which is not a social system but an ultra-reactionary leadership of the working class, will be conquered only by those who remain rooted in the working class camp and fear neither Stalinism itself nor contamination in a united front struggle with Stalinists.
December 15, 1951
 

re Frank: Evolution of Eastern Europe (1951)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Evolution of Eastern Europe
Report to the Congress
(August 1951)

From Fourth International, Vol.12 No.6, November-December 1951, pp.176, 213-218.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The Soviet buffer zone of Eastern Europe, which came into being after the Second World War, has aroused lively discussions in and around our ranks. Our opinions have evolved and we have rectified errors committed on this question in the past years. Today the evolution of the buffer zone countries on a number of fundamentals has been completed in an irreversible manner. Our ideas have been clarified on several important questions such as the nature of these states and the conclusions to be derived therefrom. The resolution submitted to the Congress registers our progress in this matter. It is not without value to view this problem from as broad a viewpoint as possible, to first of all retrace the road we have traveled.
 
The History of the Buffer Zone Question
At the end of the Second World War, as a result of the Potsdam agreements, the entire world was confronted with a zone of influence of the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe. The Russian state – which we considered a degenerated workers’ state – dominated a series of capitalist states militarily and politically; coalition governments between Stalinists and bourgeois politicians were constituted; the capitalist economies were not fundamentally uprooted, although important changes had been introduced.
Molotov had declared at the first occasion, in the name of the Soviet government, when Russian troops entered Rumanian territory, that his government had no intention of altering the social system of these countries. The only and avowed desire of the Kremlin in these countries was to replace the hostile governments of the past (the cordon sanitaire at the end of the First World War) by governments friendly to the USSR. But we understood at that time that what was involved was not the desires of the Kremlin bureaucracy. The workers’ state, and not only the bureaucracy, would have its influence on the new territories. What, could this lead to?
On the theoretical plane we took as our point of departure our definition of the USSR and Trotsky’s succinct remarks in In Defense of Marxism on the question of territories occupied by the USSR and susceptible to integration within it. These remarks have been cited many times in our discussions and are. certainly known to all the comrades present here. Let us only refer to this one:
“Let us for a moment conceive that in accordance with the treaty with Hitler, the Moscow government leaves untouched the rights of private property in the occupied areas and limits itself to ‘control’ after the fascist pattern. Such a concession would have a deep-going principled character and might become the starting point for a new chapter in the history of the Soviet regime; and consequently a starting point for a new appraisal on our part of the nature of the Soviet state.”
These lines prove how important the evolution of the buffer zone was for us and for the world workers’ movement. Developments in the buffer zone also were of decisive importance for the Soviet Union.
We followed these developments passionately, meticulously. If you assemble everything that has been written in our ranks since 1946 on this question, it can be stated that we have never sinned in the domain of the concrete study of the events. We may have committed errors in theoretical interpretation and in perspectives but our study of the events was always very rigorous. No one ever contested the facts presented by the International as the basis of our discussions. All the discussions look these facts as their point of departure.
We must confine ourselves here to a reference for historical reasons only to the discussions we have had with those who had a different definition of the USSR than ours. These discussions with the theoreticians of “state capitalism” or of “bureaucratic collectivism” never had any bearing on the buffer zone, properly speaking; they were simply appendices to the discussion on the Russian question. Neither the supporters of the theory of “state capitalism” nor those of the theory of “bureaucratic collectivism” contested the facts assembled by the International. The facts had only a minor importance for them. Later on we will mention the discussions between comrades sharing our common theoretical basis.
Our movement took a position on the question of the buffer zone for the first time at the Preconference (March 1946) and at the 1st Plenum (June 1946). The resolution adopted by the Preconference noted:
“The introduction of a series of militarily and politically controlled countries into the economic sphere (of the USSR);
“The plundering and politically reactionary, conservative and capitulatory nature of the Soviet bureaucracy ...
“The granting of governmental powers to the leaders of the Communist Parties regardless of their real strength;
“The elimination of oppositionist elements, the expropriation of foreign concessions, the acceleration of economic reforms by encouraging organs of dual power (committees of control of production, trade committees of poor peasants which carry out the agrarian reform).”
This resolution declared itself in favor of the progressive reforms, for the right of the peoples to self-determination, for the free development of the workers’ movement.
The 1st Plenum dealt especially with the occupation of numerous territories by the victor armies. The resolution said the following concerning the territories occupied by the Soviet armies:
“The Fourth International demands the withdrawal of all foreign armies, including the Soviet army, from all occupied territories ...
“The Fourth International does not in any way abandon its slogan of the unconditional defense of the USSR. The Fourth International is likewise for the defense of the progressive measures which have been realized in the territories occupied by the Red Army ...
“Wherever reactionary movements appear and, with the support of the imperialists, attempt to overthrow the more or less statified economy and to re-establish landed private property ... we will oppose these movements and fight on the side of the Red Army for the defeat of the imperialists and their agents until the workers of these countries are strong enough to confront the bourgeois counter-revolution alone.
“In all the occupation zones our militants should defend our policy in such a manner so that it cannot be utilized against the Soviet Union to the advantage of imperialism.”
We see then that in the first two positions, we clearly formulated our position on the defense of the USSR and the reforms carried out in the buffer zone against imperialism, and on the defense of the workers’ movement of these countries against the bureaucracy, but that there is not a word on the nature of these states and their economies, nor on the tendencies of their development.
The first general theoretical position taken was formulated in the theses written by comrade Germain on The USSR on the Morrow of the War which appeared in the International Bulletin, September 1946. It was said that in a general way this study expressed the position of the International Secretariat, and it opened the discussion on the USSR, the buffer zone and Stalinism for the 2nd World Congress. Here is its essential part concerning the buffer zone question:
“Inherent in the system of production brought into being by the October Revolution is the tendency to break out of the frontiers of the USSR especially because the productive forces on a world scale cry out for collectivization ...
“Taking as our point of departure the tendency of the bureaucracy to ‘structurally assimilate’ the countries where it maintains its occupation over a whole period and which it wants to integrate into its economic system; taking likewise as our point of departure the impossibility of achieving this assimilation without the action of the working mosses, it can be stated that the countries occupied by the Soviet bureaucracy can be divided into three zones:
“a) ... all the territories incorporated into the USSR, there structural assimilation has been completed ...
“b) In Poland, in occupied Germany, in Yugoslavia and in Czechoslovakia, the beginnings of structural assimilation correspond to a very strong revolutionary impulsion or to an exceptional situation involving the physical disappearance of the propertied classes ... The nature of the economy and of the state remains bourgeois in these countries. However, the relationship of forces are such that for the moment the bourgeoisie is at the mercy of an action of the proletariat. It is only the bureaucracy’s fear of the proletariat of these countries as well as of imperialism which keeps it from delivering a coup de grace to the native capitalists.
“c) In Finland, Austria, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria the state and the economy remain fundamentally bourgeois.”
This long quotation needs no comment. In the discussion which occurred at the time, Marcoux, who had assembled a very important documentation on the question, examined the question in a static manner and even denied the existence of a tendency to structural assimilation; his point of view was rapidly outmoded by the march of events. On the other hand, comrade E.R. Frank, who was in agreement with the analysis, defined what was developing in the buffer zone as a tendency toward the establishment of a “state capitalism” based on a mixed economy (state capitalism and private properly) and not toward the installation of a workers’ state. [1]
At the 2nd World Congress (April 1948) which took place some weeks after the Prague coup, the discussion did not go beyond the positions previously taken by the International in 1946. In the Theses adopted by this Congress, the part dealing with the buffer zone describes the policy of the bureaucracy, there also verifying its dual character; it shows that due to the development of the international situation the bureaucracy despite itself found itself obliged to adopt a series of economic and political measures against the native bourgeoisie. It underscored the sharpening of the tendency toward total structural assimilation, but viewed this as possible only through a revolutionary mobilization of the masses in opposition to the bureaucracy. The Theses of the 2nd World Congress declared that the situation was transitory, but also that the economy of these countries remained capitalist and that the state remained a bourgeois state in its structure as well as in its function.
Politically the Congress confirmed our position of struggle against the restorationist tendencies and our support of the struggle of the masses for which it formulated a program of transitional demands. Finally, the state and the economy being characterized as capitalist, the Theses came out in favor of revolutionary defeatism in these countries in the event of war.
Viewed with hindsight, the discussion then was marking time as a result of the situation itself. It was necessary that the situation itself become further clarified for us to make further progress.
Some months after the 2nd World Congress, the split between the Yugoslav CP and the Cominform occurred. In the period which followed, important economic and also political developments began to occur in the buffer zone countries which transformed them considerably. All these events renewed the discussion and placed it on a new plane. On the other hand, the events in China were also to contribute in the clarification of our thoughts on a whole series of problems, including those of the buffer zone.
 
The 1949 Resolution
The discussion led to the adoption of a resolution by the 7th Plenum in April 1949.
The 7th Plenum resolution described the developments which had occurred in the buffer zone since 1945, namely the period of agreements between Washington and the Kremlin, marked by agreements with what remained of the native bourgeoisie in the buffer zone countries, and then the period of “cold war” marked by a struggle against the economic and political positions of the native bourgeoisie, which was waged primarily with bureaucratic methods.
The 7th Plenum resolution concluded with a study of the theoretical significance of the evolution of the buffer zone countries. This latter part explains the transition regimes of .the buffer zone countries as the resultant of the action of several factors: the decomposition of capitalism having attained a very advanced stage in these countries, the belatedness of the world revolution, and the role of the USSR as a workers’ state but acting tinder the leadership of the bureaucracy with the methods peculiar to this caste. We have nothing essential to change on this point and that is why we have incorporated this part of the 7th Plenum resolution in the resolution submitted for adoption to the 3rd World Congress.
But a part of this same 7th Plenum resolution showed itself to be inadequate or ambiguous or false and the discussion immediately reopened. It was the part of the resolution dealing with the social nature of the buffer zone states which reactivated the debate. The resolution recognized that structural assimilation had reached a very advanced stage, it noted that the bourgeoisie was no longer in power as the ruling class. But it refused to say that the “leap” to workers’ states had been made. The resolution considered these states as bourgeois states of a special type, something like “degenerated bourgeois states” although their structure – in the words of the resolution itself – was closer to that of the USSR than that of normal capitalist states. As a reason for this definition the resolution mentioned “the historic origins of the present situation and ... the still indecisive social physiognomy” of the buffer zone countries. It indicated “the elimination of national frontiers between the buffer zone countries” as the “decisive and fundamental” factor for the completion of structural assimilation.
One year later, at the 8th Plenum, the discussion still continued in our ranks, and besides the adoption of a brief resolution on the class nature of Yugoslavia, two resolutions were submitted for a consultative vote of the Plenum, one by comrade Pablo, the other by comrade Germain, differing in the premises on which they based their definition of the Yugoslav state and in which the problem of the nature of the buffer zone countries was in fact inferred.
The developments which have occurred in the buffer zone since then have enabled us to overcome the differences which existed at the time and to evolve a very precise position, with an equally clear understanding of the reasons which caused the delay and the errors of our movement on the question of the buffer zone.
 
The Social Nature of the Buffer Zone States
We believe that the buffer zone states are no longer capitalist states and that, like the USSR, they are fundamentally, i:e. in the domain of the relations of production and property, workers’ states. The changes which were made in their economies, the extension of nationalization and planning to all spheres of the economy, fundamentally distinguishes them from capitalist states.
What has happened in these countries is not a quantitative increase in nationalizations as has taken place in certain capitalist countries, but a qualitative transformation of the economy. It is not only heavy and light industry which is nationalized and planned but also the banks, all of transportation and all trade, foreign and domestic, wholesale as well as retail (in large part at least).
It is true that the land is not formally nationalized. This is not a negligible question, but it is not fundamental from the standpoint of a sociological characterization, in view of the considerable restrictions on the purchase and sale of land, and the introduction of collectivization on the countryside.
The relationships of production and property have been upset from top to bottom in these countries, and this transformation is continuing and involving spheres which have not as yet been affected (with the exception of agriculture with which we have already dealt). A return of these countries to a capitalist type structure will only be possible through a counter-revolution, which is obviously linked to the outcome of the coming war.
These are the fundamental changes of the economic structure which make us characterize these states as workers’ states. There are, to be sure, important differences on the political and even on the economic plane among these states and between them and the USSR. That is not surprising. The evolution of varied human societies, among them workers’ states, toward socialism cannot help but be affected by a whole series of factors. The march from capitalism to socialism will certainly give rise to very diverse social forms.
What is happening in the buffer zone countries is rather the obverse The reactionary intervention of the Moscow bureaucracy tends to impose forms approximating those in the USSR upon these countries and also to Russify an important part of their state apparatuses for the purpose of assuring Kremlin control.
We are also witnessing on the plane of social relations in the buffer zone countries the imposition of a policy modeled on that of the Soviet bureaucracy which is directed towards the creation of an apparatus and socially privileged stratum in relation to the mass of the workers.
But all of these elements, which have a very great importance in determining our policy in these countries, are not decisive so far as the sociological characterization of these states is concerned.
Exception is made, in the resolution submitted to this Congress, in this sociological characterisation of the buffer zone countries, for the Soviet zone in Austria which has not undergone any of these fundamental transformations.
 
Deformed and Degenerated Workers’ States
The resolution submitted to the Congress designates the buffer zone states as deformed workers’ states. What do we mean by this designation?
We did not use the term degenerated workers’ states because of the fact that this designation should only be applied (as in the case of the USSR) to a workers’ state which was born in the revolutionary struggle of the masses and which subsequently deteriorated as a result of the bureaucratic seizure of power to the detriment of the working masses.
The buffer zone states are not the product of the revolutionary action qf the masses but of the action of the bureaucracy, to which question we will return later. The defects they now have were present from the beginning. We do not mean “deformed” in the sense of workers’ states marred by bureaucratic deformations as was the case with the USSR, in the first years of its existence. In this context the word deformed means that these states have primarily the same fundamental defect as the USSR, i.e., the complete elimination of the proletariat, on the economic as well as the political plane, from the leadership of these countries.
In saying that we have been belated in characterizing these states as workers’ states, we do not believe that we were wrong on this point in 1946 and at the time of the Second World Congress. We still believe that up to 1949 these states still retained a fundamentally capitalist structure, although it was considerably damaged from the capitalist point of view. The descriptions and analyses made by our movement up to 1949 were correct as a whole. We had correctly emphasized the principal tendencies of development. We were hesitant on the possibility of the realization of these tendencies under existing conditions or at least as we interpreted these conditions.
The transformation of bourgeois states (decayed) into deformed workers’ states under the conditions it has occurred has raised a series of theoretical problems which should be dealt with.
For us, the norm in such a transformation is the revolutionary action of the masses, their armed struggle destroying the old apparatus of the bourgeois state and substituting a new state for it. The manner of the transformation in the bufffer zone countries does not correspond to the norm. Essentially it was the result of the action of the bureaucracy of the USSR and its agents. Does this call for a revision of Marxism? We do not think so at all.
From what happened at the beginning of the Second World War and from the deductions Trotsky had drawn from these events, we were ready to grasp the tendency toward structural assimilation, to understand these phenomena as they occurred But we hesitated in our theoretical generalizations. Why?
The bureaucracy is not a class, it has no fundamental role in history, it does not make history, on the contrary it seeks only to cheat history. But it has demonstrated an undeniable power, for reasons we well know, to deform and disfigure the march of the historic process. Stalinism falsifies past history, but it employs the same methods – and they are not without their consequences – on the present. We have seen Stalinism distort fundamental ideas in the minds of communist workers; we have seen it manipulate workers’ organizations and their policy. The Kremlin bureaucracy, with all the material and political power it derives from the Soviet state, has been able to manipulate phenomena to the point of rendering them momentarily more or less unrecognizable, without however derailing the fundamental social forces and the laws of history. One of our primary weaknesses was that of not always being able to rapidly disentangle the profound nature, of phenomena from the disfiguration they had suffered at the hands of the bureaucracy.
On the other hand, we ourselves did not exactly appreciate the conditions under which the bureaucracy had to operate. It is true that it acted in quite an empirical manner; in the beginning it did not dream of going beyond its agreements with imperialism. It merely wanted to convert the buffer zone states into zones of military protection and not into a belt of workers’ states on the borders of the USSR. Molotov’s declaration when Soviet troops entered the territory of a capitalist state for the first time, the theory of people’s democracy (1st edition), was not (contrived to deceive the bourgeoisie. The Kremlin bureaucracy had been obliged to go further than it intended. But we have only recently begun to appreciate more exactly the conditions under which the Kremlin acted. It is only approximately one year ago that we have begun to appreciate the grandeur of the revolutionary forces in all their scope let loose by the decomposition of capitalism. The discussion on the political report at this Congress has permitted an understanding of the full scope of these forces.
It is the decomposition of capitalism which has spoiled all the calculations of the bureaucracy as well as of imperialism in their search for a compromise which was also to include the buffer zone countries. We were especially cognizant of the bureaucratic character of the measures taken by the Kremlin but we were insufficiently appreciative of the forces which impelled the bureaucracy to reluctantly take the measures which in turn more and more barred the road to a compromise with imperialism and created a fundamentally different situation particularly in the buffer zone countries.
Among the causes of error on our part was the absolute juxtaposition of the action of the masses and that of the bureaucracy. We said: A workers’ state is not the creation of bureaucratic action, but only of the revolutionary action of the masses. The bureaucracy, as we well know, never or almost never eliminates the action of the masses in its interventions; what it seeks to suppress is the action of the masses which it cannot rigorously control; but it is very well able to utilize the action of the masses which it can control in order to attain its own objectives at, a given moment.
That was also true in the buffer zone countries. It placed the workers’ movement there under its tutelage, it proceeded from purge to purge, it destroyed all initiative of the masses, all independent action to a considerable degree, but it nevertheless mobilized these masses in a form it completely controlled for the purpose of being able to proceed to the important changes it deemed necessary in the buffer zone countries. We did not believe that it could carry out an operation of such scope in the buffer zone countries without losing control of the mass movement.
Because we were not always capable of analyzing the deformative effects of bureaucratic action on the historic process, because we did not have an extremely precise estimation of the forces let loose by the decomposition of capitalism and because we did not always understand the utilization of the masses by the bureaucracy, we committed errors on the buffer zone question; and we became involved in a problem which was not the real one, because there was no real solution for it, namely that of the criterion which determines the moment when the “leap” takes place. We were not faced with a relatively normal process. History had gone through bureaucratic channels in these countries and the endeavor to apply rigorous norms there was not without its dangers.
It goes without saying that in recognizing the character of the bureaucratic action in the buffer zone countries we not only do not attribute any progressive character to it, not only do we continue to consider it as counterrevolutionary as a whole, but we underscore the limits of bureaucratic possibilities. They were brought to bear on bourgeois countries in full decomposition where social relations had already been very unstable before the war and where the bourgeoisie had been considerably undermined during the war.
ft also goes without saying that the evolution of the buffer zone countries since 1945 does not provide the slightest justification for the theory of “people’s democracy” (1st edition) which imitated the old social democratic revisionist conception of a possible gradual passage from capitalism to socialism. This theory has been a lamentable failure in Western European capitalist countries. In Eastern Europe, the bureaucratic intervention which was substituted for the revolutionary action of the masses had nothing whatever in common with gradual, organic evolution.
The buffer zone situation has also demonstrated several facts to us which lead to important theoretical or political conclusions.
The buffer zone situation demonstrated that the coming to power of Stalinist parties under bureaucratic conditions (contrary to those in Yugoslavia or China) had similar although less marked consequences on these parties. The contradictions of society were reflected in these parties with growing acuteness. The pressure of the masses made itself strongly felt in opposition to the demands of the Muscovite bureaucracy. The apparatus, .even the leadership itself of these parties, is sensitive to this pressure. Thus far the tendencies expressing or reflecting this pressure have shown themselves extremely weak in face of the GPU apparatus, but one cannot exclude a different development in objectively different conditions.
Another very important point. The buffer zone experience has revealed – and even bourgeois observers have testified to this – that the working masses of these countries, although very hostile to the bureaucracy, are very attached to the transformations in the system even though they were achieved bureaucratically. Trotsky wrote in the definition of the USSR which he gave in Revolution Betrayed:
“The social revolution betrayed by the government party still lives in the property relations and in the consciousness of the toilers.”
In the buffer zone countries as well, the social transformations not only live in the existing property relations but also in the consciousness of the toilers although these social relations occurred not in a revolutionary but in a bureaucratic way. That is a very important element for a proper appreciation of the buffer zone countries.
What we have learned on this point from the Ukrainian independence movement is also very significant. As a result of the division of the Ukraine before the Second World War, the Ukrainian nationalist movement in Poland had contributed in bringing independence tendencies into being in the Soviet Ukraine. But on the other hand, the difference in social system between these two sections of the Ukraine had led to the evolution of the Ukrainian nationalists in Poland toward the adoption of the social forms of property of the Soviet Ukraine. This is a phenomenon which should not be forgotten, especially in the case of present-day Germany.
 
Policy Toward the Buffer Zone Countries
Our policy for the buffer zone countries, given the conclusion we have arrived at on their class nature and also the place they will have in the coming war, does not raise any moot problems. The discussion on the political resolution has clarified the problems posed by the buffer zone countries.
We are for the unconditional defense of these workers’ states against imperialism in the war now being prepared. It is fundamentally the same problem as that of the defense of the USSR. We defend these states as working class conquests, regardless of the bureaucratic means which were used to bring them into being and regardless of the policy followed by their governments. Our defense of these states in no case, at no time, implies a limitation of our criticism of the policy followed by the governments of these states.
We have designated these states as deformed workers’ states specifying that their deformation has been identical to that of the USSR principally in the expropriation of the proletariat from the administration of these states. It follows therefore that, as for the USSR, our political program for these countries is that of political revolution having as its aim the elimination of the bureaucracy from power and its resumption by the working masses. This point does not raise especially different problems from those of the USSR. Let us merely observe that there is not a native bureaucracy in these countries possessing a strength comparable to that of the Soviet bureaucracy; in truth, it is the Soviet bureaucracy which constitutes the principal prop, the principal strength of the native bureaucracies.
As in the case of the USSR, it is obvious that the defense of these countries does not exclude but on the contrary implies our support to movements of the worker and poor peasant masses against the bureaucracy. In the case of these countries, as in that of the’ national minorities in the USSR, we are also in favor of supporting mass movements for national independence from the yoke of the Soviet bureaucracy. In the buffer zone countries we are for the independence of these countries and their organization into a voluntarily organized federation.
All these points present no difficulties. They have long been the common property of our movement acquired on the question of the USSR in the past years by following step by step the evolution of the first workers’ state. The only difference is that these countries suffer even more severely from their unequal relations with Moscow than do the nationalities of the USSR. Over the decades the national question has always been a very sensitive point in these countries. Finally the question of their federation has had a long tradition in the workers’ movements of these countries, it having figured in the programs of socialist parties of these countries even before 1914.

In conclusion, we see that the buffer zone question has, in fact, been the extension of the Russian question which has so often been discussed in our movement, and not the point of departure for a new chapter in the history of the Soviet regime. But it is an extension which has taken its own peculiar course.
Our definition of the USSR, our comprehension of the dual role of the Soviet bureaucracy has permitted us to orient ourselves in a generally correct manner in the study of what has happened in the buffer zone countries and in understanding their fundamental tendencies. At bottom this was decisive.
But on the other hand, various inadequacies on our part have made us mark time, have led us into secondary problems and even into error. Today the situation has largely contributed in permitting us to overcome our weaknesses without great internal difficulties. It permits us to basically understand the buffer zone countries, their development, their contradictions.
We believe that the discussion based on the resolution presented by the International Secretariat will enable our movement to acquire all necessary clarity on this question and to seriously arm our militants for the political problems they will be faced with in the coming years.
 

re Frank: Political Crisis in France (1950)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Political Crisis in France
(January 1950)

From Fourth International, Vol.11 No.1, January-February 1950, pp.15-18.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The importance of a correct definition of the European
governments goes beyond the domain of theory. What Trotsky wrote in
1932 on the subject of bonapartism in Germany preserves all its value mutatis
mutandis for the bonapartism of 1945:
If we have insistently demanded that a distinction be
made between Fascism and Bonapartism, it has been in no wise out of
theoretical pedantry. Names are used to distinguish between concepts;
concepts, in politics, in turn serve to distinguish among real forces.
The smashing of Fascism would leave no room for Bonapartism, and. it is
to be hoped, would mean the direct introduction to the social
revolution.
Only — the proletariat is not aimed for the
revolution. The reciprocal relations between Social Democracy and the
Bonapartist government on the one hand, and between Bonapartism and
Fascism on the other — while they do not decide the fundamental
questions — distinguish by what roads and in what tempo the struggle
between the proletariat and the Fascist counter-revolution will be
prepared.
One must no more confuse the bonapartism “of the right”
with fascism than the bonapartism “of the left” with democracy. We have
seen that bonapartism takes very different forms according to the
conditions in which the two mortally opposed camps find themselves; we
maintain also that the existence of democratic liberties, even of very
great democratic liberties, does not suffice to make a regime
democratic. The bonapartists à la Kerensky, Popular
Front ... are even notorious for their flood of democratic liberty up
to the point where capitalist society thereby even risks its balance
and is in danger of capsizing. Democratic liberties do not proceed, as
in a regime which one can correctly define as democratic, from the
existence of a margin for reforms within capitalism, but on the
contrary, from a situation of acute crisis, the result of the absence
of all margin for reforms.
Precisely because we do not generally have in Europe at the present
time democratic regimes, because there is literally no place for them
and because the extension of democratic liberties can only undermine
the bonapartist regimes, we put forward the most extreme democratic
demands, in connection of course with the transitional demands which
prepare the duality of power.
The resolution of the recent national conference of the English
section of the Fourth International ignores, alas, in a general fashion
bonapartism for Europe, and employs the expression, devoid of content,
“democratic counter-revolution” for the European governments. The
resolution contains on the other hand a fairly good example for the
future development of events in Europe, namely that of Spain in the
period which extends from the fall of Primo de Rivera up to the civil
war against the fascism of Franco. In all this period of the Spanish
Republic there was no democratic regime properly speaking.
Bonapartism, as will probably be the case in all Europe, expressed
itself through a series of epileptic convulsions, of great shifts to
the right and to the left. The same phenomenon likewise occurred in
France after 1934: 1934, violent reactionary attack; 1936, general
strike and occupation of the factories; 1940, coup d’etat of Bordeaux;
1944, uprising against the Petain regime. These great leaps follow one
another, accompanied by deepening division of the nation along with a
political clarification on both sides in regard to the decisive
struggle. [1]
The use of democratic slogans — combined with transitional slogans —
is justified more precisely because the possibilities of a democratic
regime are non-existent, because present-day bonapartism is completely
unstable and the struggle for the most extreme democratic demands can
only end its existence. But again it is necessary for us to understand
one another on the democratic slogans which we adopt and not to define
slogans as democratic when they are not.
Let us merely recall in passing that the partisans of the Three
Theses seriously propose to make a struggle for the freedom of
religion — a democratic slogan, unquestionably — one of the most
essential points in the struggle against fascism. For anyone who has
not completely lost the use of his faculties in the course of these
terrible years of reaction through which we have passed, it is clear
that such a democratic slogan has nothing in common with us. It is on
the contrary more and more evident that this slogan is today the
property of a whole section of reaction which does not dare to show its
true face.
But a great error, even a very dangerous error, has been committed
in qualifying as democratic and in proposing to our organization the
slogan of “the Republic” (cf. the article of Comrade Logan on Italy).
We are completely in favor of the slogan “Down with the monarchy” in
Italy, in Greece, and for all the countries where this institution
inherited from feudalism exists. We are no less in favor of the slogan
of the Assembly of a single chamber which is against the Senate, the
House of Lords, etc. . . . But between these slogans and the “Republic”
there is a deep moat which we cannot cross. In one case we endeavor to
direct the masses against institutions of a profoundly reactionary
character, which limit, even under the capitalist, regime, the
possibility of democratic expression of the masses, and which, in
moments of crisis become quasi-automatically the rallying point for the
forces of the counter-revolution. In the other case, we would advance
the slogan which, if we made the mistake of adopting it, would make us
the promoters of a completely vague state form. “The Republic”? This
slogan does not concern a partial objective but puts to the fore the
very question of the state. What republic can we recommend in the
current epoch? The Republic of Workers and Peasants Soviets alone, and
not a bourgeois republic. The slogan of “the Republic” is absolutely
silent on this point and can only, by its confusion, favor the class
enemy.
It is evident that, despite our rejection of this slogan, we will
not be neutral in the plebiscites which may be held in Europe on the
question of the monarchy. We shall call the workers and peasants to
vote against the monarchy, but clearly specifying that we do not have
the choice as to the other term of the alternative, that we are voting
against the monarchy but not in favor of the bourgeois republic.
It is almost twenty years ago that the Italian Social Democrats in
one of their fits of theoretical audacity inscribed in their program of
the struggle against fascism the slogan of “the democratic republic of
the toilers” and, for a certain period, the Italian Communist Party, in
one of its zig-zags to the right, had an equivocal position towards
this slogan. When in 1930, a section of the leadership of the Italian
CP broke with Stalinism, formed the New Italian Opposition and turned
toward the Left Opposition, this slogan was the object of a
clarification in the exchange of views which took place at that time.
The old opposition, that of the Bordigists, had an absolutely negative
attitude on democratic slogans; it was especially necessary that the
new Italian comrades should not take for their part a position which
could be exploited by the Bordigists and which would have been fatal in
the struggle against fascism. In a letter to the comrades in the NOI
Trotsky expressed himself as follows on the slogan of the Italian
Social Democrats:
While advancing one or another set of democratic
slogans we must irreconcilably fight against all forms of democratic
charlatanism. Such low-grade charlatanism is represented by the slogan
of the Italian Social Democracy: “The Democratic Republic of the
Toilers”. The “Toilers republic” can be only the class state of the
proletariat. The “Democratic Republic” is only a masked rule of the
bourgeoisie. The combination of the two is a naive petty bourgeois
illusion of the Social Democratic rank and file (workers, peasants) and
deliberate treachery on the part of the Social Democratic leaders (all
these Turatis, Modiglianis and their ilk). Let me once again remark in
passing that I was and remain opposed to the formula of a “National
Assembly on the basis of worker-peasant committees” precisely because
this formula approaches the Social Democratic slogan of the “Democratic
Toilers Republic” and, consequently, can render extremely difficult for
us the struggle against the Social Democrats. May 14, 1930.
The slogan of “the Republic” as such is also as
erroneous and pernicious as that of “The Democratic Republic of the
Toilers” although, we are persuaded, few comrades in our international
organization would have at present an inclination to mix in the above
fashion the forms of bourgeois power with the forms of proletarian
power. But it is not the thoughts and intentions of this or that
comrade which are under discussion but the slogan of “the Republic”
itself. This is not a democratic slogan but, to employ the strong
expression of Trotsky, democratic charlatanism.
The theoretical principles and positions which are a part of the
accumulated capital of the Bolshevik-Leninists, gained in the course of
their years of struggle against Stalinism, reformism and all the
varieties of centrism in the workers’ movement, and which we have
called to mind in this article, obviously far from exhaust the
questions which arise on the European situation. But it is
indispensable to take them as a point of departure to permit our
militants and our sections to orient themselves correctly despite the
enormous confusion which rages and which, unhappily, will not fail to
rage for the duration of a complete period, up to the point when the
events and ourselves, in assisting events by a correct policy,
consciously array an important fraction of the working class under the
flag of the Fourth International.
 
Footnote
1. Since we here
speak of the resolution of our English comrades let us note that it
defines the new Labor government as “Kerenskyism”. The Bonapartism,
that they ignored, has found the means to insinuate itself into their
document under a very special name. But we do not think that the
present Attlee government is bonapartist à la
Kerensky. Without questioning the coming to power of this government,
that is to say, of a formation which rests on the working class but
wishes to leave intact. The City and British capitalism, at the moment
when the latter has only gained a victory at the price of its very
substance, will accelerate the downfall of British imperialism. The
oldest of democracies has, as a result of the last elections, reached a
dead end. But the term “Kerenskyism” is not appropriate, for it already
presupposes the accomplishment of the passage from democracy to this
form of bonapartism. On the contrary, it is in the future, probably
very soon, that this passage will occur and the English workers and
their organizations will then have to face an important crisis. In
England one can only observe features of bonapartism. For example the
Labor government, under the pressure of capital and encouraged by the
administrative apparatus, of which it hasn’t harmed a hair, is inclined
to play a role of referee above the parties, while a section of the
Labor parliamentary group endeavors to continue representing in a
reformist and parliamentary fashion the worker masses who have elected
them.

re Frank: A Study in French Centrism (1948)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
A Study in French Centrism
(October 1948)

From Fourth International, Vol.10 no.6, June 1949, pp.180-185.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The pre-war period was marked by an implacable struggle by the Fourth International against centrist organizations, particularly against the London Bureau, the international center which was the meeting ground for groupings which oscillated between Marxism on the one side and opportunism or Stalinism on the other. This side of our activity was limited in the postwar period; the London Bureau disappeared and most of the former centrist organizations went out of existence. (The Independent Labour Party, the oldest of these and the most deeply rooted in the British labor movement, came to the conclusion that it no longer was a factor on the political scene in England.)
On the other hand, the postwar revolutionary crisis impelled the broad masses toward the old Social Democratic and Stalinist organizations. The problem of the building of revolutionary parties was posed at this stage in the form of the establishment of links between the Trotskyist organizations and the masses, so that as a result of common experiences they would be won over to the banner of the Fourth International.
The split between the masses and the leadership of the old organizations has begun in various ways but the Trotskyist organizations are still too weak to take full advantage of this development. Does that mean that there is room for centrist organizations? What would be their scope and their orientation? Such questions can only be answered by examining the situation concretely, country by country. The experiences on this point in France are quite specific, and while one must guard against drawing too generalized conclusions from them, they nevertheless are instructive in the building of a revolutionary party.
Following the “liberation” in 1944, the overwhelming majority of the working class and important sections of the middle class followed the Stalinist party. The remainder of the working class followed the Socialist Party which had wide influence among government employees and the middle class. As a result of the class-collaborationist policies carried on equally by the Social Democracy and by Stalinism, and then by the policy of the Stalinists after the formation of the Cominform and by the unbridled class-collaborationism of the SFIO (French Socialist Party), an important part of the middle class was thrown into the arms of de Gaullism and the old leadership began to lose its influence over sections of the workers and the middle class.
Confidence in the traditional parties has begun to wane. This process is quite advanced as far as the Social Democracy is concerned. It is less marked in the French Communist Party, the strongest of all Stalinist parties in Western Europe, which has at its disposal not only a huge” apparatus but a large number of worker-militants who have been associated with it over many years of struggle and who enjoy considerable authority in the factories.
In this process of disintegration, the transformation of centrist tendencies into centrist organizations tends to germinate at the weakest points of the old organizations. Moreover the workers’ groupings are still far more inert than the petty bourgeoisie; they react more slowly but with far greater consistency.
This is being very clearly confirmed in France. The allegiance of members and sympathizers of the CP to that party has always been much stronger than that of SP members and sympathizers to Blum’s party. Op to now the Stalinist party has suffered only minor losses among its worker-members. During the early part of 1947 when the CPF was still in the government and supported, the wage-freeze, some of its members went over to the Anarchists, specifically to the CNT, Anarcho-Syndicalist trade union federation, but the decomposition of this organization has been as rapid as its rise.
The bulk of the working class still follows the Stalinist party. One of the reasons for the absence of any broad development of a centrist organization was the “left turn” of the CP following the creation of the Cominform. Discontent with the policy of the CP is widespread and exists within the ranks of the party itself, where strong differences have been manifested to the position of Thorez, Duclos, Marty, etc. But these are widely diverse, politically and organizationally isolated from each other. Thus centrism assumes exceptional importance within the ranks of the CPF, embracing worker-militants who are under the pressure of a large rank and file but who, because of the policy of their leadership, are not permitted to carry on revolutionary activity corresponding to their own aspirations. Therein is posed the most important problem of centrism in France. Upon its solution depends the creation of a strong revolutionary party in France and at the same time the development of the class struggle in this country and therefore the development of class relations for an entire period in Western Europe.
What has already happened among the petty-bourgeois tendencies and in the ranks of the Social Democracy – while quite secondary to the above-mentioned phenomena: – is not a matter of indifference. In addition the evolution of a centrism, social democratic in origin and petty bourgeois in social composition, has been intimately connected with political developments in the Parti Communiste Internationaliste (French Trotskyists). As will be seen, the history of these groupings cannot be separated from the recent crisis of the French Section of the Fourth International, a crisis which is most clearly explained by the evolution of these centrist elements. It is a conclusive experience in this connection.
 
Before the Defeat of November-December 1947
Two closely associated tendencies took shape in the SP and split from it in 1947 – Jeunesses Socialistes (Socialist Youth – JS) and Action Socialiste et Revolutionnaire (Socialist and Revolutionary Action – ASR).
Deprived of political rights in the SFIO the Jeunesses Socialistes began an orientation toward a revolutionary program which was most marked at their 1947 convention at Montrouge a Paques. Six weeks later when the first Renault (auto) strike occurred, they solidarized themselves with the strikers and were expelled by the SP leadership. Their political evolution, continuing in an autonomous and somewhat devious way, led them to consider fusion with the PCI, and on December 13, 1947, their national committee resolved:
The National Committee of the JS notes that the discussion and actions carried on with the PCI have demonstrated that despite differences there is fundamental agreement on revolutionary program between the two organizations.
Therefore there can be no serious obstacle to the building of a revolutionary party uniting the JS and PCI.
The National Committee takes note that the resolution adopted by the ASR defines in essence a political orientation similar to that of the JS and the PCI and that therefore it now appears hopeful that after thorough political clarification and discussion, the three organizations will participate in the building of a united revolutionary party.
Special note should be taken that on December 13, 1947 “no serious obstacle” to unification of the JS and PCI existed.
Action Socialiste et Revolutionnaire was belatedly constituted in the SP around Dechezelles, co-secretary of the party, C. Just and members of the Lyons organization after a split with Rous, Boutbien and others to whom we shall return later. At the Lyons Convention of the SP held in August 1947, the ASR protested against the expulsion of the Jeunesses but it was not yet politically prepared to leave the party. It was only later, at the critical point of the 1947 general strike, that the ASR broke with the SP, adopting the following resolution on its position at its December 7th conference:
The only possible means for the abolition of the capitalist system and the institution of proletarian power and the building of socialism is the creation of a revolutionary party based on the class struggle.
Therefore the ASR sets as its goal the building of such a party and will issue an appeal for this purpose to all members and all organizations who agree on the following principles. ...
Under the impulse of the great workers’ battle then in process both tendencies were evolving in the direction of a clear-cut revolutionary program. Unification with the PCI was on the agenda of both organizations; it was posed more concretely in the JS than in the ASR because of the more heterogeneous character of the latter, but the problem was clear enough to its leading elements.
The defeat of the November-December movement, the trade union split organized by Blum and Jouhaux (reformist trade union leader) and facilitated by (the Stalinist) Frachon, the capitalist and government offensive, the rise of de Gaullism, gave rise to the attempts of the socialists to find new ministerial combinations, and to the extremely complex policy of the Stalinists.
 
The Stalinists Intervene
The Stalinists were not inactive in this situation. Their. agents in the SP, gathered around the paper Bataille Socialiste, who had said nothing against the expulsion of the JS and had not carried on any campaign against the anti-labor policy of the party leadership and the socialist cabinet ministers, came into violent conflict with the Managing Committee of the SP on the issue of its pro-American and anti-Russian policy. They courted expulsion for the purpose of chanelizing the discontent of the socialist-minded workers and of the left wing in the SP.
Soon after, what remained of the “left” in the SP, Rous, Boutbien and others – no longer able to remain silent or to freely desert to the leadership as was done by Marceau Pivert (leader of pre-war French centrism) – believed that it would be possible to circumvent the discipline of the SP by another device. In company with a number of journalists who proclaimed their independence from all organizations and with some figures from the literary world like Sartre and Rousset, they launched the Rassemblement Democratique Revolutionnaire, (Revolutionary Democratic Rally – RDR) a grouping without any programmatic basis, without any strict form of organization, without discipline, and above the parties. The aim of the operation was indicated in a pamphlet by Rous who advocated a policy of pushing the “third force” to the “left.”
One would have thought that these two new “independent” groupings, one obviously pro-Stalinist and the ether a transparent appendage of the “third force,” would not have been able to exercise any powerful attraction on the JS and ASR. These groups had the merit of breaking with the SP on a class basis. They knew from their own experience the exact worth of the leading figures of the Bataille Socialiste group as well as those of the RDR.
But a third element intervened in the situation which arrested the development of the JS and the ASR. This was the crisis in the PCI and the role played in it by the former right wing of the PCI, the Parisot-Demaziere faction which led the party from September 1946 to December 1947. Under the impact of the defeat of the workers’ movement they cast aside the revolutionary program and broke with the Fourth International. Confronted with this split, the militants of the JS and the ASR, still either immature politically or confused, became disoriented and demoralized; Their progress stopped short and retrogression set in.
 
The Crisis in the PCI
How was it possible for this to happen to an old Trotskyist leadership?
The right-wing tendency in the PCI was not united by common political views (its members gave no evidence of precision in the formulation of their political positions and La Verité, under their editorship, manifested this, alas, only too often) but by a conception of building a revolutionary party which can be summarized as follows:
The Trotskyists have not grown in the past because of their “sectarianism” (meaning their attachment to a program which concretized the whole experience of the working class); it is necessary to be flexible; on occasion to put programmatic questions in the background; daily policy is not a question of principle; political skill is required to gain the leadership of a mass movement, which having been won can be directed toward certain ends. Some of them thought it possible to create this mass current by a vast superficial agitation, others by resorting to this or that conception or slogan which was popular on some occasion (such as the “Resistance”), others by creating a broad shapeless mass organization. (In essence, this conception is closely related to that of the Stalinists for whom the class is a malleable mass to be manipulated by an all-powerful apparatus.)
This is also the idea which pervaded the activity of the JS and the Dunoyer grouping in the SP. The left wing in the JS and the SP formed slowly, painfully and confusedly. But matters worsened after the split because of the substitution of a whole series of organizational maneuvers for genuine political struggle, resulting rapidly in mishaps, then in catastrophe.
 
Evolution of Socialist Youth
Jeunesses Socialistes, a very weak political organization, had an absolute need for an intense political life if it was to assimilate the program of the Fourth International. But instead and in place of that, at more or less regular intervals, Dunoyer gauged the “political consciousness” of the JS and set an organizational goal which according to him was to develop this consciousness. In the period which followed expulsion from the SFIO, a space of several weeks, there occurred a rapprochement with a Stalinist youth organization for the ostensible purpose of permitting the JS to have an experience with Stalinism; then activity oriented around the formation of “Committees of Revolutionary Regroupment” to give the JS an understanding of the need for a revolutionary party; and finally a rapprochement with the PCI in a joint electoral campaign in the municipal elections of October 1947 with a view toward fusion.
These youth, who should have been learning the revolutionary program by study and in actions other than an electoral campaign, were told to defend a program they did not understand by hook or by crook before the working class. Heavy damage to the JS was caused by these organizational gymnastics. Still one could hope toward the end of 1947 that with the adoption of the above-cited resolution by the National Committee of the JS, the worst would soon be over.
At that time, Dunoyer told us that there was “no serious block” in the “consciousness” of the JS to fusion with the PCI, and one could be thankful for that. But when the effects of the workers’ defeat made themselves felt, Dunoyer, and with him the “consciousness” of the JS, began to evolve. The same evolution and the same zigzags were manifested by the defeated leadership at the 4th Convention of the PCI and in the leadership of the ASR.
Instead of the building of a revolutionary party by unification of the ASR, JS and PCI on a program which would be fundamentally if not formally that of the Fourth International, we saw first a new turn in the leaderships of the ASR and the JS in the direction of the Stalinist Bataille Socialiste. They told us that involved in part in this procedure was the unification of those elements with a socialist origin which would later serve as a stepping stone for the building of a revolutionary party. [1]
This undertaking did not get very far because the leaders of Bataille Socialiste insisted upon an open attack against the PCI (which as was shown later would not perhaps have been unacceptable) and submission to the desires, big and little, of the leaders of the CP – which was hardly an attractive condition at a time when the wind had turned and was now blowing ever more strongly from the West.
The unification of the JS and the ASR which took place in 1948 was only a belated recognition of the existence of two leaderships over one and the same organization, or rather the vestiges of an organization. The ASR, thus unified, found itself on the horns of a dilemma; either to work for the building of a revolutionary party, as had been decided five months earlier and as was demanded by a tendency in its ranks grouped around comrades Dumont and Just – and that meant to seek a rapprochement with the PCI; or to abandon this perspective and, as inveterate centrists, to turn toward the RDR. The majority of the leadership, with the support of the ex-Trotskyists who betrayed their party and their program, adopted the latter solution and decided to enter the RDR. [2]
Since then the ASR has virtually disappeared, its political disintegration proceeding apace. At a recent session of its central committee, after having expelled the tendency favoring the building of a revolutionary party in unity with the PCI, the majority divided into two sections, one for fusion with the Stalinist Bataille Socialiste in the “Socialist Unity Party” and the other which no longer has any other hope than to be the spark plug of the RDR. It is noteworthy that Dumont who a few weeks later was to be the spokesman of the revolutionary opposition at the Congress of the CGT (French trade union federation) was expelled from the ASR by Sautery who was to vote with the Stalinists on all questions at the same trade union convention. This incident speaks volumes on those who wanted to teach the Trotskyists lessons in political flexibility.
The Free Men
To speak of the RDR as centrist is a little less than exact. Traditional centrism, mixture of Marxist phraseology and opportunist practice, is far superior to the positions taken by the RDR. The first manifesto announcing this social democratic offspring begins by amending Marx: Its motto is: “Proletarians and free men of all countries, Unite!” Being neither proletarians, who are specifically designated, nor capitalists, this expression can only refer to what we in our Marxist language and stubborn sectarianism call the middle classes, the petty bourgeoisie.
The concept of classes is abhorrent to the RDR. According to the “free men” of the RDR there are entities above the classes and their struggles, and the most important of these is “the Resistance.” Only a malicious Marxist would point out that the “Resistance” was almost universally divided and engaged in mortal combat along class lines (Yugoslavia, Greece) or was rapidly dividing along sush class lines (France, Belgium).
Watching reactionary developments in France, a free man like David Rousset cries out: “No, the Resistance didn’t want this!” One must have the brain of a free man to discover that one “of the errors of General de Gaulle ... which has its roots in his social formation and in his political orientation ... (is) to have understood the Resistance solely in the narrow framework of military action and intelligence.” The capitalists and the militarists at their service are obliged to utilize the laboring masses in their wars in “the narrow framework of military action,” to use the language of a “revolutionary democrat.” This is no error on their part. The capitalists know what a class is and they know how to exploit petty-bourgeois intellectuals for their benefit.
 
“Freedom” Within the French Empire
The national problem is also tackled by the RDR from the point of view of “free men” and not from the class point of view. Lenin pointed out the role of the proletariat in the struggle of oppressed peoples for independence; he also demonstrated in his study on imperialism that this force subjugated, not only colonial countries but small modern capitalist countries as well to the yoke of the most powerful nations. This tendency has been tragically unfolded to the extent that we now see Europe put on rations by the United States. But Lenin did not depend upon free men, especially on the kind who could free themselves from Trotskyism. In his letter of March 4, 1948 which marked his break with Trotskyism, Demaziere discovered that “... along with scarcity there has arisen new exploiting and privileged groups (middle men, speculators) who are completely unconcerned with the independence of their country.”
Is it any wonder that there are dissertations in La Gauche (the name of the RDR paper which in itself represents a program in France) on the guilt of the German people? Of course they do not speak of this guilt in any specific sense. But who doesn’t know that the technique of these “left” personalities consists in finding progressive meanings for the ideas the ruling class utilizes for its reactionary policy?
International tension is now obliging the free men to take a position. David Rousset has discreetly abandoned the pro-Stalinist position he had on the morrow of the “liberation.” [3] He sees only “the geographic extension of the Russian system whose state form does not respect all the freedoms.” (The terms used to describe the GPU regime are very cautious because he does not wish to burn all his bridges.) And he also sees America whose “strategic advance is essentially aimed at safeguarding, wherever it is threatened, a moribund economic regime which, however, is indispensable for its economy.”
The RDR proposes a “constructive struggle” against the Marshall Plan which consists in demanding from Wall Street an effective control over the utilization of American grants and credits by trade union organizations. To whom is Washington to give control over American funds granted to capitalist states? To Jouhaux or to Frachon? And for what purpose? Perhaps to build socialism? The free men are especially free in using any kind of formula which does not tie them down to anything concrete.
There is no lack of denunciation of “the old colonialism” by these personalities on the “left.” They favor the right of the people to self-determination but within limits, that is within the French Union, or, to be more precise, within a genuine, democratic, revolutionary French Union. Provided that they take care to keep within these limits, the Vietnamese, the people of Madagascar and the Algerians will be entitled to complete self-determination. In other words, in place of the “old colonialism” our free men propose a new colonialism, democratic and revolutionary, which we suppose is to be enforced by the good capitalist Republicans.
 
Centrists and the Problems of the Class Struggle
The petty-bourgeois character of the centrist tendencies manifest themselves in many ways toward domestic problems. In Drapeau Rouge, organ of the JS, as in La Gauche, workers’ demands far from occupying a primary position are only the object of afterthoughts. Only during the second half of 1947 was there a momentary effort in Drapeau Rouge to give more consideration to specifically workers’ problems. The demands which they do put forward vary from issue to issue according to the editor of the moment. In June 1948, the RDR was at one and the same time in favor of the sliding scale of wages and for an increase in wages proportionate to the increase in productivity. Are they trying in this manner to satisfy all tendencies in the labor movement?
The centrism of the former right wing of the PCI and the leaders of the ASR and the JS is most completely revealed on the question of the united front. There was an entire period when the two old leaderships – Social Democratic and Stalinist – were united in opposing strikes, and when the initiative was in the hands of the working class which was restrained only with the greatest difficulty by these leaderships. The problem of the split in the workers’ movement was not a practical question but, on the contrary, it was the slogan of the general strike which embodied the highest form of the unity of the workers’ front. During this entire period our centrists, on every occasion and out of all contact with reality, agitated for the united front, going so far as to propose a “united electoral front” to the CP and SP in the November 1946 elections.
Following the defeat of the general strike, the initiative passed over into the hands of the bourgeoisie and it became necessary to rebuild the unity of the workers’ front, to organize a working-class resistance which could be transformed into a victorious counteroffensive. Thus when the united front should have become the central axis of the policy of a revolutionary party concerned with elaborating a perspective for the working class, this slogan virtually disappeared from the platform of the centrists.
There has never been any lack of ambiguity on the character of the RDR, judging even from the conceptions of its supporters themselves. For some it is a formation based on a more or less precise program in competition with the existing parties. For others the RDR pretends to be a rally above parties for the purpose of opposing the other rally (de Gaulle) and, because of this, realizes within itself a united front of the masses. But since the masses have not decided to follow this kind of organization, the RDR cannot be anything else but a political formation, a sub-party without a precise program. It will neither achieve the united front nor contribute to its achievement. To the degree that it hinders the formation of the revolutionary party, it hinders the realization of the united front.
At a time when everyone knows that the dominant question in France is that of power, when de Gaulle and the Stalinists who influence three-fourths of the country, campaigning on the one side for a “strong state” and on the other side for a government of “democratic unity,” the free men have nothing to say to the laboring masses on this question. Their approach to this question is possibly embodied in the proposal by (George) Altman [a social democrat] who, proclaiming his loyalty to the Republic (it is really touching), calls for “a rally of all the left forces in the .country ... with formal guarantees for the free expression of differences.” This may, appear somewhat complicated, this “revolutionary, democratic rally” which is itself enclosed within a “rally of all the left forces,” seasoned with unrestrained rights for everyone to say everything and to do nothing, the total result being the well known old tale which is entitled: left bloc, popular front, tripartitism.
That is the essence of the program of the centrists. And for this purpose Demaziere proposed to the PCI that:
“The revolutionary vanguard of which the PCI is a part should enter the RDR and play the game intelligently and thoroughly. In the prevailing state of disintegration and bewilderment in the workers’ vanguard, some key values will help our militants find their way again. As for the rest we should withhold our views until there is sufficiently widespread activity which would permit us to make ourselves better known than in the past.”
 
Free Men of All Countries, Unite!
The centrists have their peculiar way of being internationalists. Before the war, the “London Bureau” was the center for a number of political formations which met from time to time, exchanged fraternal greetings, adopted vague resolutions, but otherwise felt no common bond whatever. The war put an end to this Bureau and most of its affiliates.
The split of the right wing from the PCI occurred on the eve of the Second World Congress of the Fourth International. They parted company with the Bolshevik Leninists in more than 30 countries in order to unite with the free men of the editorial board of Franc Tireur and the Flore cafe. This done, Demaziere, Dunoyer and company announced that they were prepared to remain within the Fourth International on the condition that the latter would be content to receive occasional reports of their activity in the RDR – in other words on the condition that the Fourth International would take the place of the defunct “London Bureau.”
But since there were Ceylonese, Uruguayan and even French Bolshevik-Leninists who had no stomach for this international with the “new look,” it became necessary for the ex-Trotskyists and their associates to clear their conscience by devising some form of internationalism. This did not prove to be difficult. “A movement not bound to any system, any regime, any doctrine” (Altman pontificated) should have no trouble finding other free men beyond the frontiers and the oceans who are similarly free and similarly uninhibited by doctrine.
If rumors are correct the ex-Trotskyists are assured of the help of Shachtman and the POUM, a Spanish party, in the publication of a periodical. (The magazine has since appeared under the name Confrontation Internationale.) International alliances are very helpful for politically characterizing a movement.
Trotsky designated the POUM as having been the most serious of the centrist organizations. It had a workers’ base in Catalonia and a certain revolutionary tradition. Although some of the leaders of the POUM pretend to have leanings toward the Fourth International, they never lose an opportunity to assist the opponents of the Trotskyists or to display sympathy for them. It has become a standard practice to be sympathetic to the Fourth International while coming to an agreement with those who are trying to betray it.
La Batalla, organ of the POUM, was preoccupied with the presidential elections in the US. They were aware that our comrades in the SWP were carrying on a vigorous campaign for their nominee, Farrell Dobbs. They were equally aware that Shachtman’s organization had advised American voters to take their pick among the “socialist candidates,” that is, to vote either for the SWP candidate, or for Norman Thomas, or for the candidate of the archaic grouping, the SLP. It is noteworthy that the most decisive elements in Shachtman’s group (James T. Farrell, Albert Goldman) who were sympathetic to Norman Thomas, left the organization on this question. Referring to Shachtman’s vague position, La Batalla (September 18, 1948) wrote:
“It would have been more correct to come out publicly and officially in favor of the Socialist Party candidate and even participate actively in his behalf in the election campaign.”
Thus as between Trotskyism, whose candidate was a militant worker with a record of struggle and who was imprisoned for his activities during the war, and American “socialism,” whose candidate was a former preacher who supported the imperialist war and has nothing in common with socialist thought, the sympathies of the POUM are on the side of social democracy.
We have no doubt that Shachtman is well able to cover the pages of a magazine with his scribbling. But on the basis of what program? The word program itself is rare enough in his writings. And what are his perspectives? Having returned to his country after a visit to Europe, he found a completely demoralized organization. This is the opening observation of all the articles in the Internal Bulletin of the Workers Party and of some of the articles in its public organs. The Second World Congress of the Fourth International, the strongest international gathering of Trotskyists, to use Shachtman’s own words, made no impression upon him. He voluntarily closed the door upon it. He sees no solution except to renounce the name “Workers Party” in favor of a study and discussion circle. And as for the rest of the Marxists in the world, he recommends that they plunge into the mass movement without a program – this movement being represented in France not by the Stalinist party but by the RDR! Shachtman joins hands with Demaziere on every point. Without doctrine, without principles, no one is held responsible for anything by anyone. What a remarkable magazine will emerge from
such an ideological vacuum!

It is with considerable disgust that we watch this wretched comedy in which ex-Trotskyists are the chief actors. But it throws considerable light on the struggle which took place over the years in the PCI, a struggle between the supporters of the Trotskyist program and a petty-bourgeois wing which was attempting to free itself from the Trotskyist program and organization.
The future of centrism, originating in petty-bourgeois and social democratic groupings is unquestionably very circumscribed in France. The struggle of the Trotskyists against this tendency should now permit them to turn their attention to the other centrism, that of the workers breaking with Stalinism, with all the necessary theoretical clarity as well as with all the indispensable flexibility needed to advance on the basis of the program of the Fourth International.
October 15, 1948.
 

re Frank: The Transitional Program (1967)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
The Transitional Program
(1967)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.28 No.3, May-June 1967, pp.1-12.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




This article is an introduction to the forthcoming French edition of the Transitional Program. It includes a discussion of Rosa Luxemburg’s speech printed below (Programme for Revolution, by Rosa Luxemburg). Pierre Frank is a member of the United Secretariat of the Fourth International.



The first Marxist transitional program appeared in the Manifesto of the Communist Party of 1848, at the end of the chapter Proletarians and Communists. Formulated in ten points, it presents both a program for mobilizing the workers in the struggle for the conquest of power, and a program to be instituted in the period following the seizure of power by the workers. The programs of the big working-class parties that arose during the second half of the nineteenth century, the most famous of which was the Erfurt program of 1891, consisted of two parts having no dialectical relationship to each other whatever: There was a maximum program calling for a socialist society in the indefinite future, and a minimum program which the working-class party defended in the immediate period within the framework of capitalist society; for this was the era of the development and worldwide expansion of capitalism and the problem of the seizure of power by the proletariat could not be posed as an immediate objective.
With the advent of the imperialist phase of capitalism at the beginning of the twentieth century, the struggle for power was again on the agenda; the Russian Revolution of 1905 was its first and most striking manifestation. In 1917, the Bolshevik Party advanced what was a transitional program in fact even though it did not use the name (it is to be found in the April Theses as well as in Lenin’s pamphlet The Threatening Catastrophe and How to Fight It). In 1918, Rosa Luxemburg, who was first in sensing the danger of dividing the program into two parts (see footnote two below), called attention in her programmatic speech at the founding congress of the German Communist Party to precisely those passages in the Communist Manifesto which we mentioned above, as well as to the Erfurt program. Declaring that it was necessary to return to the ideas of the Manifesto, she went on to assert:
“[Our program] is in conscious opposition to the point of view on which the Erfurt program was based, in conscious opposition to the separation of immediate demands, called minimum, in the economic and political struggle from the final socialist goal as the maximum program. In our conscious opposition to this, we draw a balance on the results of the past seventy years of development and especially their direct consequence, the world war, by stating: For us there is no such thing as a minimum program and a maximum program; socialism is one; socialism is the minimum which we must achieve today.”
Having established itself organizationally and taken measures to shut its doors to reformist and centrist currents at its first two world congresses, the Communist International, at its third and fourth world congresses (1921 and 1922) advanced the idea of a transitional program in these terms:
“In place of the minimum program of the reformists and centrists, the Communist International mounts a struggle for the concrete needs of the proletariat, for a system of demands which taken together will disintegrate the power of the bourgeoisie, organize the proletariat and constitute stages in the struggle for the proletarian dictatorship, and in which each particular demand will express a need of the great masses, even if these masses are not yet consciously in favor of a dictatorship of the proletariat.” (Third Congress, 1921, Thesis on Tactics).
“3. The programs of the national sections must clearly and decisively establish the necessity of the struggle for transitional demands, making the necessary reservations about the dependence of these demands on the concrete circumstances of time and place.
“4. The theoretical basis for all transitional and partial demands must be clearly stated in the general program, and the fourth congress likewise decisively condemns the attempt to depict the inclusion of transitional demands in the program as opportunism, as well as all attempts to gloss over or replace the fundamental revolutionary tasks by partial demands.
“5. The general program must clearly explain the basic historical types of the transitional demands of the national section, in accordance with the basic differences in the economic and political structure of the different countries, for example England on the one hand, and India on the other.” (Fourth Congress, 1922, Resolution on the Program of the Communist International)
As the gangrene of Stalinism set in, the Communist International abandoned the idea of a transitional program. After some ultraleft convulsions, its main orientation became opportunist (Popular Front, National Fronts, etc.), and collaboration followed with various wings of the bourgeoisie or was sought after within the framework of the capitalist system. The Communist parties returned de facto to the concept of a minimum program. For them the question no longer existed of a system of demands so interrelated as to develop and raise the class struggle from the level of a struggle for partial and transitional goals to that of the struggle for a workers’ government.
 
Trotskyist Contribution
It was the Fourth International which, in the transitional program as well as all other fields, continued and enriched the work of the first four congresses of the Communist International. After a number of initial efforts by national sections (Action Program of 1934 of the Communist League of France, Action Program of the Belgian section, etc.), the Founding Congress of the Fourth International adopted, in 1938, the document which has entered the history of the Trotskyist movement under the name of the Transitional Program. It is this document which we are reprinting here, along with the preface to the French edition of 1946.
The work should not be thought of as the fundamental program of the Fourth International, for the latter consists of the totality of lessons drawn from the struggle for socialism since the beginning of the working-class movement. A program of that kind cannot be drafted in the form of a single document. It is based on the teachings of the Marxist classics, the first four congresses of the Communist International, the fundamental documents of the Russian and International Left Opposition and the documents of the congresses of the Fourth International. Within this historical context, the Transitional Program of 1938 constitutes a part of the fundamental program of the Fourth International. It is its most important part politically in the sense that on the basis of the totality of teachings contained in the fundamental program, it formulates a political program aimed at mobilizing the masses into actions which correspond to their level of consciousness at a given moment, in order to lead them, through the education they receive in the course of these actions, to the highest level of consciousness, which will carry them to the conquest of power.
 
Key Elements of Program
The Transitional Program is therefore based upon two essential elements:

the condition of a capitalist society that has lost its stability on the historical scale (not necessarily at every moment and in any and all countries) and where the struggle for the conquest of power has become the major task for this historical period;
a series of slogans linked to national and international conjunctural conditions which in combination have the objective of raising the masses to the highest political level during the process of their struggles.

With the validity of each slogan being determined by its correspondence with the internal logic of the mass movement, the key piece in the program is precisely the culminating slogan of the whole chain – the slogan for a workers’ and farmers’ government or for a workers’ government. Here again the Fourth International has both revived and enriched the teachings of the third and fourth congresses of the Communist International by using the slogan as a transitional governmental formula corresponding to the organizational conditions and consciousness of the masses at a given moment, and not as a synonym for the dictatorship of the proletariat. A program without the perspective of a government of the working masses to carry out anti-capitalist measures, is not a transitional program.
Another enrichment contained in the 1938 program, in comparison with the teachings of the Communist International: Stalinist degeneration in the Soviet Union posed the question of a political revolution against the bureaucratic power, and the Transitional Program of 1938 contains a section dealing with this struggle, with slogans having a conjunctural character which Trotsky explained in this way in The Revolution Betrayed:
“The program of the new revolution depends to a great extent upon the moment when it breaks out, upon the level which the country has then attained, and to a great degree upon the international situation.”
Written on the eve of the second world war, the Transitional Program received its most striking verification a few years later, right after the war. All the great struggles in Europe in the immediate postwar period developed along lines corresponding with the internal logic and slogans of the Transitional Program, but the struggles were most frequently under Stalinist leadership, operating under directives from the Kremlin, which in turn was committed to the imperialists under its Yalta, Teheran and Potsdam agreements. Since these leaders had no desire to overthrow the capitalist regime, they never conducted the struggles toward the objective of installing a government of the laboring masses, and the struggles ended up in failure. The colonial revolution subsequently verified that part of the Program relating to colonial uprisings against their imperialist mother countries. The uprisings of the Polish and Hungarian masses in 1956 brought their verification of the document’s guidelines for the Soviet state, which was the only workers’ state in existence at the time the Transitional Program was written. [1]
This threefold verification should be enough to emphasize the importance and value of this document. It remains just as valid today, provided, of course, we make certain necessary changes corresponding to developments which have taken place during the years since it was drafted.
But before we turn to that, it is necessary to deal with another question which does not have a purely conjunctural character. There are people who have brought the fundamental meaning of a transitional program into question by their very use of the term. In fact, the expression “transitional program” has now been used for several years in a completely opposite sense from that which it had in the Communist International originally and then in the Fourth International. The leadership of the Italian Communist Party has been its most eminent exponent. It advances the following point of view: The Italian constitution contains articles which make it possible to shift over from capitalist society to a society that could presumably construct socialism; the world is now in the period of the transition from capitalism to socialism; all that is necessary, therefore, according to Togliatti and his disciples, is to advance a program, utilizing the provisions in the present Italian constitution, the realization of which would signify a transition from one mode of production to the other.
 
A Peaceful Transition?
This point of view, as is immediately apparent, raises a fundamental question with regard to the Marxist conception of the state, which Lenin reaffirms so strongly in The State and Revolution (the leaders of the Italian Communist Party do not deny this moreover). In the transition from capitalist to socialist society, this viewpoint disregards – one could say conjures away – what Marx, Engels, Luxemburg, Lenin and Trotsky considered to be the essential turning point, the moment when the working class conquers power and destroys the bourgeois state. The “transitional program” advanced by the leaders of the Italian Communist Party does nothing more than bring back the type of program envisaged by Eduard Bernstein at the beginning of the century, predicated on a gradual evolution of society through a series of reforms, with the question of power being posed only on the parliamentary road, and, as an inescapable extension, socialist participation in bourgeois governments. This sort of “transitional program” is therefore no novelty; it takes us right back to the debates on revisionism which took place in the Second International in the early years of the twentieth century. [2]
The ultraconservative leadership of the French Communist Party has long opposed this “Italian” notion of a “transitional program,” but not from the revolutionary direction. Its opposition is more in the Kautsky style, “theory” being preserved as a dogma having no relevance to daily practice, which is just as parliamentary and opportunist in France as it is in Italy with the Italian Communist party. In France, it is inside the Parti Socialiste Unifié that partisans of the Italian-style “transitional program” are to be found. They hold the following point of view: Present-day capitalism, or “neo-capitalism,” to use that rather vague expression for it [3], is a phase in the transition from capitalism to socialism; this transition is not taking place along the lines of the old schemes of political struggle; the question of governmental power has become of secondary importance; social power is now lodged in the great economic organizations, and socialism can advance precisely by means of men, animated by socialist convictions, attaining leadership in these economic organizations, in these “centers of decision” (in the plural).
As in the case of the Italian Communist Party, the question of power has been eliminated from their concerns and struggles. That decisive center of decision represented by governmental power within the state is conjured away and replaced with multiple centers of decision. Instead of making mass struggles converge toward the question of power, their tendency is to disperse these struggles in space and in time over multiple objectives. Ideas like these become associated with others which are already widely diffused, reaching even into certain bourgeois circles, ideas which are derived from a superficial evaluation of the Liberman reforms in the workers states on the one hand and of planning in the capitalist states on the other. On the basis of this, it is concluded that the question of the differences between capitalism and socialism has become outmoded and the problem of the conquest of power is now passe. Of course the capitalists themselves do not share these ideas when it comes to their daily practice. The most authoritative voice in the City of London, where the wealth of yesteryear has been lost but not the solid notion of capitalist interests, puts the matter in a way which, while not being put in Marxist terms, reveals a most lively capitalist class consciousness on these questions:
 
Capitalism Speaks
“Indeed the more one looks at the effort of the eastern and western economies to move closer to each other – the communists by turning towards ‘market relations,’ the capitalists by experimenting with planning – the more they seem to resemble two tethered goats trying to get together but checked by the length of the leash that ties them to its own particular stake. The stake is where the basic power of economic decision rests, with the state or with private men.” (The Economist, November 28, 1964, p.955; our emphasis.)
In capitalist society, despite all the changes which may have occurred, the state remains the center of decision serving the capitalists. Only by attacking it, by attacking governmental power, is it possible to go over to the building of socialism. Ignoring it and working surreptitiously for the accession of well-intentioned men to the leadership of multiple centers of decision will not achieve this. The theory of “centers of decision” no doubt offers some advantages ... particularly to those who get the jobs. Here, too, the matter is not altogether new. When Jouhaux became a regent of the Bank of France (one of these centers of decision, and hardly the least important), his reply to revolutionary critics was that he was doing it for the cause of workers’ emancipation, and he made out that he was making more sacrifices for the cause than anyone else.
For our part we absolutely reject such a conception of the “transitional program”; we unreservedly support the conception that governed the elaboration of the program of 1938, not out of any simple attachment to the past and feelings of respect for it, but because this conception continues to be more valid than ever for every portion of the globe.
In the countries which previously had a colonial or semi-colonial status, the conquest of formal political independence has yielded no solution whatever to the major problems of underdevelopment. On all the continents which experienced colonialization, the necessity imposes itself with ever increasing force for the colonial revolution to pass over into the socialist revolution. Parallel with this the need for a transitional program becomes more imperative.
In the workers states, “de-Stalinization” did not challenge the political power of the bureaucracy, and because of the continuation of this bureaucratic power, none of the demands formulated in the 1938 program or in The Revolution Betrayed has been completely satisfied. The events in Poland and Hungary in 1956, among others, have demonstrated the need for a political revolution, in the sense which Trotsky gave to this term, and consequently, the need for a transitional program for that part of the world as well.
In the economically developed capitalist countries, years of economic prosperity which no one expected, not even the most optimistic capitalists, have engendered a reformist euphoria and a setback for revolutionary currents. The opportunists and reformists find no need to be vindicated by theory: For them, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, and besides, aren’t the conditions pre-eminently favorable for a minimum program? [4]
 
Imperialist Decline
But economic prosperity has not eliminated the essential characteristics of capitalism in its imperialist phase; it has not brought capitalism back to its period of full bloom, such as existed in the last third of the nineteenth century, which was likewise the period of the minimum program. Behind the facade of extraordinary economic prosperity, we find a capitalism which has lost control over a third of the land surface and a third of the population of the globe, a capitalism which is under continuous attack from the majority of mankind, a capitalism which sees that the material might of the United States is unable to break the will of the Vietnamese people, a capitalism whose economic system is visibly inferior to that of the workers states despite the fact that the latter is not yet beyond the preliminary stage, started from an extremely low level and is operating under a bureaucratic leadership characterized by its wastefulness.
The boasts about capitalism’s capacity for adaptation, about its superiority over socialism, certainly do not deceive the capitalists themselves or their most responsible and clear-sighted servants in maintaining the system. Despite all the accumulated economic wealth and an unquestionable improvement in the living conditions of the working class within the economically developed countries, we are not witnessing any parallel flowering of bourgeois democracy as was the case during the expansion of capitalism in the last century. On the contrary, the tendency in all these countries is toward installation of a “strong state” at the expense of democratic forms, a strengthening of the “executive” at the expense of national parliaments and local institutions, and this is happening even in that model country of bourgeois democracy, Great Britain, and even under a Labour government. This tendency is not the result of some mental aberration but of capitalist necessity. It requires only some relatively limited event, whether it be the Belgian general strike of 1960-1961, the Greek crisis of the summer of 1965, or some similar episode, to demonstrate the social fragility of the European countries. Even in the United States, society has been shaken to its depths by the aspirations of the Negroes. In the most economically developed countries, the need for a transitional program has no more vanished than in the other parts of the world.
The present dialectics of the world revolution [5] will only sharpen the need for a transitional program to mobilize the greatest masses around slogans engaging them in struggle with the existing order and with the aim of establishing a government that will begin to implement the demands of the program, and by so doing begin the process of putting society on the road toward construction of socialism.
A few words remain to be said to complete our earlier remarks regarding the necessity for working out the slogans of the transitional program and linking them up on the basis of conditions existing in a given place at a given time. Compared with 1938, certain slogans have become, if not outdated, at least of secondary importance relative to others. Their justification, in particular, becomes quite different in the context of a different reality. The need for changes is greatest in the case of the economically developed countries, since the 1938 program was formulated in a period when they were in the throes of a prolonged chronic crisis, with massive unemployment which was altogether different from the limited kind now appearing after a long period of full employment. The transitional slogans such as workers’ control, opening the books, reducing the work week, etc., no longer coincide with the conditions of a chronic crisis and massive unemployment but are now juxtaposed even to conditions of temporary prosperity and the need for maintaining or defending full employment. Defense of the organized working-class movement is not being posed in the face of a direct threat from fascism, but against the far more complicated and insidious threat or establishment of the strong state. The struggle against the danger of nuclear war poses problems and consequently slogans (unilateral nuclear disarmament, for instance) which would make no sense whatever for so-called conventional weapons, in view of the fact that it is generally easy to set up a conventional armament industry starting with normal industrial tooling, whereas the same cannot be done for nuclear weapons. The increase in leisure time poses new problems which must find a place in a program of action, etc., etc. But on all these points and in all these cases, it is merely a matter of adjustment to present conditions and in no case one of repudiating the principles which lie at the foundation of the Transitional Program.
This new edition of the Transitional Program of 1938 will become, we are sure, a multi-purpose tool for youth who are now turning toward Trotskyism. In it they will find a document showing how the Fourth International after years of struggle by the Trotskyist movement in defense of the theoretical and political teachings of revolutionary Marxism, established itself and translated its will to fight for the leadership of the working class movement into a programmatic application of these lessons to the conditions of our era; a document whose spirit can only continue to inspire the activities of revolutionary Marxists inside the mass movement; a document whose content still remains very largely valid almost thirty years after it was written, despite the substantial upheavals which have taken place in that span of time.
 

re Frank: "We Will Emerge Stronger Than Ever!" (13 June 1968)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
“We Will Emerge Stronger Than Ever!”
(13 June 1968)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.29 No.4, July-August 1968, pp.3-4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




(The following statement by Pierre Frank, secretary of the Parti Communiste Internationaliste (Internationalist Communist Party – the French section of the Fourth International) was issued June 13. Pierre Frank was one of the first revolutionists arrested after the Council of Ministers decree.)



I learned from a press agency that the Parti Communiste Internationaliste [PCI] has been placed on the list of organizations whose dissolution has been decreed by the Council of Ministers. I have had no official notification of this measure but it does not surprise me.
The PCI, it should be remembered, was built in the underground during World War II through the fusion of various Trotskyist groups of that time. It has been active in public life since the liberation. Among other things, since 1946 it has run candidates in legislative elections many times.
Our members were persecuted and arrested during France’s war with Vietnam and again in the war with Algeria. The government measure, which has struck at various revolutionary youth organizations along with us for allegedly organizing commando groups, is a completely arbitrary administrative directive. The government does not dare to present its case in the courts, where it would have to formulate exact charges and present evidence.
The government move coincided with the frenzied campaign which the leaderships of the PCF [Parti Communiste Français – French Communist Party] and the CGT [Confederation Generale du Travail – General Federation of Labor – the CP-led union] are conducting against the “leftists.” These leaderships have not protested at all against the repression which can turn in their direction in the future.
We are studying the legal aspects of the measure and are reserving our right to challenge it. We are confident that many labor and civil liberties organizations will speak up against the dissolution measures taken by the government against a series of vanguard organizations, and will struggle against these decrees until they are abrogated.
In any case, the Trotskyists, who have undergone many repressions before, will emerge from this attack stronger than ever.
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (5. Characteristics of movement)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

V. Characteristics of the movement
What were the essential characteristics of the movement of May 1968? Its first characteristic, which struck everyone, was its extensiveness. Ten million strikers – France has never known such a movement. It is probable no big industrial country has experienced one like it or similar to it in proportion to population.
This movement – and this is another of its characteristics – did not include only workers. The industrial proletariat and the agricultural proletariat in the strict sense of the word, as well as most categories of white-collar workers, were encompassed by it. Besides the teachers and students who originated the movement, the participation of the high-school students, and parallel to this, of a large number of young workers, of very young people from 14 to 18 years of age, is an absolutely new phenomenon in history. Very young people have participated in revolutionary periods before, but this was always limited and never included the great bulk of adolescents. This is a phenomenon which would merit a serious sociological study. It is moreover an enormously promising development. All who closely followed the participation of these young people were struck, let me say for my part, amazed, by the seriousness and high political consciousness they exhibited above and beyond the enthusiasm of their age. This bears a promise for the movement in the coming years of an abundance of activists and cadres who will already have considerable experience at an age when recruitment to youth organizations generally used to begin.
The movement drew in a whole series of categories belonging sociologically to the petty bourgeoisie. At the side of the strikers were the greater part of the intellectuals and of the artists. Likewise, an important part of the new middle classes (technicians, etc.) joined in with the strikers. If I am not mistaken, this was the first time that the CGC took a favorable stand toward the workers demands; it even formally gave permission for its members to go to the May 13 demonstration if they wished. The liberal professions (doctors, architects, etc.) were also drawn into this movement, some of their members demonstrating against the high priests of their orders. Even the lawyers were stirred up against the archaic rules which govern them; even the judges were not left unaffected by the situation, and all the more so inasmuch as the government took a very cavalier attitude toward them during the student struggles.
Sectors as blasé as the journalists, as neutral as the public gardeners, as little politically concerned as the professional football players, and so on, were set in motion by this movement.
Among the peasants many demonstrators declared themselves outright for solidarity with the workers’ and students’ movements. I will only mention the ranks of the army. All reports agree that they followed the events with the greatest interest and that it would not have been possible to range them against the striking workers.
Even the police forces felt it necessary to address themselves through the proper hierarchical channels, to let the authorities know that it would be a test of conscience for them if they were sent against workers fighting for their demands. When cops start talking about conscience ...
* * *
Another characteristic of the movement was that it bypassed bourgeois legality. May saw many street demonstrations, very strong demonstrations, for which no one had asked authorization – no more than the strikers had considered it necessary to give legal notice five days before going out on strike.
These demonstrations were not all of the same character. There were still some which proceeded calmly, quietly, and spiritlessly at the wish of their organizers and with the tacit approval of the authorities. And there were others which attained a high political level and did not shrink from confrontation with the repressive forces, giving free rein to the most varied methods of struggle.
The various demonstrations which took place in Paris expressed in the streets the various opposing political currents of the movement. These were the most remarkable illustration of the different orientations seeking to lead the movement toward different political objectives. Because, for all practical purposes, power was “in the street,” politics was carried on in the streets. This constituted a uniquely potent school of politics.
* * *
One essential characteristic of a revolutionary period was present which cannot be overstressed. In such periods, different mass actions of greater or lesser duration and varying scope cripple the authority of the state, of the bosses, of those institutions whose basis lies in capitalist society. In Marxist terms, manifold mass actions lead to the creation of more or less prolonged dual power, that is to the creation of organs or forms, often only embryonic, which are outside the framework of capitalist society or the prevailing system, and which, as they progress could become the leading bodies of a new society. In the decomposition of capitalist society and its state, the elements of a socialist society began to form from the ground up. The balance of forces compelled the capitalist government, temporarily of course, to tolerate or accept these socialist elements. Instances of “dual power” were often produced independently of the consciousness of those who initiated them.
Here are examples: The universities and many educational institutions obviously broke most clearly with the government. They were suffering under a statute instituted by Napoleon I, and they were also the establishments in which self-government could be established with the least difficulties. It is also in this sphere that no solution has been achieved, that relations with the government have not been reestablished, and where a multiplicity of conflicts can be expected. Attempts at reorganizing the existing structures were also made by professors and high-school students; and they did not fail to run into resistance from the administration. What was attempted in the medical schools naturally carried over into hospitals linked to medical education.
I cannot go into detail here on many instances where authorities in the plants were challenged. Were there not many cases of plant managers locked in their offices or forbidden access to the plants? During the strike, the strike committees – even when they were only the old trade-union executive boards under another name – were led to confiscate plant property to assure continuation of the strike (Saclay ...). In certain cases, the strike committees spread out beyond their respective plants, entered into negotiations with suppliers and laid the initial groundwork for a resumption of work without the bosses. The problems of guaranteed employment and hiring were put on the agenda (CSF) in Brest.
In services, the employees often exercised the decisive supervisory power. Postal clerks made the decisions about the texts of telegrams to determine whether or not they were urgent.
Some localities found themselves under the control of the trade unions for all practical purposes (in Nantes and Saint-Nazaire, local authorities in actuality served only as messengers between the unions and the government). In Caen, passage in and out of the city was under the control of the strikers for a whole day. In a great number of cases groups of citizens took steps with little concern for legality or bourgeois property; land and buildings were occupied and used to meet needs which had been neglected or ignored before by both the appointed and elected officials.
The printing industry merits comment. The leadership of the printing unions, by an agreement between the reformist and Stalinist leaders, permitted daily newspapers to appear and consequently the bourgeois press continued being published. True, in certain circumstances the workers demanded changes in headlines (Figaro) or even refused to bring out a paper (La Nation) when the content was directly prejudicial to the strike. In these cases, the workers amended the decision of their union organization in the right way.
But this decision held another not altogether innocent aspect. The strike was to be applied to all of the weekly press and all periodicals. The result was that the wealthy publications which wanted to could be printed abroad, while with rare exceptions, all the vanguard papers, whose financial means are limited, were unable to appear. In other words, while the bourgeois press and the reformist and Stalinist press could express itself freely, revolutionary militants were up against enormous difficulties getting their views into print.
Obviously, this was a stratagem of the reformists and Stalinists in which they conspired like thieves. Only the proofreaders’ union, which was particularly sensitive to the problem, adopted the proposition in a resolution: “it [the proofreaders’ union] declares itself for the freedom to publish by the strikers themselves all publications supporting the workers and students movement, whether daily or periodical.”
One sphere where the question of relations with the government took an acute form was radio and television. On one hand, the government, which was so zealous about the “right to work,” deprived the over-the-border radio and television stations (the only stations broadcasting which are not under government control) of the radio-telephones they had rented, to prevent them from broadcasting accounts of the revolutionary demonstrations and the savage repressions of the CRS and the Gardes Mobiles. On the other hand, under the pressure of events and general indignation, the radio and TV workers (ORTF) found the majority of its personnel, including journalists who were not known in the past for independence, refusing to carry on a systematic dissemination of official lying.
And finally the day came, at a heightened moment of the crisis, when Geismar [head of SNESup during the crisis], Sauvageot [head of the UNEF], and Cohn-Bendit could be heard and seen on television. And this single broadcast showed the damage that merely honest radio and television could do to the government. While the government seemed to abandon any idea of reestablishing its “order” in the universities for a while, it was at no time disposed to making any essential concessions in the political management of ORTF. A battle is being waged there which concerns all the working people. Will this office, whose financial support comes from them, remain the monopoly of the Gaullist mafia (which formed an anonymous committee calling for the dismissal of certain journalists by name)? Or will it remain open, even if not completely, to a confrontation of ideas and points of view? In the present circumstances, when even the most politically bland large formations are excluded, revolutionary organizations and militants cannot hope to be heard.
The most developed form of “dual power” is in the Sorbonne itself. Bourgeois laws stop at the perimeter of this building, which used to be a school of scholastic theology. The police do not enter. Immunity is assured there for those who break bourgeois laws. Cohn-Bendit, who was banned from France, lived there in safety. Socialist democracy is undergoing an unlimited development. The Sorbonne is self-governing. I am told that for some time the police have been checking papers of those entering and leaving. They are doing this at a time when police and customs forces on the borders of France have almost literally evaporated. At the Sorbonne, they no longer pay any attention to the government’s decisions in educational matters, and not only in educational matters. Demonstrations are decided on there that really amount to attempted sorties into different countries, and not always peaceful ones. The word “foreigner” has no meaning, except insofar as men are given the means for preparing a struggle for socialism directed at their respective countries. The Sorbonne is, so to speak, the first free territory of the Socialist Republic of France.
Since the movement did not attain the end it could have, that is, the conquest of power, it is now reduced to strikes which are holding more or less to a united front. But it is obvious that before the next revolutionary wave, these islands of “dual power” will be subjected to attacks by the bourgeois government aimed at eliminating them. This is a problem I will examine further on in connection with the preparation for future revolutionary struggles.
Finally, the movement gave birth to manifold spontaneous forms of organization, with and without connections to previously existing organizations. No one could fail to be impressed by the number of leaflets from every quarter, alike from old organizations, more or less ephemeral new organizations, and individuals themselves. All of this testified to the impetus which socialist revolution gave to the liberation of man, from its first steps, even before its triumph.
Some have thought to display their wit by denigrating the Sorbonne occupation as a carnival. This is not very far removed from de Gaulle’s thinking that it was a “chienlit” [a crude military expression meaning roughly “a shitty mess”]. In fact, neglecting a few things which weren’t too serious, the Sorbonne revealed the creative power of revolution, its liberation of the creative initiative of masses and individuals alike. Life at the Sorbonne is not characterized by the “excesses” but all the creative ferment, the unquestionable liberation of the human spirit, what it would take a body of thinkers years to conceive – if then.
I will return to some of these questions in approaching the subject of the tasks of the revolutionary vanguard as it emerged in this movement. One task is to defend these gains. Only the living movement itself can sift out what it has created and eliminate what it does not find worthwhile. We must not fall into the trap which will certainly be there, of putting the spotlight on certain “excesses,” shocking to petty-bourgeois opinion, in order to discredit the conquests of the revolutionary movement of May 1968, thus enabling bourgeois repression to liquidate them.
 
Chapter 6
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (7. Organization during strike)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

VII. The organization of the working class during the strike
A few words must be added on the organization of the working class by the PCF leadership through the CGT apparatus. For a good many years the Stalinists have stifled workers democracy in the organizations they dominate, above all in the CGT. It was almost impossible for a worker to rise to the most modest post in a union local, in a national union, or even to the position of plant delegate – no matter how devoted or how active he might be – without the endorsement of the factory cell or the trade-union apparatus in his plant. Only those who had passed through this screening were eligible to be officially entrusted with the confidence of the workers, even at the lowest level. That is, while they were not necessarily members of the Communist Party, they were not to constitute an obstacle to the policy which it conducted through the intermediary of the CGT. Only rare exceptions could be noted in recent years: For example, some union activists held PSU cards. Furthermore, criticisms in union meetings could not go beyond a certain limit. In these conditions, the opportunities for activity open to critical elements were restricted if not nonexistent. There was never any question of getting a serious hearing in trade-union congresses, or being able to openly advocate a different line than that of the leadership. Known oppositionists were barely tolerated.
In the course of the movement, “strike committees” were designated in the factories. But for the great majority of workers, the concept of a “strike committee” was not clear, for the simple reason that the union leaderships never seriously explained it – because it was not in their interest to do so. They never explained to the workers that in a strike the leadership of the struggle must be democratically elected by all the strikers whether or not they are union members. This occurred only in rare exceptions, in scattered plants, since workers had not been alerted to this question. Generally, the union local leaders were baptized “strike committees” during the strike. The result? These “strike committees” continued to operate in the same way they did when they were the executive boards of the union locals. They served therefore much more as transmission belts to bring the CGT’s policy down to the workers than transmission belts for bringing the aspirations and desires of the rank-and-file workers up to the union tops. This, of course, helped to keep the union leaders in the dark about the aspirations of the class and to make them think that the workers would accept the agreements which they had negotiated on the Rue de Grenelle without any problem.
But this camouflaging of the union locals leadership as “strike committees” had another consequence which was really grave. These “strike committees” were bound together only by the union apparatus. If there had been real elected strike committees it is probable that we would have seen, at least in certain places, the tendency which has always manifested itself when there were elected strike committees – that is the tendency for these committees to federate on the local, then regional, and finally national levels. Then, instead of a bureaucratic halter and brake on the movement, there would be a network of democratically elected committees from the ground up which would tend to give birth to a much more representative leadership of the class in struggle, to a leadership subordinated much more to the strikers than to a trade-union apparatus or party whose special interests ran counter to the most profound natural tendencies of the movement and notably to the revolutionary tendency which was carrying it toward the conquest of power to create a socialist society.
 
Chapter 8
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (8. Revolutionary vanguard)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

VIII. The revolutionary vanguard
The revolutionary vanguard in May is generally conceded to have been the youth, youth who very largely escaped control of the traditional organizations and leaderships of the workers movement.
It was the student youth who, first of all began the fight at the university. New movements emerged, like the March 22 Movement at Nanterre. There were formations claiming to base themselves on Trotsky, Che Guevara, Mao Tse-tung. In UNEF, these line formations played a leading role or acted as the motor force, instigating the taking of positions, demonstrations, etc. There was no room for doubt about the relationship of the old leaderships of the workers movement to this student youth. Hardly a word was heard about the Social Democratic students. The Communist students, led by the political bureau, had over the preceding years expelled in successive purges all elements from the Communist Student Union (UEC) inspired by political orientations different from that of Waldeck Rochet – and they were the majority. It was these expelled members precisely who were in the leadership of the “grouplets.”
Banned from the peaceful and spiritless demonstrations which sometimes moved from the Place de la Republique to the Place de la Bastille, and sometimes from the Place de la Bastille to the Place de la Republique, these “ultraleftists” turned up again in the May 1968 demonstrations at the head of tens of thousands of demonstrators. And these were ardent, militant demonstrators not afraid to confront the repressive forces of the capitalist state.
In the student-occupied Sorbonne courtyard the UEC has its place – because the other groups respect workers democracy even for those who have trampled it underfoot for years. However, the authority and influence of the UEC, and through it of the PCF leadership, have been mortally damaged in the student milieu. It is not anticipating the future to say that the PCF leadership has little further chance in this milieu. Observations which it has been possible to make here and there indicate the UEC’s recruitment in the most recent period has been among the most politically backward layers. This is only normal. Once a party has (capitalist) “statesmanship,” as the editor of Le Monde described the PCF, the only ones who can turn toward it in such a period are those who still dream of leading a quiet life in the service of the state or the bosses – not those who dedicate themselves to the socialist revolution.
The university student youth were joined by the high-school youth. The participation of hundreds of thousands of 14- and 15-year-old young people in the May movement is a phenomenon absolutely unprecedented in history. The high-school movement originated in the course of actions in solidarity with the Vietnamese revolution. Some very young militants who sought to campaign for solidarity with the Vietnamese people in the high schools collided with the administration as well as many teachers attached to the old idea of the barracks-type school. In order to struggle against the regime in the high schools, these very young militants founded the high-school action committees (CAL). One of the leaders was expelled from the Lycée Condorcet [4], and this touched off a protest demonstration of several hundred high-school students outside this lycée. This movement grew during the early months of 1968. On May 9, the CAL decided to call a high-school general strike for the following day. This strike was begun in a manner rather like factory strikes. The strike (the high-school students used the same term as the workers) began in the morning; the striking students went out into the streets to go to other high schools in order to bring them out on strike; street meetings were held. In the afternoon, a demonstration of close to 8,000 high-school students went from the Gobelins to the Place Denfert-Rochereau to join the university students and teachers’ demonstration. This demonstration was to end with the night of the barricades in which a great number of high-school students participated. The strike movement extended to the technical high schools and all institutions of the same type. The CAL, democratically representing all of the strikers, initiated several street demonstrations together with UNEF and SNESup.
Politically, the active wing of the CAL shares the views of the university students; it is resolutely anti-capitalist and internationalist. Some pressure from the teachers has made itself felt in the schools, since the secondary-school teachers’ union is in the hands of the Stalinists. But one can be confident that Stalinist influence will not make much headway with this section of youth either.
After May 3 the number of young workers demonstrating side by side with the students grew daily. This was also a revelation: The unions which held sway over the factory workers exercised only relative control over the youth in the factories.
In the months preceding May, on several occasions (Besançon, Caen, Le Mans, Rouen, etc.) there was a conspicuous combativity on the part of the youth in strikes; this could be particularly noted in confrontations which had already occurred in the streets. These were the advance signs of the explosion. These developments showed that the youth were exhibiting signs of a militancy and a combativity which they had not learned from their organizations. But it was still difficult to discern in these manifestations a break with the traditional leaderships and their policy. The youth were unable to assert their views against the union apparatuses because of the lack of workers democracy. It took May to reveal this break. And it came out into the open primarily because the students, by taking the lead with a different policy from the traditional leaderships, offered the young workers a pole of attraction; the young workers flocked to it en masse. Dissatisfied with the policy and methods of the traditional leaderships, they came in large numbers to the Sorbonne to get direction.
Thus, the working-class youth are also showing themselves more and more resistant to Stalinism. The CGT leadership rapidly comprehended the danger facing it. For several months, it had been preparing a “youth festival” for May 11 and 12. Two hours before it was to open it cancelled it on a phony pretext. In actuality, the CGT leaders wanted to forestall the contact which would have occurred between the youth they brought together and those who had come the evening before to fight on the barricades the night of Rue Gay-Lussac – and that was the real youth festival.
It was also the youth in most cases and notably at the Renault plants who took the initiative in the strikes and factory occupations. They did not wait for orders from the union, often violently shaking up the immobility of the trade-union organizations. During the strike, frictions multiplied between union apparatuses and young workers. An impressive picture can be drawn. The May 29 CGT demonstration was called largely to prevent the unions from being outflanked by young workers. At Renault this situation assumed important proportions.
It is necessary to go a bit more into the question of the “young hoodlums” and other youth belonging to the “gangs” in the working-class districts who for years have been a frequent subject of discussion in the press. Because they participated extremely combatively in the street battles, striking fear into the forces of repression, the most violent abuse was heaped on them from various quarters. During the events, the minister of the interior Fouchet, never sparing in his use of scare words, dared to use the word “scum” to blacken these youth. These young people have nothing in common with the real scum, the riffraff who are also the best defenders of the bourgeois order. At the time of the Ben Barka affair they were on the best terms with the highest police officials, they often operated as a kind of auxiliary police service, and they mingled with secret police agents who gravitate around the highest spheres of the Fifth Republic. It is in the gangs de Gaulle is appealing to for “civic action” that you find the scum. This scum extends from the highest rung of society to the riffraff who protect the underworld. These supporters of the Fifth Republic are in the best tradition of Napoleon III’s “December 10 Society.”
The “young hoodlums” and other youths who were slandered by this rabble-rousing minister are nothing more than young workers whom the neo-capitalist consumer society has reduced to more than precarious conditions of existence and employment. Lacking in vocational skills, the first to be thrown out of work by technological progress, without hope, harassed daily by a police force which considers repression the highest form of education, they have built up a ferocious hatred of the repressive forces. This was, if you will, a very elementary form of developing political opposition to capitalist society. With rare exceptions, no one has had a real dialogue with them. With an unfailing instinct they took the side of the students. Their interest was in taking their revenge for all the harassment the police had subjected them to. During the events, a radio reporter asked one of these young men what his motive was in taking part in the demonstrations. He may have expected a more or less awkward political answer. “I came to beat up cops,” the youth told him. According to the press reports, very few cases of looting were noted during the struggle. This proves that these youth were not interested in appropriating this or that product of the consumer society they were deprived of, but were much more interested in attacking police stations and the stock exchange. In the days of fighting, these young people, like many others, underwent a political ripening which will have its effects in the future.
* * *
With the exception of the student milieu where there were well-developed and politically well-defined organizations representing a minority of the students and with the exception of the CAL’s beginning to spring up among the high-school students, everywhere else the youth had no organization of their own. In this situation, the only solution lay in the extensive improvisation that actually occurred. Whether the bureaucrats like it or not, this improvision, giving full freedom to the development of different points of view, produced results far exceeding those which the bureaucrats obtained with all the modern means at their disposal. This was so because for the first time in a very long time the initiative of every individual was appealed to. No personality was repressed; everyone could express himself with full freedom. Not only could individual personalities express themselves without constraint but in these conditions they expanded daily.
I will not give a profile here of the youth or adult political groups which were in the vanguard of the movement. The events provided an opportunity to test each of them, their men and their politics in confrontation with developments. This question will be dealt with in separate articles. What it is important to define here is the general framework so that what these groups did at different moments of the action can be understood and judged better.
In any case, there was no team or group in the movement with sufficient authority to impose its will unchallenged. At each stage discussions developed, even at the beginning of demonstrations (at Denfert-Rochereau for example) or even during demonstrations (the Gare de Lyon for example). In a general way, the results were far from bad. No serious mistakes were committed. Moments of uneasiness or uncertainty, like May 8, were quickly overcome. Things did not deteriorate until the last. By May 29 it was necessary to determine a strategy and a tactic capable of setting the movement on the road to the conquest of power. But the vanguard as constituted did not command the objective elements necessary for such an effort. This situation must be altered because the struggles tomorrow will be much more arduous and the question of leadership will become vital.
The vanguard, which was politically heterogeneous and within which only minorities were organized, had overall a high political level. It recognized that the movement’s object was the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of a society building socialism. It recognized that the policy of “peaceful and parliamentary roads to socialism” and of “peaceful coexistence” was a betrayal of socialism. It rejected all petty-bourgeois nationalism and expressed its internationalism in the most striking fashion. It had a strongly anti-bureaucratic consciousness and a ferocious determination to assure democracy in its ranks. It accepted the existence of different political groups as normal; it feared only, because of the Stalinist experience, control of the movement by any one of these groups.
On many occasions one saw this vanguard collectively reaching decisions which revealed a high degree of political maturity. But I would fall short of my responsibility if I did not say that in some cases a still inadequate capacity in the area of strategy and political tactics could be noted. If I speak of ultra-left tendencies in this movement, it is not to indulge those militants still influenced by the Stalinists. I have no reason to concede anything to the prejudices fostered by the Stalinists. However, we find in such ultra-left tendencies a manifestation which is common to all revolutionary youth groups in every period. These tendencies are heightened at the present time in reaction to the extreme reformism and betrayal of the PCF. I am profoundly convinced that once this rebel youth gains a revolutionary response from an appreciable part of the working class, it will have no difficulty in acquiring the strategic and tactical capacity indispensable for tomorrow’s extremely arduous struggles.
 
Chapter 9
 
Footnote
4. The French lycées are on the order of the English “public schools” like Eton and Harrow. The Lycée Condorcet is one of the elite lycées, along with the Lycée Louis le Grand and the Lycée Henri IV. Expulsion from such a school could represent a serious threat to a student’s future career. – Ed.
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (4. Stages of May 1968)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

IV. The stages of May 1968
Following the movement day by day, one can distinguish stages which succeeded each other with a thoroughly remarkable internal logic.
The first stage began on May 3 with the entry of the police into the Sorbonne courtyard and the immediate resistance of the students on the Boulevard Saint-Michel. It reached its peak on May 10, when the high-school strike was followed by the demonstration which started out from the Place Denfert-Rochereau and returned on the Boulevard Saint-Michel, to end in the night of the barricades on the Rue Gay-Lussac and the neighboring streets.
This opened the way for the second stage, which began with the 24-hour general strike and the demonstrations of May 13. Under the impetus of this gigantic demonstration, the workers began to strike about 48 hours later, beginning a general strike with factory occupations. The movement reached a very high point (about 10 million strikers, to say nothing of numerous and many-sided demonstrations of all orders) toward the end of the week of May 20 to 25. During this week the dreary CGT demonstrations were politically juxtaposed to the demonstration at the Gare de Lyon, which culminated in a new night of the barricades and revolts in many parts of Paris. At this point, the government, the bosses, and the trade-union leaders hurriedly plunged into marathon negotiations lasting about 30 hours.
On Monday May 27 the trade-union leaders were barely given time to present the provisions of the Grenelle agreements to the workers in the principal factories (Renault, Citroën, etc.). These agreements were indignantly rejected by a unanimous hand vote. Then the movement entered into a third, politically decisive stage in which the question of power was posed. The government was impotent. There were demonstrations in the street in favor of different formulas for a government to succeed the de Gaulle regime. At Charlety stadium, the ranks were for “power to the workers.” However, the silhouette of Mendes-France stood out on the speakers’ platform, offering himself both to the bourgeoisie and the working masses as a ‘left de Gaulle” to replace the right-wing de Gaulle. On May 29, from the Bastille to the Gare Saint-Lazare, the workers of Paris and its red suburbs responded to the appeals of the CGT and the PCF for a “people’s government of democratic union” “with Communist participation.”
But these were only whims of the leaders since no slogan was given for any action aimed at overthrowing the Gaullist government. Strengthened by this indecision, this inertia, and by the electoral and parliamentary cretinism which deeply marks all the left leaders, de Gaulle decided to turn and fight. He stirred up every poltroonish, craven, and conservative element in the country. He denounced a purported danger from the PCF, which was completely nonplussed. He threatened to resort to military means. And, in place of a referendum which nobody even wanted to consider, he offered the left a goody – legislative elections in the coming weeks, following the dissolution of a National Assembly which had made itself an object of ridicule by the servility of the Fifth Republic mini-majority and the impotence of the minority to gather the few votes necessary to get a motion of censure adopted.
With de Gaulle’s May 30 speech a new stage opened up. The mass leaderships accepted the elections, creating an extreme fragmentation of the movement. The all-out general strike which objectively posed the question of power gave way to powerful strikes for essentially economic objectives, which were negotiated separately with the bosses or the leaderships of the overseeing ministries. This, as I write, is the phase we are in now. As a revolutionary thrust, a revolutionary crisis making possible the overthrow of the Gaullist regime and even the capitalist system, May 1968 is now ended.
The strike movement will not dissipate itself overnight. These strikes will continue for a more or less prolonged period in many sectors. Analyzing these strikes in detail is outside the scope of this pamphlet. It is enough here to say that they must be waged vigorously with the maximum cohesion on the strike front so as to obtain the best results in winning the economic demands.
In this new stage, revolutionaries are concerned not only with improving the workers’ living conditions, which is always the case for them. The new period of the crisis of the capitalist system will not end with the present strikes. The socialist revolution will pass through new waves and new revolutionary crises. In order for these to start in the best conditions, it is not unimportant that the workers come out of the present strikes free from any feeling of failure, or of frustration, and that they end the strikes as they began them, in a very militant way.
 
Chapter 5
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (10. International repercussions)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

X. The international repercussions of May 1968
It is impossible as I write this to give a complete picture of the international repercussions of the May events. Every day new signs are noted. Above and beyond the direct echoes, deeper consequences can be expected which will show up less immediately.
The French student revolt was not the earliest. Similar movements have developed in several countries in Europe and North America, born in the struggle against the Vietnam war, and advancing demands of a social nature. I am not forgetting the student movements in the so-called underdeveloped countries; great revolutionary thrusts have been developing there for a long time and the students have been associated with them. But the working masses of the West European countries in their great majority have been politically inert and the student movements have seemed to be going against the current in the general situation in these countries.
There is no doubt that the victorious Tet offensive gave considerable impetus to all the vanguard movements and to broad masses and encouraged all the enemies of capitalism and imperialism. Once Paris threw itself into the battle, the floodgates were thrown open everywhere. Paris regained the old honor of its revolutionary traditions. The student uprisings, followed by the gigantic working-class explosion, gave the signal for the start or the reinforcement of movements more or less everywhere. In Spain, first of all, the fall of Franco is on the order of the day; in Italy the students are throwing themselves furiously into repeated assaults; in West Germany – this American fortress in Europe – in England, Belgium, Sweden, etc. Everywhere the clarion call of revolution rang out and was heard. Everywhere the students defied the bourgeois order; everywhere they turned to the workers; everywhere the red flag was raised. University buildings tended to become free territories outside the bourgeois state’s authority. In several countries and in Paris the high-school students intervened in political and social life. The essential difference in France was that nowhere else has a working-class mobilization arisen to any degree comparable to that of May. The workers’ reactions are slower in appearing, but it cannot be doubted that they will react. Several politicians, generally Social Democrats, have been the first to realize this. It could well happen here, Willy Brandt plaintively reflected; and he was not the only one saying such things.
In the underdeveloped countries, the consequences have not been long in making themselves felt. In Dakar, in Santiago de Chile, in Buenos Aires, in Rio de Janeiro, and in many other cities, the revolution has raised its head. Paris has given the best possible support to Vietnam as well as to socialist Cuba. We will soon see the consequences of May 1968 in North Africa, the Near East, in all of Asia, etc. ... All the students from the colonial countries living in France and the other European countries during these events and who took part in them will transmit an added stimulus to the colonial revolution as well as a more complete Marxist education.
Once Paris and France had moved, it could be all the less doubted that the revolutionary movement would find a response in East Europe. In Czechoslovakia, the action of the students and the intellectuals had just made a decisive contribution to bringing about the fall of Novotny. Only a few days were required before the students in Belgrade formulated a body of demands which no Marxist could find anything to object to. They also threw up barricades and occupied the universities.
Reading the press often gives a deceptive impression of what is going on in a country. Is it not clear that the French press – both the bourgeois press and the press of the PCF – contributed to the self-intoxication both of the Gaullist government and the PCF leadership in regard to the situation in the country before May 1968? But what is to be said about the Soviet press in regard to the French events? L’Humanité, which always tail-ended the events, saw its lies printed in Pravda or Izvestia still a few days more behind the facts. We are living in the age of the transistor; and no censorship, no barrier, can limit the dissemination of the truth.
The Chinese government has sown an unexampled confusion in regard to the “cultural revolution” in the last year, and its crude accusations against the USSR have helped the Kremlin bureaucracy. This said, however, unlike Moscow, which did not hide its dismay at the idea that de Gaulle might vanish from the scene, the Chinese government organized immense demonstrations of solidarity with the May movement. The mobilization of hundreds of thousands of demonstrators – whatever the motives of the organizers – has an objective importance which no one can underestimate.
It will be forgotten by no one that in the Soviet Union, on the other hand, the government hid from the masses what was going on in France. This was not only owing to their indisputable desire to conciliate de Gaulle. During these last years, the Soviet government has been pushing a very determined campaign against the intellectuals and the university youth in that country. Everyone recalls the Daniel-Sinyavsky trial, Brodsky, Ginzburg, the Litvinov-Bogoraz protests, etc. ... the movements of writers, artists, and scholars to gain freedom of expression in their fields (art, literary creation, etc.) are, in many countries as in the Soviet Union, merely the precursors of antibureaucratic workers movements aimed at reestablishing soviet democracy. The hour – I am convinced – will not be long in striking when the students and the intellectuals of Leningrad, Moscow, Kharkov, and the other big Soviet cities will move massively into struggle against the bureaucratic government. They will struggle for soviet democracy and will clear the way for the intervention of the Soviet workers.
I cannot leave the workers states without saluting the Polish students – other forerunners of these battles – and more particularly, without saluting their leaders, comrades Modzelewsky and Kuron, who have again been imprisoned for their remarkable achievement of drawing up the first antibureaucratic socialist program in the present resurgence.
* * *
The rekindling of the European workers struggle is the May 1968 mobilization’s most important contribution to the world revolution. At the end of the second world war, revolutionary movements in West Europe were quickly stifled because of the class collaboration of the Stalinists who lived up to the “Big Three” wartime division of Europe into “spheres of influence.” These agreements guaranteed the maintenance of capitalism in West Europe. The victory of the Chinese revolution in 1949, at the end of the revolutionary period in Europe, kicked off the advance of the colonial revolution.
At the same time, the revolutionary socialist movement in West Europe suffered a considerable setback. Social Democratic or Stalinist reformism prevailed. Apathy and stagnation characterized the European workers movement to such an extent that some thinkers drew extremely pessimistic conclusions about the potentialities of the European proletariat and the proletariat in general. It cannot be doubted that the May mobilization of the French working class has broken the ground and set the workers throughout all of West Europe on the move. And this is true not only in the area of economic demands (properly speaking these struggles had never ceased but had remained within a narrowly reformist framework) – these struggles have been revived on a revolutionary level. The struggle for socialism is resurgent on the continent of its birth and where great revolutionary Marxist traditions exist, as May 1968 showed in France. As May 1968 showed also, these battles were renewed starting off from the heritage of the past, despite the fact that the Social Democratic or Stalinist leaderships have encased this heritage in a thick reformist shell for 20 to 30 years.
At its origin, the movement for socialism was limited for more than a half century, for understandable objective reasons, to the economically developed countries of Europe. The victory of October 1917, although situated on the periphery of Europe, was the first great success in this struggle. It gave the starting signal for revolutionary struggles in the colonized countries. For a whole series of reasons which have been set forth in extenso by the Trotskyist movement, Stalinism, which had triumphed in the Soviet Union and in the Communist parties, caused numerous defeats (Germany 1933, Spain 1937, for example) and the miring down of socialist revolution in Europe. In May 1968, the European workers movement first got moving again. Although the pernicious influence which the old leaderships will continue to exercise for some time yet cannot be underestimated (we have just seen this in France), it is now unquestionable that everywhere in Europe, the youth – the young workers, students and high-school students – are no longer in thrall to these old leaderships and are seeking to provide a socialist solution for these struggles. This fact gives assurance that we can hold the greatest hopes for the European socialist revolution.
Moscow was long the center of the socialist revolution, long after the Kremlin policy had lost all revolutionary character. For some years now, Moscow has no longer held any authority or prestige in the eyes of numerous young revolutionary movements. China and Cuba together have had revolutionary aspirations. Now, the advance of the socialist revolution will continue on all fronts at once (the workers revolution in the advanced capitalist states; the colonial revolution; the anti-bureaucratic political revolution in the workers states). The dangers involved in polarization around a state leadership which has given priority to the specific national interests of certain privileged layers will disappear in the face of a more even advance of the world socialist revolution.
* * *
A few of the initial consequences of this less lopsided advance of the world socialist revolution were quickly discernible. The theoretical problems are no less important for the revolution and socialism. In past years, aside from the old, worn-out revisionist theories picked up by the Stalinists (“peaceful and parliamentary roads” to socialism, “peaceful coexistence”), many other theories have been advanced. Here are the most well known of these:

The theories on neo-capitalism which, it seems, was supposed to have resolved the fundamental contradictions of capitalism as Marx disclosed them.
Manifold theories that the workers in the highly industrialized countries had been coopted into capitalist society and that as a result they were incapable of serving, as the motor forces of the struggle for socialism, with this role falling to other social strata (Marcuse, Sweezy).
The theory that the role of the peasants is decisive in the underdeveloped countries where the proletariat supposedly cannot play a revolutionary role (Fanon).
The theory of revolution by an insurgent countryside encircling the cities (Mao Tse-tung, Lin Piao).
The theory of guerrilla warfare in the country, in which battles in the cities are considered impossible.

The reformist conceptions warmed over from Bernsteinism received a stinging refutation. The PCF leadership avoided drawing the conclusions of the fact that de Gaulle, who had been brought to power in 1958 by General Massu, went to visit him again 10 years later in order to maintain himself in power. Barricades did not turn out to be as old-fashioned as many claimed. It was proven yet again that reforms and demands are won, not after long years of narrow-minded reformism, but as a by-product of revolutionary struggle.
The theories that neo-capitalism had definitively assured the stability of capitalism burst like soap bubbles. Neo-capitalism, even in France, where there was a “strong state” the like of which existed nowhere else, was rotted within much more than anyone had suspected.
As for the new theories which did not renounce revolutionary socialism, they were all the products of the historical detours of the socialist revolution which I mentioned above. Each one of them based itself on one particular aspect of the situation: the fact that the students and intellectuals in the capitalist countries supported the colonial revolution, while the traditional workers movement proved derelict in this regard; powerful peasant uprisings in the colonial countries; the success of the guerrilla struggle in winning power in Cuba; the apathy of the workers movement in the European countries and its stifling bureaucratization. These experiences were over-generalized. The common denominator of all these theories was their claim that the proletariat in the central imperialist countries was incapable and impotent. May 1968 dealt a mortal blow to all these generalizations, without, however, putting in question the validity of certain special methods such as guerrilla warfare in specific cases. It is demonstrably risky, even if you think you are proceeding in a revolutionary manner, to make revisions of fundamental features of Marxist theory, such as the role of the proletariat, based on experiences involving only a few years and in circumstances as exceptional as the period of stagnation in the European workers movement.
The May 1968 movement endowed the revolutionary Marxism which the Fourth International has ceaselessly defended against the most inclement conditions with a new luster. It verified a whole series of lessons which for ‘several decades had been relegated to the theoretical realm. The real-life experience of these lessons constituted the best school of Marxism we have had in a half century. The place of the general strike in the class struggle as a stage on the road to the winning of power; the creation of real mass committees in a revolutionary period; the emergence of dual power; the fact that the question of taking of power can be resolved in a very few crucial days and that such days come into existence in a revolutionary upheaval; the decisive role of the leadership in these days; the relationship between the masses and the vanguard – all these questions came out of the books and became part of the flesh and blood of thousands upon thousands of militants who had never experienced anything like this in the past.
The mobilization of May 1968 also brought a series of enrichments which I can only mention here in this pamphlet. We witnessed in Paris a sort of overture to the great drama of the socialist revolution in the central imperialist countries. The themes of the great struggles to come were sounded. The relationship between the student and youth movements and those of the great working masses were illustrated in a striking manner. Methods of fighting in big cities were outlined. It is impossible, without smiling, to think of all the theories built on the idea that the masses were brutalized by the mass media. These theories were also one-sided, as we saw when all France lived through the barricade battles and the revolts in Paris for nights at a time. It was not brutalization but revolt that the communication media fostered.
The relationship among the various European movements, in particular among the various student movements, has underlined the need for a liaison and even coordinated activity on the international scale. As it develops, the European workers movement will be compelled to organize itself on a more international basis. The Common Market represented a defensive effort by the European capitalists in the attempt to hang on after two world wars. This miserable attempt to organize the productive forces within the capitalist system will be shattered by the exploding revolutionary struggles of the European working class, which will put the creation of a Socialist United States of Europe on its agenda.
And in regard to Europe and the Common Market, it is not unworthy of note that these champions of “European integration,” the German, Italian, Belgian, Dutch, etc. reformist socialist party and trade-union leaderships did nothing – not a single appeal, not a single meeting, not a single solidarity demonstration – in support of the 10 million striking French workers. Moreover, among these striking workers were members of Force Ouvrière, the trade-union federation linked to them in this Common Market. For them, “European integration” means a share in the graft; it does not mean international solidarity of the European workers.
The necessity for a common international strategy for the struggles of the socialist revolution will make itself felt more and more imperiously. Thus, the question of the revolutionary international, which has been obscured and submerged for years by bureaucratic leaderships with special nationally limited interests, will arise with new vigor. Born in Europe more than a century ago, the mass revolutionary international will resurge more powerful than ever.
The French socialist revolution has begun; the European revolution has resumed its march forward. Fifty years after October 1917 worldwide victory looms on the horizon.
 
Chronology
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (9. Tasks and perspectives)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

IX. Tasks and perspectives
May 1968 was, let me repeat again, the first phase of the socialist revolution in France. The crisis which would have led to the taking of power in the space of a few days has given way to a period of great strikes in which state power is no longer an immediate objective. Another revolutionary wave will follow. It is impossible to say when, but it undoubtedly will come. The objective conditions (among others the situation of the French economy in the international economic context) will play an important role in touching it off.
Already the French capitalists complain bitterly about the concessions they were compelled to make to the workers. The French economy, they say, will not be able to meet international competition. This argument has no special validity for the workers whose interests are opposed to those of the capitalists. Furthermore, it is rather exaggerated because the capitalists in other countries will soon be forced to make concessions to those they exploit for fear they will follow the French example. The French economy’s difficulties lie elsewhere. On the one hand, in spite of the process of concentration which it has been undergoing, concentration in many areas is still far from the level attained in other countries. The workers’ only interest in this matter is to seek ways to prevent this concentration from being effected at their expense.
The French economy is also suffering from the policy of “grandeur” inflicted on it by de Gaulle. This policy commits the French economy to the execution of immoderate projects, some of which are dangerous and useless, like the “force de frappe” [France’s nuclear striking force], others of which must be realized at prices higher than would result from a rational utilization of the international division of labor. De Gaulle and the men around him are for “independence” at any price, that is at the price of the greatest sacrifices by the workers. Will May give de Gaulle and his agents pause to reflect on this score? In any case, the workers will no longer submit to the sort of thing they have been experiencing for the last 10 years.
There is still one more point which must be stressed about the economy. Haven’t we been told ad nauseam about de Gaulle’s realistic financial policy in which the franc is solidly backed by gold? On this point as on all others this great mind has proved its bankruptcy.
It is worth spending a little extra time on the subjective conditions because the vanguard has the real possibility of altering these in a favorable direction. Many political and organizational problems are posed on widely differing levels. In particular, important political questions exist: It is impossible to raise the question of the government without answering the question of what programs an alternative government would have. Problems of organizational policy arise for the vanguard at the level of the large masses and their organizations, at the level of a very broad vanguard in the more specific realm of action, and at the level of a numerically smaller but highly political vanguard. I obviously make no pretense of giving definitive answers to these questions. My aim is to provide the components which can serve as a basis for fruitful discussion. The events which have taken place are of such an importance, the richness of their lessons so great, the problems they pose so complex, that these questions cannot be resolved within a narrow circle.
* * *
Leaving aside the problems posed by the economic strikes coming in the wake of the general strike, the following problems are on the agenda for the future in the arena of the broad masses: a perspective leading to the socialist society; the preparation of the great future struggles and of a revolutionary leadership to lead them; defense of the elements of “dual power” resulting from the May movement; the problems of universities and of education, where the conflict between the government and the interested parties – which concerns all workers – remains irreconcilable.
Defense of the students and university teachers against the bourgeois government will inevitably assume multiple forms, not all of which can be foreseen. One can be certain that the government will not long tolerate what is going on at the Sorbonne, where there is a revolutionary center, a fortress of socialism and internationalism. In order to carry out this defense, the great masses of people must be made to understand its importance. A system of ever closer ties must be established between the students and the workers. The government is trying to establish a distinction between the “good” students who want to pursue their studies, and the others who think of nothing but agitation. Developing a link between the students and the workers is not a one-day affair; it is still one of the tasks which the vanguard must work at on a day-to-day basis and for which it must step up its efforts.
This is not a secondary problem. It is not surprising that the two mutually hostile forces which have an interest in maintaining the established order, the bourgeois state and the PCF leadership, express themselves in more or less identical terms about the revolutionary movements among the students. In this sector the revolutionary socialist vanguard is politically dominant in fact and offers a valuable support for all revolutionary militants no matter what tendency they belong to.
Failure to understand the Sorbonne’s exceptional position today for the cause of world socialism would show an unpardonable blindness. New positions cannot be won if you are incapable of defending positions already conquered. The defense of the Sorbonne is the prime task of all revolutionaries at the present time.
 
(a) A transitional program
I have pointed out the basic causes which prevented the movement from making the decisive leap to take power, that is, in the first place, the betrayal of the traditional leaderships, notably of the PCF and the CGT, which the most decisive masses follow; and, in the second place, the absence of organized forces able to constitute an alternative leadership in the eyes of the workers. This is not all. The militants who made up the revolutionary minority were handicapped by a considerable gap in their political arsenal – the lack of a transitional program.
What do I mean by that? From the moment the struggle began it was relatively easy to determine a program of the workers’ essential immediate demands: All that was necessary for that was to listen to the workers. Moreover, it was easy to explain that these demands could only be guaranteed by a government representing the workers and that any government tied to the bourgeoisie would be a means by which the class enemy could gain time before setting out to reconquer the lost ground. Beyond this however, questions were also posed which the revolutionary vanguard did not answer adequately. Even our own organization, the PCI, whose program holds an answer to these questions, was deficient in this regard. Caught up in the whirlwind of the events, it primarily answered the immediate questions and did not make sufficient use of the political armament it has possessed for years.
The questions which were posed can be summed up briefly:

How was a workers government to be established?
Above and beyond the satisfaction of the workers’ immediate demands, what would the program of such a government be, not only for the workers but for all the working masses of the country? A government must have a full program.

These questions will arise anew as the next revolutionary crises develop. They will be posed even more acutely, for the coming mobilizations will not start off from immediate demands alone with only these as their object. Already certain demands were raised in May which exceeded the limits of the workers’ immediate demands.
The required program is what we have long called the transitional program; this term has been picked up by others but in a meaning we have rejected as false. To deal concretely with this question, let us start from the fact that in the course of the movement the CFDT advanced more general demands in connection with workers’ participation in the management of the plants. The workers in fact do not seek merely an improvement in their immediate conditions. They do not want to be cogs in the economy like cogs in a machine, only maintained better than in the past. Nor do they want to remain the objects they are in the capitalist economy. The CGT leaders responded to these questions, in the words of Seguy, that self-management was “a vague formula” (May 10 at Renault). This was quite simply the response of a bureaucrat for whom all power in the union, the party, the plant, or the nation must be in the hands of an apparatus. The Stalinist system has been and remains his model.
But the epoch of this system – which moreover never had any justification from a Marxist point of view – is now over. It is impossible to run society, the economy, the schools, the workers organizations, etc. ... unless the producers, the consumers, the participants, and the membership are democratically involved in running them. It is the bosses and the bureaucrats who are proving increasingly superfluous.
The desire for structural changes is recognized even by de Gaulle. In his recent radio interview, he tried once again to offer the same tired old nostrum – collaboration between capital and labor – as an invention by which both capitalism and communism could be disposed of. This discovery is just about as old as the first clashes between capitalism and the workers movement. De Gaulle, however, chose to specify one point of what, according to him, such collaboration would be: there must be a leader in command in the plants. This point of view is identical to his conception of society. There must be a leader – de Gaulle himself. This time he has dubbed his notion “participation.” We already got a long look in May at the kind of participation we will see in the coming period, the participation of the CRS and the Gardes Mobiles.
If the CFDT’s demands in the area of plant management are examined, it can be said that they engendered ambiguity in the arguments of those defending them. For the leadership of this union federation and a large number of its activists, these demands by no means represented a challenge to the capitalist order. Their objective, in the minds of the leadership and these activists, was to remove certain aspects in present-day capitalism carried over from the 19th century and to carry out a certain number of reforms which would enable the capitalist system to function more effectively. For other militants, these demands were meant to bring about the substitution of a socialist society for capitalism. In other words, in the minds of their promoters, these demands were intended to lead to the integration of the workers and their organizations into a capitalist state renovated on the technocratic model.
However, in our conception, the transitional program is a body of general demands which bring the masses, as they mobilize behind them, into conflict with the bourgeois state, which lead them to creating the first organs of a workers state, to seize the government and begin building a socialist society.
A transitional program must be an anti-capitalist program. And to be effective its internal logic must correspond to the logic of the mass movement. No organization can seek to establish it alone. Such a program can only be the product of confrontation in large assemblies in which not only workers, teachers, students, and intellectuals take part, as was outlined in the meetings in the Sorbonne and the universities, but also the representatives of all layers of the working population – housewives, soldiers, small businessmen, peasant-workers, etc. In regard to the universities, certain people associated the formula “student power” with that of “workers power,” etc. No such “power” can be effective in the framework of a capitalist state. Self-management – in the universities, the plants, or elsewhere – is only an effective force in the context of a state freed from capitalism and in which workers democracy prevails.
For the immediate future, a confrontation between needs and articulated demands can only take place in relatively restricted circles. However, in a period of revolutionary crisis the committees produced by the upsurge (workers committees, committees of housewives and small businessmen, peasants committees, soldiers committees, etc.) at once would be a place for formulating a real transitional program and could constitute a sort of national assembly of the working masses of the country. By federating on the local, regional, and national levels these committees would become the organs of the new government which would put this transitional program into effect. They would be the bodies on which such a government could be based and by which it could be controlled. A government thus constituted would really be a government of the toilers.
I have pointed out the confusion which occurred in the strike between bureaucratized trade-union bodies and strike committees. From what I have just said it clearly follows that committees and trade unions are not mutually exclusive. They are organs with different functions and different tasks. The workers will not cease to have immediate demands under the new regime, and the unions’ essential task will be to assure that these demands are defended. Although I do not deny the unions the right to have an opinion on more general problems, the committees will be the political form encompassing the broadest masses. It is there that the masses will be able to educate themselves as to the general functioning of society (planning, education, justice, international policy, etc.) through a confrontation of ideological currents and opposing programs. It is there that the masses will be able to make decisions which they will execute. These committees will thus become organs of a government which involves the masses in its functioning in a continuous manner and not in the form of the “democratic” farce of elections every four or five years. These committees – they were called Soviets in Russia in 1917 – are the organs affording the greatest flexibility for drawing in the broadest masses; they are the only way to prepare for the withering away of the state, according to the concept of Marx and Lenin.
I make no pretense of setting forth a finished transitional program here. I will limit myself to bringing out a few points which, above and beyond the demands already proposed, I think must form the basis of such a program:

A higher standard of living for the masses; reduction of the workweek, which is required by increased productivity and the need to eliminate unemployment.
Nationalization without compensation of the factories and the key industries; the elimination of trade secrets; the establishment of a monopoly in foreign trade; the establishment of workers control to prepare the way for management of the plants by those who work in them.
The establishment under democratic control by the masses of an economic plan to benefit the masses (housing, schools, roads, hospitals, urban transportation, and free medicines, etc.) which would break with the bourgeois consumption model [that is, private instead of public consumption – Ed.].
The simplification of administration, the institution of control over administration by people’s committees.
The dissolution of the repressive forces; the replacement of the professional army by a system of militias and the arming of the workers.
Bold social legislation concerning young people and women.
Nationalization of the large agricultural enterprises; the establishment of model state farms; the furthering of agricultural training; many-sided aid to agricultural producers or sellers cooperatives.
Withdrawal from all military alliances; aid without political strings attached to peoples struggling for their independence and to peoples formerly colonized by French imperialism; solidarity with the revolutionary movements which are beginning to develop in Europe, with the perspective of creating a socialist federation of European countries. [6]
 

(b) Building a revolutionary leadership
Without a rationally applied transitional program it is impossible to mobilize masses of people. But how can this program be formulated by mass committees unless there exist at the different levels mentioned above organized groups to unite the masses, to pose the problems for them, to move them to action? I am going to examine the ways it seems possible to deal with the more general problem of building a revolutionary leadership in the plants, in the neighborhoods, and on a national scale.
In the arena of the large masses, the May movement unquestionably showed that, while the students were able to play a “detonator” role on several occasions, when the time came to take the leap of seizing power, a substitute leadership, or even the organized components of a substitute leadership, was lacking in the plants. I would stress the insistence with which the union leaders emphasized the opposition in the plants to “outside interference.” They had asked nothing from the workers in regard to their relating to other forces; rather they speculated on the most backward layers’ fear of being maneuvered. This was an echo from the Stalinists of the bourgeois refrain about “agitators” from God knows where, from abroad most often, etc., who were supposed to be stirring up the good French workers.
How can a substitute leadership, or the organized components of such a leadership, be created? If there had been real elected strike committees responsive to the will and aspirations of the ranks in a few medium-sized factories during the decisive hours, some of these committees, for example, could have taken the step of calling all the committees, or strong minorities in such committees, which agreed with them to a conference. This is not an invention on my part but a long-standing experience which has been renewed every time real strike committees have existed. Such committees, independent of the apparatuses, could have overcome the prejudice against “outside interference” and gained a hearing that the students could not.
The components of a substitute leadership for the revolutionary wave to come which, appealing and fighting for an independent policy in the factories, would offer the same sort of challenge to the CGT leadership’s reformist line there as UNEF and SNESup did during the May mobilization, cannot be created overnight. These elements of an alternative leadership can only be formed by beginning a struggle against the reformist line in the workers movement right now. This is particularly necessary in the unions. Since these are the workers’ permanent organizations, they regain their primary importance in normal periods, that is, in the intervals between acute struggle. What is primarily necessary in this regard is to achieve the conditions which would make it possible for the organized workers to choose between opposing positions: workers democracy in the unions, the factories, on demonstrations – in all the organizations it was eliminated from during the Stalinist years.
Here we face a crucial problem. And there is an obvious link, moreover, between the struggle against the authoritarianism of the Gaullist regime and the struggle against the omnipotence of the union leaderships. A reflection of this appeared at the time of the demonstration in the Charlety stadium, on the same day the workers rejected the Rue de Grenelle agreements. Shouts in conjunction were heard “De Gaulle Resign!” “Seguy Resign!”
This is not the place to go into detail on such a struggle inside the unions. It will be impossible to prevent a discussion of the line followed during the May mobilization in the CGT first of all as well as in all the mass organizations. Undoubtedly the CGT and PCF leaderships want to avoid such a debate. Their denunciation of “provocateurs” made this objective clear enough, one does not debate with provocateurs. However, this debate is inevitable because many trade-union activists have voiced fundamental criticisms of the line followed in May. Debate is also inevitable in the PCF. It is possible the leadership wants to “play out the fish” by keeping the membership busy with stepped-up activism, for example in the electoral campaign, and by touching,the sensitive chord of the militants which vibrates every time the government attacks their party.
Already in May the intellectuals voiced their demands within the PCF. In the June 5 l’Humanité an official PCF declaration mentions the existence of a letter addressed to the party leadership by a number of intellectuals in the PCF. To find out what was in the letter, however, you had to consult the issue of Le Monde appearing the same day. What was discreetly described in the PCF’s official statement as questioning “the application of the party’s policy” was put this way in the intellectuals’ letter:
“Their common revolt (of millions of workers; the youth in the factories, the universities, and the high schools; and the great majority of the intellectuals) challenges, in the guise of the Gaullist regime, the very foundations of the present social system. By seeking from the outset to put a rein on this exceptional enthusiasm, the leadership cut the party off from a great force for socialist renewal ... At the Gare de Lyon ... many Communists were there; but the party was not. This facilitated provocation by the government which was anxious to isolate and, in fact, crush the student movement. However, if it had not been for this movement ... the factories would not have been occupied ... and other opportunities would not have been opened up for struggle by the workers, whose role is decisive ... We cannot shirk the debate on orientations, on the structure and future of the revolutionary movement which these events demand. A frank analysis of the reality, and bold political initiatives must at all costs enable the development of links with the new forces which have revealed themselves in the struggle for socialism and freedom.”
As far as links with these new forces go, l’Humanité, speaking for the Stalinists who remain at the head of the PCF and the CGT, found no formula but denouncing them to the repressors, slandering the students who went to Flins as “provocateurs.”
The leadership wants a “debate” in the customary fashion – that is a speedy condemnation by the party central committee, which is simply a body for recording the decisions of the political bureau. But this operation will not be so easy to carry out. Is it true that Garaudy agrees with these intellectuals? And why didn’t l’Humanité mention that once these intellectuals had gotten a brush-off from the leadership in the June 1-3 meeting they occupied the headquarters of the Paris party federation of the Rue La Fayette for several hours? This is an example l’Humanité does not consider it desirable to make known ...
The PCF worker-militants who hold positions in the trade-union movement and the factories have been confronted with responsibilities, questions which threaten their relations with their comrades in the shops that affect them on a day-to-day basis. A number of these Communist militants will not be able to remain indifferent to the fact that their party’s policy toward the youth has gone bankrupt beyond all description. It is also known that Marchais’s notorious formula, “the German, Cohn-Bendit,” shocked many party members, who saw in it only a disagreeable lapse.
The elements of a major crisis have come together for the first time in the history of the PCF since its complete Stalinization: a leadership with impaired prestige; a policy repudiated by large strata of the workers; total bankruptcy in such an important area as the youth. The PCF and CGT leadership will certainly not give in without a fight. Indeed, its stubbornness in maintaining the party’s regime and policy is at least as great as de Gaulle’s in maintaining his authority in the state. One of the essential tasks which must be accomplished so that the next wave will not remain without a substitute leadership is to wage a struggle for discussion in the CGT without delay, and, for those who are members, in the PCF. This discussion must have as its starting point a balance sheet of the events of May 1968 and the policy pursued during this month. This struggle must be tied to the struggle for workers democracy so that the ranks will be able to choose between differing lines.
In the CGT this will clearly pose the question of the right of tendencies, that is the right of those who do not think like the leadership, to combine in order to defend nationally a common line in the various unions. At present this elementary democratic right is a monopoly and privilege of the leadership. How can anyone claim to fight for democracy in society and make a mockery of it in his own organization?
This battle for workers democracy – which clearly cannot be conducted abstractly, divorced from debate over the lines followed in May – is of crucial importance. It cannot be said with absolute certainty that the leadership’s betrayal of the movement would have been averted if workers democracy had existed. However, a betrayal in this case could have only been carried out under difficult conditions for the leadership. It would not have been impossible for a sufficiently strong minority of the workers to have succeeded in carrying the movement in action beyond the point it attained by its own momentum.
* * *
Now let us move on to the level of a relatively broad vanguard. The first problem which arises is that of the action committees which sprang up spontaneously in May. These committees match their name. They have no definite program, no well-articulated hierarchical structure on a national scale. In actuality, they are groups of activists who intervene daily in the neighborhoods or factories to achieve objectives through action which cannot be obtained by legal means, or could only be so obtained at the cost of great exertion, expense, and considerable time. The existence of such action committees is obviously dependent on favorable circumstances, more specifically on more or less embryonic forms of “dual power.”
It is very important to maintain and strengthen these committees as long as circumstances permit by setting goals for them, whether defense of the existing elements of “dual power,” or the creation of new ones, or self-defense against the attacks of the repressive forces and the “civic action” forces evoked by de Gaulle. It is in fact inevitable now that the bourgeoisie will resort to using both repressive forces of the state and extralegal forces in order to carry out a campaign of intimidation and repression. This would be true not only if de Gaulle stays in power but also if a “government of the left” were established. It must not be ascribed to chance that among the recent workers’ demands the mass leaderships of all types, trade union or political, classical reformist or Stalinist, etc. ... never advocated the slogan of dissolving the repressive forces (CRS, Gardes Mobiles) in May when the anger at, and even hatred of, these forces by the masses was at its peak. These leaderships have bourgeois “statesmanship” and the bourgeois state cannot do without repressive forces.
It cannot be thought that a dead calm will reign in the interval between revolutionary crises. Now there are many incidents, of a greater or lesser import, of clashes between the social forces. In such conditions, a revolutionary policy must consist, among other things, in a sort of “political guerrilla warfare,” a continual harassment of bourgeois society at the most diverse points. Such a struggle increases the importance of the action committees in particular. They must be able to keep the masses awake, to gain a better knowledge of their demands, and, thus, to prepare their future actions.
* * *
More complex problems exist in regard to the vanguard proper. The factors in this situation are the following: a) groups and organizations formed long ago with fully developed programs; b) militants whom the events of recent years have driven out of the PCF (Vigier and Barjonet are among the most well-known and the most recent examples). One cannot predict what tendencies or formations will emerge in the PCF and sooner or later be expelled from it. The problem of revolutionary regroupment in various forms is inevitably on the order of the day. Those who belonged to the PCF and leave it or are expelled from it cannot act in isolation if they want to remain political activists. For the most part, however, they are not inclined to enter formations organized long ago and whose program was developed without their participation. In the coming period, while the old organizations will recruit, new organizations will also develop on rather generalized political bases. These organizations will provide their members with a milieu enabling them both to gain new political experience and to clarify their positions.
The members of the French section of the Fourth International think that the definitive solution of the processes at work in the vanguard, assuring the victory of the socialist revolution, will lead to the constitution of a mass party based on the revolutionary Marxist program they have defended for long years. However, they have never thought that such a party would be created solely by individual recruitment, by people just joining the organization as it is at the present time. Parties are not created and do not develop in such a way.
The most complex problem is that created by new groupings of militants, like the “Mouvement Revolutionnaire” [Revolutionary Movement]. This organization was the first to be formed and it will certainly not be the last of its type. Such groups are not comparable to the old formations, generally filled with men of fixed centrist positions whose political labels vary periodically. These new organizations will be formed primarily by militants whose political development is being advanced by the events. The attitude of the Trotskyists toward such formations must be to assist their development toward firm revolutionary Marxist positions. There can be no question of employing prefabricated formulas or more or less sharp stratagems in dealing with them. Taking account of the dynamic character of such movements or formations, the Trotskyists’ political attitude will be to support them insofar as they are correct and to criticize them where they are wrong.
Obviously, the Trotskyists want to encourage the development of the revolutionary vanguard toward Trotskyist political positions. The organizational question arises as an accessory to this. One of the obstacles on this path is the present division of the Trotskyist movement in France. With a view toward reunification of the Trotskyist movement, the PCI appealed during the May 1968 events to two other formations claiming to be Trotskyist to consider ways of altering this situation of disunity. There was no response from the OCI. This organization, along with its youth group, the FER, pursued an aberrant policy in May which cut them off from the more politically mature part of the vanguard. On the other hand, a step forward was accomplished with the founding of a coordinating committee of the PCI, the UC and the JCR. The Revolutionary Marxist Group later joined this committee.
 
Chapter 10
 
Footnote
6. On these questions, see our publications: Apres de Gaulle? (After de Gaulle What?); The Death Agony of Capitalism, the Transitional Program; and Whither France? by Leon Trotsky.
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (2. Crisis of French Capitalism)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

II. The Fundamental Crisis of French Capitalism
For an understanding of the historic meaning of May 1968, the major features of the crisis of French capitalism must be outlined. The great crisis of French capitalism began after the first world war. During part of the 19th century, France was still the second-ranking economic power in the world. After 1918, despite the advantages it drew from the Versailles Treaty, it was no longer anything more than a second-rate country, which moreover had suffered crippling losses. French capitalism had to adjust to its new position at the expense of the workers, by lowering wages or creating unemployment, or else the workers had to eliminate French capitalism. This crisis took spectacular forms starting in the 1930s. There was a succession of great convulsions in which the political regime changed a number of times: February 6, 1934, a right-wing coup, for the first time succeeding in damaging the parliamentary system and the Third Republic; June 1936, a thrust from the left, the first factory occupations; 1939-40, an abrupt shift to the right, the overthrow of the Third Republic and the establishment of the Vichy regime; 1945-47, a new thrust to the left following the war and the establishment of the Fourth Republic; and in 1958, the coup in Algiers, de Gaulle’s coming to power and the establishment of the Fifth Republic. May 1968 fits into this succession as the beginning of a new drive to the left moving toward the overthrow of the Gaul-list regime and opening up the perspective of a socialist republic. While each of these convulsions had its immediate cause in con-junctural phenomena of greater or lesser political importance, each of them developed in such a way as to pose all the social problems. I will not go into all the details which would be brought out by a thorough history of France since 1918, but a fundamental fact must be noted. In none of these thrusts to the right has French capitalism, owing to a lack of sufficient inner forces, been able to carry its offensive to the point of imposing a fascist solution, a solution which would involve crushing the working class, completely eliminating its organizations, and a merciless decimation of the cadres of these organizations. It was incapable of doing so even at the time which was most favorable to it, the occupation of France by Hitlerite German troops. It has been able only to institute solutions of a bonapartist type.
The most stable of these has been the Gaullist regime. This regime succeeded for some time in deceiving a part of the masses about its real nature because it ended the Algerian war, because it pursued a demagogic international policy, and because it received support from the governments of many recently decolonized countries, and also some workers states, for example the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union saw the Gaullist regime as a disruptive element in the Atlantic alliance and a possible ally for “peaceful coexistence.”
In contrast, in each of the left thrusts, the workers first of all and the working masses in general have never lacked militancy and combativity. In every case, they stopped short of overthrowing capitalism only because the leadership of the mass organizations failed to give the order. “You must know how to end a strike,” Thorez declared in 1936 [Maurice Thorez, longtime head of the Communist Party of France]. This same Thorez succeeded in getting the resistance (FTP) to disarm voluntarily by invoking the need for “one state, one army, and one police force.” The state, the army, and the police force were then under the command of de Gaulle. In May 1968, Seguy [Georges Seguy, head of the CP-led General Federation of Labor (CGT)] could not continue his speech to the point of saying “you must know how to end a strike”; he had to change his line right in the middle of his speech.
But once again – as we will see in another chapter – this movement, which had gone further than ever, which was on the point of bringing the Gaullist government down by its own momentum, did not accomplish this, did not arrive at an anti-capitalist conclusion, because of the policy of the working-class leaderships, essentially the CGT and the PCF, because the other leaderships did not have a decisive weight in the working class (the FGDS, the CFDT, and the PSU).
While it can be argued in retrospect how far the movement could have gone in 1936, and while only a minority thought that the “boat had been missed” in 1945-47, a great many understood the betrayal in 1968. These diverse mass thrusts have this simple common denominator: The leaderships have repeatedly betrayed, when all that would have been necessary to overthrow capitalism was for them to have wanted to do it. These leaderships will certainly never change. But there have been important differences in the objective and subjective conditions of these great working-class mobilizations in France.
In 1936 and 1945-47, the leaderships enjoyed very great prestige and authority among the masses (the Socialist Party and the PCF in 1936, and mainly the PCF in 1945-47). But in May 1968, even before the mobilization began, the Mollet and Mitterrand leaderships in the FGDS and the Waldeck Rochet leadership in the PCF, while still enjoying extensive control over their members and their constituencies, were beginning to encounter critical feelings, doubts, and even a malaise. Before this movement was unleashed it was hard to discern much more than that, and it was impossible to know the real situation that was first manifested in the course of the mobilization itself.
In 1936, the movement in France did indeed carry over into several countries. In Spain also the mass movement attained revolutionary breadth in the face of the Franco coup. But the international context was then dominated by the rise of Nazism in Europe and moreover by the rise of Stalinism in the USSR (the Moscow trials, etc.). In 1945-47, Hitlerism was defeated by the alliance of the imperialist democracies and the Soviet Union. However, the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership pledged itself not to challenge the capitalist order. And in the Soviet Union, the government was again preparing to begin its bloody purges (the “Doctors’ Plot,” Zhdanovism, etc.).
In 1968, the international situation was marked first of all by the victorious Tet offensive, as well as by numerous uprisings in the colonial countries. It was marked also by the resistance of the Afro-Americans in the United States, by a “de-Stalinization” which, however shallow, had eliminated the most oppressive aspects of Stalinism in the movement which swept away Novotny in Czechoslovakia. And finally, it was marked by growing student movements everywhere in the imperialist countries.
In all the great mobilizations of the French workers, one element has played the role of detonator. In 1936, it was the electoral victory of the Popular Front, that is, an event of an essentially parliamentary character. In 1945-47, it was the liberation brought about by the joint military victory of the imperialist democracies and the Soviet Union over Nazism. This victory was thus stamped with an equivocal character, an ambiguity from the class standpoint – an equivocality and ambiguity which was one of the characteristics of the Resistance. This resulted in an inner weakness in the movement of the period which made it possible for it to be liquidated relatively quickly.
The detonator in May 1968 was the student struggle. Nothing could be more misleading than to characterize this struggle as “petty-bourgeois” simply because the great majority of students are the children of the bourgeoisie or petty bourgeoisie. The ideology inspiring the students of opposition to the neo-capitalist consumer society, the methods they used in their struggle, the place they occupy and will occupy in society (which will make the majority of them white-collar employees of the state or the capitalists) gave this struggle an eminently socialist, revolutionary, and internationalist character. Thus, while the detonator in the preceding mass movements was either “to the right” of the movement, or eclectic from the class point of view, this time it was to the left of the movement, with a very high political level in a revolutionary Marxist sense.
There were revolutionary minorities in the 1936 and 1945-47 movements which were in the vanguard of the movement as a whole and opposed the mass reformist leaderships. But these minorities were, all told, extremely few in numbers. They were really “group-lets.” For example, in the big parade that took place at the end of May 1936 at the Mur des Federes on the eve of the factory occupations, the group rallied around the Trotskyists – the only minority really existing at the time – was on the order of a thousand persons, who were ejected after a few brawls. In 1945-47, the revolutionary minorities were stronger, but in the climate created by the military victory, left oppositionists were unpopular. A few slanders were enough to keep the revolutionaries from gaining a broad hearing among the masses.
However, the May 1968 experience showed – at the Champ de Mars, at the Gare de Lyon, at the demonstration in Charlety stadium, at the demonstration in Montparnasse, at the Gare d’Austerlitz – that while the notorious “wildmen,” “grouplets,” “provocateurs,” etc., depending on whether you choose the government’s terminology, l’Humanité’s [official organ of the PCF], or some others’, were of course still a minority, they were by no means an insignificant minority. This minority was capable of bringing together tens of thousands of people in demonstrations, who effectively stood up against the repressive forces of bourgeois order.
To sum up, May 1968 occurred under political conditions far superior to those governing the previous mobilizations of the French workers. The new mass upsurge began at a much higher level with initial conditions much more favorable than in the past to a socialist outcome. It would certainly be wrong to draw only optimistic conclusions from this. The fight, although not a simple or easy one, comes in circumstances which objectively and subjectively offer much better perspectives than in the past.
 
Chapter 3
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (3. Bourgeois leadership)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

III. The bourgeois leadership
A revolutionary situation is also distinguished, according to Lenin, by the bourgeoisie’s inability to govern the country. What was the condition of the bourgeois leadership in France during the month of May 1968.
The bourgeois leadership was itself notoriously deficient. Let us leave aside Pompidou’s and de Gaulle’s trips abroad, which testified to their failure to face up to the situation. The almost total silence of these two men was not the result of calculation. The student movement and then the workers movement had exceeded anything the bourgeoisie had experienced in its history. There was talk in a number of quarters, for example in a newspaper like Le Monde, noted for the seriousness of its analyses, about the government’s “errors.” This, however, was disregarding the lessons of history which show that a worn-out system commits such “errors” from the simple fact that every one of its acts rebounds against it. It cannot be said that de Gaulle decided to launch a referendum with the idea of giving it up a few days later. Just like the working-class leaderships, the leadership of French capitalism found itself left behind and outflanked. De Gaulle really considered resigning. His radio interview can be believed on this score. The statements of Mitterrand, Mendes-France, Giscard d’Estaing, and several others on May 28 were also in line with such an assumption. In those days the bourgeois political world was searching for an alternative.
It was only when he found himself in an extremely difficult, almost desperate situation that de Gaulle, who is a political tactician in the grand style, decided to move with the utmost audacity. The movement was close to breaking through all restraints. De Gaulle understood that in these circumstances, the final impetus could only be given by the opposing leadership. On spontaneity alone, by its own undirected strength, the movement had advanced much further than anyone could have imagined. To continue to advance it now needed a leadership which would dare to give the signal. De Gaulle knows the Communist Party’s men well; he was able to use them in his 1946 government. [1] He knew that they were incapable of such audacity. Having nothing but contempt, moreover, for “politicians on the shelf” of the Mollet or Mitterrand type, he decided to throw a scare into the lot of them. He accused the PCF of a policy which it had not the least intention of pursuing. He threatened a repression which made these spineless leaders tremble. And he offered them elections in exchange for their torpedoing the movement. Elections! These men found themselves back on their favorite ground! And thus de Gaulle saved his regime in extremis.
There was no long premeditated operation on his part. He resorted to a last-minute improvisation, a very slick improvisation which produced a guaranteed effect. However, it would be wrong to view this as a real solution for the situation. The strikes are continuing with great firmness. The elections are not entirely safe for de Gaulle. And even if he succeeds in surmounting this hurdle, difficulties will very soon reappear. If, for a period, a certain degree of repression could produce some results, other mass thrusts will show up profoundly marked by the experience of May 1968.
In conclusion, the French bourgeoisie, which is probably the world’s most experienced in the matter of mass movements, showed in the May mobilizations that it was not its intelligence and slickness that saved it this time. It was the reformist policy of the PCF leadership and its still very strong control over decisive masses of workers which saved the de Gaulle regime and the capitalist system. The bourgeois economist, P. Uri, a member of Mitterrand’s “shadow government,” talked in the London Times, June 5, about an “objective conspiracy” between the Gaullist government and the PCF leadership. As two British bourgeois journalists described it:
“But the paradox which underlies this controlled chaos is that the Communist unions and the Gaullist government they appear to be challenging are really on the same side of the barricades. They are defending French society as we know it ... The Communist Party thus stood revealed as the ultimate bastion of the consumer society which the student Bolsheviks are pledged to destroy. It is as if Washington and Moscow had got together to put down North Vietnam.” (P. Seale and M. McConville, The Observer, May 19.)
 
Chapter 4
 
Footnote
1. Here is what de Gaulle wrote in his memoirs on the presence of PCF leaders in his government in 1945:
“Taking into account previous circumstances, events since then, the necessities of today, I hold that the return of Maurice Thorez as head of the Communist Party can yield more advantages at present than difficulties ...
“Inasmuch as in place of revolution, the Communists seek preponderance in a parliamentary regime, society runs less risk ...
“As for Thorez, while trying to advance the affairs of Communism, on many occasions he was to serve the public interest. On his return to France, he helped put an end to the last vestiges of the ‘patriotic militia’ whom some of his people obstinately sought to maintain in a new underground. Insofar as the gloomy, hard rigidity of his party permitted him, he opposed the attempts at encroachment of the liberation committees and the acts of violence to which the overexcited groups turned. Among the workers – they were numerous – particularly the miners, who listened to his harangues, he did not stop advocating the slogan of working to the utmost and of producing, cost what it might. Was this simply a political tactic? It’s not my business to figure it out. It was enough for me that France benefited.” (Le Salut, pp.100-101.)
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (6. Movement and leaderships)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

VI. The mass movement and the traditional leaderships
In studying the various stages of the movement closely, the following conclusions may be drawn. Within the “detonator” group [“detonator” is the term the students themselves used], there were several elements capable of playing a leading role: political groups and the UNEF and SNESup leaderships, which included politically educated militants independent of the traditional leaderships and opposed to their policies. Without exaggerating the forces on which these UNEF and SNESup leaders based themselves, or the strength of the politically conscious groups, it can be said that these few “dozen wildmen,” in the objective conditions of the revolutionary crisis, played a considerable role in touching off the movement and later in advancing it through the various stages I have pointed out. They continued to perform this function up until the last stage, in which the “detonator” could have only worked again had exceptional circumstances developed – and this was not the case, as will be seen further on.
Once it was off the ground under the impetus of the “detonator,” the workers movement itself went forward despite its traditional leaderships. These leaderships held back from demonstrating solidarity with the students when they were struggling against the police. They wanted a demonstration on May 15 only; but following the night of the barricades of May 10-11, they found themselves obliged, under the pressure of popular anger, to declare a 24-hour general strike for May 13.
Once that day was over, they thought they were back to peace and quiet, when, spontaneously, the workers – essentially the young workers – began to occupy factories without any directive from the unions. Once more, the union leaderships only recognized the de facto situation this created. They negotiated with the government and the bosses under the shock of the night of rebellions on May 24, but they did so ignoring the workers’ real desires and so again found themselves outdistanced on May 27.
The leaderships of the CFDT and FO, whose respective influence in the working class was limited, can be left aside. No one expected the CFDT or FO to assume a vanguard role. The CGT leadership, however, had behind it the decisive battalions of the working class, as was seen in the demonstration of May 29. While revolutionary minorities were conscious of the pernicious role the CGT leadership could play because of its allegiance to the policy of the PCF, the large masses of the workers placed their hopes in this leadership. The CGT and PCF leadership was outdistanced by the mass movement as early as May 3 and for all the days following. It was only on May 29 – or four weeks late – that it seemed to regain the leadership of the actions by calling for a political change and the establishment of a “people’s government of democratic union.” While it was still being constantly outflanked to the left by the mass movement, it strove to limit the movement’s advance by directing its principal blows against “ultraleftists,” “provocateurs,” etc. At no time did it undertake to criticize the leaderships of the other trade union federations, and with reason. However, it felt the need to denounce and even break with UNEF – and in harsh terms. This bureaucratic PCF and CGT leadership must have thought that once the “ultraleftists” were denounced and eliminated the movement would return to “order.” Hadn’t it been the case for many years that the CGT’s “monitors” forcibly removed “ultraleftists” and other “provocateurs” from demonstrations organized by the CGT without the least altercation with the police? Hadn’t it been seen how these disrupters were eliminated who threatened the “calm” and “dignity” of the CGT’s demonstrations, that is, threatened to break agreements reached beforehand with the police? The enemy is on the left, that was the CGT and PCF leaders’ slogan. And that meant not only the “ultraleftists,” but the entire mass movement which was moving in a left direction.
* * *
It was not, however, so much its utterances which proved particularly harmful in the course of the movement. This movement had such power that it very often ignored these. What was chiefly harmful to the movement was the fragmentation which the CGT leadership maintained and fostered and in which it was followed by the leaders of the other trade-union federations. The students and teachers as well as the high-school students were first of all carefully divided from the workers. Everything was done to deepen this separation. For the universities, the CGT and PCF put forward slogans like “A Democratic and Modern University” which had nothing in common with the demands of the striking students and teachers. In practice, the factory gates were closed to the students, who the CGT leaders feared would contaminate the workers with their “ultraleft” politics. In order to facilitate this result, the leaders also did their utmost to reduce the number of strikers occupying the factories, urging the majority to stay home most of the time, so that the factories were chiefly occupied by those elements which were considered most reliable – from these leaders’ standpoint.
Furthermore, their negotiations with the government – which should not have been considered a valid party to discussion in the first place – were conducted right from the start in a way that divided the workers of the private sector, those in the nationalized sectors, and salaried personnel. In other words, there was no general strike for these leaders. They refused to launch this slogan at one time apparently under the pretext that the general strike was already an accomplished fact and didn’t need to be called. But the reality of this was their fear that if they had issued a general strike slogan they would have had to set political objectives because political demands alone expressed the common denominator of the movement struggle. These bureaucrats saw the movement only as an arithmetical sum of separate and distinct economic struggles in which each group was negotiating on its own account. This was their policy in the weeks preceding the Rue de Grenelle negotiations and during them; it remained the same immediately following the rejections of these agreements by the workers.
Even at the time when the CGT organized the May 29 demonstrations it did not establish any link between the immediate demands and the slogan of “a people’s government.” It never declared that the general strike, nonexistent in its eyes since it had not been called, had the objective of creating this “people’s government.” Finally, when de Gaulle, to create a red scare, accused the PCF and the CGT of conducting a political strike with the aim of changing the government in the country, both organizations rejected this accusation. At last, the PCF and CGT leaderships aligned themselves with de Gaulle’s decision to hold legislative elections.
Thus, the CGT leadership, which had rejected the accusation that it was following a revolutionary policy (and certainly did not follow such a policy), which claimed that all political problems were the sole preserve of the political parties, reconciled itself to politics by floundering in parliamentarism. The CGT, which never failed to say all through the mobilizations that it was only concerned with economic demands and that governmental problems were the business of political parties, which ignored the question of government as long as it could and later rejected anything remotely approaching a revolutionary orientation, only began to show signs of political life when de Gaulle put the question on an electoral basis.
Turning to the PCF’s own policy through May, first of all, like the CGT, it directed almost all its fire against the “ultraleftists.” After the l’Humanité article by Marchais, the organizational secretary of the PCF, denouncing “the German Cohn-Bendit” on May 3 – the very day the struggle began – hardly a day passed without some more or less severe and more or less crudely expressed condemnation of “ultraleftists.” The variations in this regard are not without interest. It is easy to show from the columns of l’Humanité that the virulent denunciation of the first days was progressively (if this adverb can be used in this instance) attenuated as the movement took rapid leaps forward and grew, that it took a sharper turn just before any possibility that the leaders would be outflanked, and that it assumed a heightened form after de Gaulle’s speech and above all as soon as the back-to-work movement developed. Now that elections are the order of the day, monopolizing the PCF leaders’ attention, the “ultraleftists” are increasingly becoming the target of virulent attacks. [2]
Throughout May, the PCF leadership’s favorite term for attacking revolutionary militants was “ultraleftist.” Now it is resorting to the term “provocateur.” The June 8 issue of l’Humanité is a choice specimen in this regard. The “provocateurs” at Flins were not the government and the Gardes Mobiles but the students along with Geis-mar from the SNESup, who went there to express their solidarity, with workers driven out of the factory and to fight alongside them against the forces of repression. The students there were not organized in disciplined commando groups (which would not have been a bad idea in facing the forces of “order”). However, l’Humanité, through its published statements, can only be said to have played the role of an informer. These are the real provocations whose infamous ends must be denounced. And the reason for the PCF’s outburst can be found explicitly stated in a declaration by the CGT Railway Workers Federation, which is Seguy’s own union: Incidents with the state forces, they say, could have a bad effect on the election campaign. The distance from this to condemning those who came to support strikers is not long. After all, the Stalinists are not novices in these matters. Didn’t one Stalinist secretary of the CGT declare in December 1945 “strikes are the weapon of monopolies?”
* * *
But the “enemy on the left” slogan is only one side of the CGT leadership’s policy. How did it conduct itself toward its right, that is toward the FGDS?
The line the PCF leadership has been following for some years is well known. It wants to reach a “common program” with the FGDS to wage a joint election campaign. It was rather neatly added that this would be linked to a mass movement of “unrivaled breadth.” One doesn’t know whether for Waldeck Rochet this meant a revolutionary movement, which is doubtful, or whether his vision of such a movement corresponded to the one which occurred in 1968. In passing it can be remarked that he isn’t known for such imagination. In any case, when this movement of “unrivaled breadth” occurred, he did not seem to recognize it or to feel any need to draw conclusions from it. From the first day and almost up until the end of May he stepped up his appeals and letters to Mitterrand to speed up the negotiations on a common program. This leadership refused to serve as an “auxiliary” (its own term) for UNEF in organizing a demonstration against the Algerian war in 1960, but pleaded day after day to the FGDS to agree to a meeting to negotiate this mysterious “common program.” Moreover, no one knows what this program could be since the Declaration of February 1968 was not to serve as the model. The PCF did not want to be an “auxiliary” of UNEF in the struggle against the Algerian war; but it was acting as if it was anxious to be an auxiliary of the FGDS, on the basis of no-one-knows-what program, at a time when the mass movement had reached an exceptional peak.
From May 3 to 27, the PCF leadership did not advance in action a single slogan on the question of the government. Its decision was, so to speak, subordinated to an agreement with the FGDS on this “joint program” which no one has yet seen. The PCF leadership thus had no political solution of its own for the crisis for more than 25 days. For it, everything depended on an agreement with the FGDS. Does this leadership, after that, still dare to claim that it is leading the party of the working class, and even that it is its vanguard?
But the PCF leadership made a turn toward the end of May, declaring itself for a “people’s government of democratic unity” and calling for the constitution of “committees of action” for such a government. A few preliminary words are necessary. First of all, one cannot find any definition of the content of such a government in the CP press. “With Communist participation,” PCF agitators chanted in the May 29 demonstrations. But, assuming this, who would they be “participating” with? The FGDS, one might think. There is a small difficulty in this, which I will take up right after noting one other point. The PCF leadership used the term “action committee,” which refers to manifold organizations created during the May mobilization with a policy quite different from the one the CP has been following. Here, the CP duplicated the operation it carried out a few months earlier when it created “Vietnam Committees” totally different from those which for long months had been waging a real struggle for Vietnamese victory and which the CP continually fought as “ultraleftist.” When it does not slander the “ultraleftists,” the PCF tries to mix up political labels. It creates “action committees” whose objective in regard to real mass action is inaction.
Having said this, we can return to the question of the government itself. The formula “people’s government of democratic union” did not drop out of the blue. While the PCF leadership was pleading heart and soul with the FGDS leadership to come to an understanding on the “joint program” which did not seem to be about to see the light of day, a little operation had been plotted for several days by the FGDS leadership and other forces on the left. A good many people were aware of it or in on it and it was revealed at the very moment the PCF (also on to it) presented its new formula.
The May movement itself posed the question of government. This was correctly appreciated even in Gaullist ranks. It was then that Mitterrand, having totally forgotten the existence of his “shadow government,” made a declaration in favor of a “government of transition” which had little in common with a special alliance between the FGDS and the PCF and consequently with an FGDS-PCF government. Mitterrand added that he was ready to take the lead of such a government, but – oh, what rare generosity for the political world! – others were as worthy to lead it as he, for example, Mendes-France. The name which had been quietly whispered about for some days was finally pronounced publicly.
What was the meaning of this political operation? Mendes-France did not exclude participation of Communists in his government, but at the same time Lecanuet [3] himself would not have done less. Mendes-France added that such a “provisional government” should not be based on a “concoction” of different political parties. This became very clear. The operation consisted in replacing the right bonapartist government of de Gaulle with an equally bonapartist government, but a “left” one, with Mendes-France. This would not be a government based on a parliamentary majority but one which would continue playing the game of balancing between opposing social forces in the country. This balancing game would be more anchored to the forces on the left in distinction to that anchored to the forces of the right in de Gaulle’s time. Mendes-France is no novice in this type of operation. His government in 1954 was the groundbreaker. It contained, moreover, several politicans who have since reappeared in de Gaulle’s governments (among others, Fouchet [Minister of Education under de Gaulle]).
In the face of such a powerful movement de Gaulle’s “strong government” might no longer be the most indicated solution for French capitalism. There was, however, no question of a return to bourgeois democracy. Another team under the leadership of a so-called man of the left would have operated in the same way as de Gaulle.
The PCF leadership saw a danger to itself in this attempt. Hadn’t it served before (when Thorez was its leader) in such a government led by de Gaulle? It wanted a government, whether led by Mitterrand or someone else, in which it could bring pressure to bear – not for the victory of socialism (if it had wanted that, it would not have needed to take a detour through Mitterrand or anyone else). What it was seeking was essentially concessions in a direction favorable to what the Kremlin wants – notably in international policy. A parliamentary government of the Mitterrand type would have been more sensitive to pressure than a bonapartist government of the Mendes-France type. In the minds of its organizers, the May 20 demonstration for “a people’s government,” ostensibly directed against de Gaulle was at least as much against a Mendes-France coalition.
Finally, when de Gaulle decided to turn and fight, the first response to his decision to call legislative elections came from Waldeck Rochet. De Gaulle, he said, had only adopted the PCF’s own demand on this score. The PCF leadership then called on all PCF members to roll up their sleeves for the coming elections, which could only be done by draining the energy devoted to continuing strikes.
One can legitimately doubt the PCF leadership’s desire to oust de Gaulle. Reading the Soviet and East European press shows that de Gaulle has the favor of the governments in these countries. He has been enthusiastically received there in recent years. A change appeared only after his recent anti-Communist statements. While this is debatable, there can be no hesitation on another point. In a pinch, the CP might replace de Gaulle’s regime with another, but not on the basis of a mass movement like the one in May. It wants to do this only on the basis of an electoral success. This is less dangerous for the government which could result.
Let us sum up the May 1968 balance sheet of the Stalinist PCF and CGT leadership:

It opposed the revolutionary struggle of the fighting students and did everything possible to prevent a political and organizational link between them and the workers.
It divided the various categories of workers (private industry, the nationalized sectors, and white-collar workers) instead of uniting them on a common program.
It refused to declare a general strike on the pretext that one existed in fact, but in reality so as not to have to advance the only proper slogan for a general strike – a slogan of struggle for power.
It. negotiated in disregard of the workers’ desires and accepted miserable agreements which the workers spontaneously rejected in as many seconds as the union leaders had spent hours working them out with the bosses and government.
It never took the slightest initiative to mobilize the strikers, limiting itself either to keeping them bottled up in the plants or sending them home to twiddle their thumbs.
It never stopped making war on and slandering the “ultra-leftists,” tacitly encouraging physical violence against them as in the past, and at the same time, it never organized workers to defend themselves against reactionary bands and state repressive forces.
It never raised the slogan of dissolution of the repressive forces (Gardes Mobiles, CRS) which were sent against the students and the workers.
It betrayed the defense of “foreign” militants faced with repressive government dictates (the Cohn-Bendit affair), thus promoting its factional interests ahead of proletarian internationalism and at the expense of it.
It never publicly denounced Mitterrand’s maneuvers and never stopped chasing after the FGDS to get a “joint program” already outdistanced by the political events.
It held an equivocal attitude on the referendum which de Gaulle decided to call at one point.
It never sought to overturn de Gaulle and was the first to accept his decision to hold legislative elections. Thus, it betrayed 10 million strikers in the quest for five million votes.
It did not want to utilize a movement which was leading to socialism. Seeking a “new democracy” of a bourgeois character, it assured the maintenance of de Gaulle’s regime.

This betrayal of the PCF leadership equalled and surpassed the oft denounced betrayals of the Social Democracy. If this leadership has not up until now acted in the manner that the Noskes and the Eberts acted against the German revolution of 1918-19, it is because the bourgeoisie has no need of it. But its conduct toward the “ultraleftists” leaves no doubt that it is ready to do so should the need arise.
 
Chapter 7
 
Footnotes
2. It should not be forgotten that the UNEF and CGT leaders could not come to an understanding because the CGT leadership refused to condemn the government’s measure banning Cohn-Bendit from France. What authority will the protestations of the PCF or the CGT have tomorrow when the government expels foreign workers? Their aversion to “ultra-leftists” has taken precedence for them over solidarity with foreign militants struck by administrative measures. Of course, the Stalinists never defend oppositionists persecuted by the bourgeoisie.
3. The leader of the Centrists or the party of “Progress and Modern Democracy.” This party is identified with a program of bourgeois modernization and strengthening the “Atlantic Alliance.” – Ed.
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (Glossary)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

Glossary
CAL – Comités d’Action Lycéens (High-School Action Committees)
CFDT – Confederation Française et Democratique du Travail (French Democratic Confederation of Labor – an independent union of Catholic origin)
CGC – Confederation Generale des Cadres (General Confederation of Professionals)
CGT – Confederation Generale du Travail (General Confederation of Labor – the Communist controlled union)
CNPF – Conseil National du Patronnat Français (French Employers Association)
CVN – Comités Vietnam Nationaux ( National Vietnam Committees)
CP – Communist Party
CRS – Compagnies Republicaines de Securité (Republican Security Companies – militarily armed and trained elite security troops)
CSF – Compagnie Generale de Telegraphic sans Fil (General Electric Company)
FEN – Federation de l’Education National (National Educational Federation)
FER – Federation des Etudiants Revolutionnaires (Federation of Revolutionary Students – the youth group of the OCI)
FGDS – Federation de la Gauche Democrate et Socialiste (Federation of the Democratic and Socialist Left – an alliance of right-wing Social Democrats and liberals)
FO – Force Ouvrière (Work Force – a right-wing Social Democratic controlled union under American patronage)
FTP – Franc-Tireurs et Partisans (Snipers and Partisans – the armed forces of the French resistance)
Groupes Marxistes Revolutionnaires (Revolutionary Marxist Groups – the group associated with the former Fourth International leader Michel Pablo)
JCR – Jeunesse Communiste Revolutionnaire (Revolutionary Communist Youth)
OAS – Organisation de l’Armée Secrete (Secret Army Organization – the right-wing terror organization which arose in the last phase of the Algerian war)
OCI – Organisation Communiste Internationaliste (the Internationalist Communist Organization – a sectarian organization claiming to be Trotskyist – allied with the Socialist Labour League in England)
ORTF – Office de Radio et Television Français (Bureau of French Radio and Television – the state controlled communications network)
PCF – Parti Communiste Francais (French Communist Party)
PCI – Parti Communiste Internationaliste (Internationalist Communist party – the French section of the Fourth International)
PCMLF – Parti Communiste Marxiste-Leniniste Français (the Marxist-Leninist French Communist Party – one of the two pro-Chinese groups in France)
PSU – Parti Socialiste Unifié (United Socialist Party – a centrist formation)
PTT – Postes Telephones et Telegraphes (the telephone and telegraph system)
RATP – Regie Autonome des Transports Parisiens (the Paris transportation company)
SNESup – Syndicat National de l’Enseignement Superieur (National Union of University Teachers)
SNCF – Societé Nationale des Chemins de Fer Français (the French state railways)
SNECMA – Societé Nationale d’Etude et de Construction de Moteurs d’Aviation (the state supported aviation construction and research company)
Syndicat du Livre – the printers union
UC – Union Communiste (Communist Union – a group claiming to be Trotskyist which publishes Voix Ouvrière)
UEC – Union des Etudiants Communistes (Union of Communist Students – the Communist Party’s student organization)
UNEF – Union Nationale des Etudiants Français (National Union of French Students)
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (1. Introduction)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution




[I. Introduction]
On June 14, 1968, the day following the French government ban of revolutionary organizations, Pierre Frank was seized by French police and held incommunicado for ten days. It is little accident that Frank was among the first victims of de Gaulle’s repressive measures. Secretary of the Internationalist Communist Party (PCI), the French section of the Fourth International, and a prominent voice of revolutionary Marxism in the May-June uprising, Pierre Frank has a long career in French revolutionary politics.
As a teenager in Paris, he was expelled from school because of his radical political views. A few years later, in 1923 or 1924 he joined the Communist Party. In 1929 he was one of a group of Communists who sent a representative to see Leon Trotsky when the Bolshevik leader was exiled to Prinkipo, Turkey. Under Trotsky’s guidance, he helped found the Left Opposition in France. By 1931 he was elected to the International Secretariat and in 1932 became one of Trotsky’s secretaries in Prinkipo.
As the curtain rose on World War II, Pierre Frank was sentenced to ten years in prison by the Daladier regime because of his “defeatist” activities against the French imperialist army. Escaping to England, he was arrested in October 1940, charged with not registering as an “alien” and sentenced to six months at hard labor. Following this he was rearrested by the British authorities and kept under lock and key until the end of 1943. Only after the war was Frank able to return to France.
The PCI was built in France during the war itself, in defiance of Nazi occupation. It has been active in French politics since the liberation. Its members were persecuted and arrested for supporting colonial rebels during France’s war with Vietnam and again in the war with Algeria.
Pierre Frank completed the following article on June 10 – four days before his arrest. It covers the period of the May-June revolt prior to de Gaulle’s reelection and the institution of repressive acts against revolutionary organizations and their members. In order to facilitate its reading, the article is followed by a brief chronology of events and a glossary of the political, trade-union and other organizations mentioned.




May 1968 will go down in history as the month the French socialist revolution began. Opening with the struggle of the students against police intrusions into the Latin Quarter and the university, this month saw the entire working class entering into struggle, and with it all strata of the working population (the new middle class, the intellectuals, the peasants, etc.). This happened with a unanimity never before known in the past.
All of the country’s youth were to be seen in this struggle: the high-school students, university students, the young workers – both employed and unemployed – including the “young hoods” that the bourgeois press, the government ministers, and so many others have slandered, though they are nothing more than the victims of “consumer society.” The youth took the lead of a struggle which unfolded in the streets including extremely violent clashes with the repressive forces of the bourgeois state. Strikes, factory occupations, occupations of all sorts of buildings, street demonstrations took place not only in Paris but throughout the entire country. No region was untouched by the gigantic hurricane which swept the country. The capitalist state foundered for several weeks. It recovered its bearings in extremis much less thanks to its own strength than to the default, worse, the betrayal of the leaderships which controlled the great majority of the country’s vital forces.
The French economy, which had already passed through great struggles like June 1936, had never been paralyzed as it was in May 1968. According to the statistics about 10 million workers were on strike but this does not give a complete picture of such a situation. Tens of thousands of workers (in gas, electricity, the waterworks, and newspaper printing, etc.) continued to work only to provide for the most elementary needs of the civil population. And they did so by decision of their unions.
The bosses and the government found themselves bereft of all authority over the industrial, commercial, and banking enterprises, the means of communication, and the great modern mass media. The armed forces were obviously insufficient to suppress the movement. The police department employees were on strike. The police themselves threatened to go on strike. It was hard to envisage use of the army, in view of the consequences it would have provoked. The repressive troops (CRS, the Gardes Mobiles, etc.) were tired out after several nights of fighting in the streets of Paris and incessant mobilizations throughout France.
In a situation where the government was disabled for a period of several weeks and the workers traditional political and trade-union leaderships were bypassed by events, the revolutionary center of the Sorbonne arose with extraordinary improvisation. The most diverse revolutionary currents, previously subjected to implacable repression by the bureaucratic apparatuses of the reformists, came together in close proximity. Day after day, for several weeks, out of the ferment of this socialist democracy, an orientation emerged from this center which made it possible to carry the movement beyond all possible expectations.
In the opinion of all observers, this movement went far beyond June 1936. The historic parallels cited went back to Petrograd 1917, to the revolutionary movements of 1918 and 1919, and the first weeks of the Spanish revolution of July-August 1936. No doubt was possible: We were experiencing the first great revolutionary thrust which would reach a peak in a few days and put the question of power on the order of the day. This took place in an economically developed capitalist country (the fifth-ranking in the world). All the problems of the society (economic, political, social, cultural, etc.) were posed on a knife’s edge. These problems are those of all highly industrialized capitalist countries. But they are also, in part, the problems of colonial countries (concerning relations of the working class with other social classes), and even of countries where capitalism has been abolished (concerning relations of the working class with the bureaucracy). With good reason, the entire world turned its eyes to France in May 1968.
The battle was still not over in the early days of June. The strike was still being vigorously pursued in the biggest plants, in vital sectors of the economy, in education, etc. But its peak had passed. The conquest of power was no longer on the order of the day. In the wake of this first phase of the socialist revolution a series of great economic struggles are continuing whose results will be very important for future revolutionary waves, determining their initial slogans and their objectives. There also remain a whole series of bases, large or small bastions, where the state, capitalist property and numerous institutions of capitalist society have been more or less completely put in question.
It is essential to draw a balance sheet of this month of May 1968 as soon as possible, to define what has been achieved, to clarify the perspectives which have opened up, to lay out the main lines of the tasks to come. This is the objective of this pamphlet. In the conditions under which I am writing it I make no claim that it is complete, or that it is exempt from certain inadequacies and perhaps even errors in detail. Nonetheless, I am sure that it will answer the main questions raised in the course of the events and will provide a sufficiently clear basis for the discussion which will inevitably begin in the workers movement and more particularly in the vanguard of the workers movement on the problems posed in May 1968 by the socialist revolution which has begun.
 
Chapter 2
 

re Frank: May 1968 - First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution (Chronology)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
May 1968:
First Phase of the French Socialist Revolution

Chronology of the May Events
May 3 – UNEF meeting at the Sorbonne against Fascist attacks and government repression. Police invade Sorbonne campus and make arrests. Violent incidents in Latin Quarter lasting six hours.
May 4 – UNEF holds to its plans for demonstration Monday May 6. SNESup sets strike of university teachers for same date.
May 5 – Extraordinary session of the Court of Summary Jurisdiction to sentence demonstrators arrested Friday.
May 6 – Violent fighting in the morning and then from 2 p.m. in the afternoon to 1 a.m. the next morning on the Boulevard Saint-Michel and Saint-Germain. Grills around trees and paving stones are torn out to resist the repressive forces firing tear-gas grenades. Close to 600 students and police wounded. Student strikes spread to the provinces.
May 7 – UNEF demonstration from 6:30 p.m. to midnight, going from the Place Denfert-Rochereau to the Place de 1’Etoile on the Champs-Elysees, and then from the Place de 1’Etoile to the Latin Quarter. More than 25,000 demonstrate. Violent fighting after 10 a.m., from Saint-Germain-des-Pres to Montparnasse, lasting until 3 a.m.
May 8 – Debate in National Assembly. A hypocritical statement by the minister of education Peyrefitte. A meeting in the Halle aux Vins which breaks up without incident.
May 9 – The Sorbonne is still closed despite the words of the minister of education. Impromptu meetings on the Boulevard Saint-Michel. The strike continues with three primary demands: release of all those imprisoned; halt to prosecutions; withdrawal of police forces from the university campuses. A meeting continues long into the evening at the Mutualite. The CGT and CFDT project a joint demonstration with UNEF for May 15.
May 10 – A high-school student strike in Paris in the morning; a demonstration of high-school student strikers at 5 p.m. at the Gobelins to join UNEF and SNESup demonstration at the Place Denfert-Rochereau at 6:30. The united demonstration returns to Latin Quarter at 9:00. Barricades built, principally on the Rue Gay-Lussac. Violent fighting in the night from 2:15 to 6:00 in the morning. Almost 400 wounded.
May 11 – CGT, CFDT, and FEN call a 24-hour general strike for Monday May 13. Pompidou speaks at 11:15 p.m., accepts the students’ three primary demands.
May 13 – General strike and monster demonstration in Paris. A minority continue the demonstration from the Place Denfert-Rochereau to the Champ de Mars and hold a meeting of about 20,000 persons. The students leave the Champ de Mars to occupy the Sorbonne.
May 14 – New debate in National Assembly which fails to came to a conclusion. Late in afternoon, workers at Sud-Aviation in Nantes occupy their factory and shut the plant manager up in his office.
May 15 – Renault plant in Cleon struck and occupied.
May 16 – Renault strike extends to Flins. Speech by Pompidou.
May 17 – Solid strike at Renault (Sanouville, Le Mans, Orleans, Billancourt). Strike at Berliet (Lyon), at Rhodiaceta-Vaise, Rhone-Poulenc (Saint-Fons). Air traffic halted.
May 18 – The CGT in the person of Seguy formulates demands and announces that there will be no “all-out general strike.” Student demonstration in front of and around the Renault plant. Trade-union officials refuse to let them enter the plant. Strike in SNCF, in the PTT, airplane construction, the Creusot and Rhone-Poulenc foundries (throughout France).
May 19 – Strike at the RATP.
May 20 – The strike extends to include millions of workers, the merchant marine, banks, insurance companies, gasoline industry (refining plants and distributors). Printers union authorizes publication of the daily papers.
May 21 – New extension of the strike: textiles, the arsenals, construction, the big stores, the paper industry, Citroen, municipal services, entertainment. Declaration by Seguy: “empty formulas like self-management, reform of civilization, and other inventions ...”
May 22 – Beginning of peasant demonstrations (fraternization with the striking workers at Saint-Brieuc). Expulsion decree against Cohn-Bendit. The ORTF employees broadcast the debate in parliament. Extension of the strike to all agencies, to the Atomic Energy Commission, and to the social security administration. Temporary occupation of the CNPF and CGC. Trade unions declare their readiness to negotiate with the government.
May 23 – The motion of censure is defeated. Resumption of student demonstrations on the Boulevard Saint-Germain and at the Palais-Bourbon with fighting until 4:00 a.m. The CGT breaks with UNEF. Declaration by the police unions: “Missions against striking workers would pose grave tests of conscience.” The big Paris hotels, ORTF, and taxis strike.
May 24 – Peasant demonstrations throughout France. Separate CGT demonstrations in Paris and meetings in the working-class neighborhoods. De Gaulle’s speech announcing a referendum. A demonstration by the Action Committees at the Gare de Lyon which continues into a night of rioting in several neighborhoods in Paris. Five hundred wounded. Fighting in several cities, including Lyon and Nantes.
May 25 – The strike encompasses 10 million workers. Opening of negotiations between the government and the unions at the Rue de Crenelle at 3:00 in the afternoon.
May 26 – Negotiations continue.
May 27 – An agreement is reached at 7:30 a.m. This agreement is immediately rejected by the workers at Renault (in the presence of Frachon and Seguy), Citroen, Rhodiaceta, Berliet, Sud-Aviation (Nantes), SNECMA, etc. Demonstration at Charlety (UNEF and SNESup), the Mendes-France maneuver comes out into the open. Mitterrand mentions Mendes-France in a press conference. The CGT organizes meetings in Paris.
May 28 – Negotiations continue separately in many sectors.
May 29 – De Gaulle leaves for Colombey. Scheduled to report to the Council of Ministers on the following day. The Mendes-France maneuver takes clearer form. For the first time, the CGT raises the question of a “political change opening the way for social progress and democracy.” The PCF calls for “a people’s and democratic unity government.” CGT demonstration on the main streets of Paris. Statement by Mendes-France.
May 30 – De Gaulle dissolves National Assembly and announces immediate elections. Pompidou remains premier and the government is to be reshuffled. De Gaulle appeals for “civic action.” Gaullist demonstration on the Champs-Elysees.
May 31 – Change in the ministerial lineup. During his absence from Paris, de Gaulle met with the army leaders. The CGT wants to reopen negotiations and declares its desire not to disrupt the elections of June 23 and 30. The PCF expresses its satisfaction on the holding of elections.
 
Chronology
 

re Frank: Otto Bauer (January 1969)




P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Otto Bauer
A Representative Theoretician
of Austro-Marxism
(January 1969)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.30 No.3, May-June 1969, pp.36-41.
Originally published in French in Quatrième Internationale, January 1969.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The arguments to prove that Stalinism was the natural outgrowth of Bolshevism have been innumerable. Wasn’t Stalin a member of the Political Bureau? Didn’t he always identify himself with Lenin and Leninism? Weren’t the methods of Stalinism “embryonic” in Lenin’s “amoralism,” in the centralist conception of the party, in the ban the Tenth Congress placed on factions? And so on.
How many times Trotsky had to refute such arguments, to show that Stalinism had no theory of its own, that it was the political expression of a social stratum – the Soviet bureaucracy – that this bureaucracy destroyed the Bolshevik Party, which had been the political expression of the revolutionary proletariat. Trotsky did not neglect also to point up the social, political, psychological, and other affinities between the Soviet bureaucrats and the bureaucrats of the Social Democratic parties and the reformist trade unions.
This correspondence is striking in the realm of ideology. It is evident when you compare the fundamental views advocated by the Stalinists with those that have been put forward by the reformists, most especially by the left Social Democrats, who were the last in the Social Democracy to give lip service to Marxist theory – that is the Russian Mensheviks, the Austro-Marxists, the Italian Maximalists, and the Guesdists, Bracke and Zyromski, in the SFIO [Section Française de l’Internationale Ouvrière – French Section of the Workers (Second) International – the French Social Democratic party].
It is these profound ideological affinities, moreover, that explain why, when these circles have experienced crises, some left Social Democrats – and not the least prominent – capitulated to Stalin or even joined the Communist Party. This was the case of Dan for the Mensheviks; of a wing of the Italian Socialists; and of Zyromski, who joined the PCF [Parti Communiste Français – French Communist Party]. This was also the case of Otto Bauer, the dean of Austro-Marxism in the last years of its existence.
The case of Otto Bauer is by far the most illustrative because he was the most inclined to offer theoretical justifications for his positions. He did not lack culture and a certain agility in the game of ideas, which made him much more subtle that a Kautsky in this regard. The younger generations know nothing about Austro-Marxism generally, even the name of Otto Bauer.
A French writer, Yvon Bourdet, has taken up the study of Otto Bauer, along with other Austro-Marxists like Max Adler. His book Otto Bauer et la Revolution [Otto Bauer and the Revolution] [1] is especially interesting because it offers a compilation of the essential body of Otto Bauer’s major theoretical and political writings from 1917 to 1938. Thus this book enables us to make an instructive comparison of the Austro-Marxists’ thought with that of the Stalinists or post-Stalinists. [2]
Otto Bauer’s idea of Marxism is characterised primarily by fatalism. For him what happens in most cases is “inevitable” and “necessary.” These adjectives dropped repeatedly from his pen. I stress them in the quotations that follow in this article.
His conception was also marked by a view that socialism would develop country by country – that is fundamentally of socialism “in one country.” He had no idea of combined development, of societies where features belonging to different epochs or modes of production are combined.
Thus in 1917, since Czarist Russia was a backward country, he drew the conclusion that the revolution, which the Russian workers carried out in alliance with the peasants, would not lead to the dictatorship of the proletariat but ... bourgeois democracy:
“I consider from now on (October 1917) the transitory rule of the proletariat allied with the peasantry as a necessary phase of Russia’s evolution in her march toward bourgeois democracy” (“Neue Kurs” in Sowjetrussland, p.73).
For him, Russia had necessarily to follow the road followed by France, England, etc. He very frequently refers to the French revolution and the period of the Jacobin dictatorship. He adduces that this dictatorship was necessary, as well as the “illusions” of the plebeian masses on which it depended, in order to clear the way for the capitalist system. He concludes that the Bolsheviks had the “illusions” which all fighters need but that history would use them as a means of advancing to a bourgeois democracy:
“Their [the plebeian masses’] rule ... cannot achieve their communist ideal. It has only been the means used by history to destroy the vestiges of feudalism and thereby create the preconditions for the development of capitalism on a new extended base” (pp.79-80).
Thus, he was one of the creators of the theory that the Soviet system constituted “state capitalism,” which was to find popularity in the most diverse political circles (Eisenhower-type capitalists, Guy Mollet reformists, Bordigist ultraleftists).
When the Bolsheviks instituted NEP he considered himself fully vindicated:
“The inevitable results of free commerce (NEP) are the restoration of commercial and industrial capital and the reestablishment of capitalism” (p.79).
Of course, while he was for the defense of the USSR, it was in a very Austro-Marxist sense, in order to better assure the transition to bourgeois democracy:
“It is in the vital interests of the Russian proletariat and the international proletariat that the inevitable liquidation of the dictatorship be accomplished through a peaceful transformation and not through the violent overthrow of the Soviet regime” (p.82).
In his own country, in Austria, where he was the theoretical guide of the Social Democratic Party which embraced the very great majority of the working class, he held that there could be no question of using force in the struggle for socialism The world war victors would not permit it. In a pamphlet The Road to Socialism (1919), he wrote:
“Let us imagine that in a single day the workers seize the factories, kick the capitalists and the bosses out just like that, and take over the management themselves! Naturally, such an upset would be impossible without a bloody civil war ... The foreign capitalists would deny us raw materials ... and the indispensable credit ... America and the Entente would maintain a blockade ...” (p.90).
But he, Otto Bauer, had found a solution. He developed a whole program fitting into the framework of the democratic republic:
“Socialization begins with expropriation. The state [the bourgeois state – PF] declares the present owners of big industry divested of their property. Compensation must be paid. It would be unjust to despoil the owners of mine and foundry stock while the other capitalists remained in possession ... The cost of compensation must be borne by all of the capitalists and landowners. To this end, the state will level a progressive capital tax on all capitalists and owners, the proceeds of which will be used to compensate the dispossessed owners of stock in big industry. In this way, no harm will be done to stockholders in big industry ...” (p.93).
Would the reactionaries permit such a program, which has great similarities to the “transitional programs” of the Togliattis and other advocates of “renovated democracy”? What is to be done if the bourgeoisie resists? Otto Bauer’s answer, while reformist, is – let us give it its due – superior to that of our contemporary post-Stalinists. He does not only say, like them, that in that case the workers must resort to force. He also advocates political propaganda in the army and aimed at the state repressive forces. Still more, he has an armed workers militia in mind, the Republikanische Schutzbund, a vestige of the aborted Austrian revolution of 1918. Listen to what he said in 1924 in a pamphlet entitled The Struggle for Power.
“We cannot use our soldiers’ arms to take power. No, we must win power by the ballot. But our soldiers’ arms can protect us from a counterrevolution, which would tear the ballot out of our hands at the precise moment it could bring us power (p.157) ... If the soldiers remain in our camp, if we manage to win a part of the police and security forces, if the Republikanische Schutzbund remains powerful and alert, then reaction will not dare rise up against the Constitution of the republic. And then we can take power without resorting to violence and without civil war but simply by availing ourselves of the right to vote” (p.158).
We must also recognize that in 1934 Otto Bauer applied his theory of “defensive force” fully. The tragic example of the heroic but hopeless struggle of the Vienna workers implacably condemned this too subtle theory that claimed that class struggle could be won from all positions – either within the framework of bourgeois democracy, or failing that and leaving the decision up to the enemy, in armed combat.
Having taken Germany and Austria, Nazism advanced throughout Europe. In exile, Otto Bauer erected new “Marxist” theories. He had lost his illusions about bourgeois democracy but not his fatalistic interpretation of Marxism: “Bourgeois democracy necessarily ends in fascist counterrevolution” (p.222).
I will come back later to this proposition in examining Otto Bauer’s conception of the relations between the class and the party. But the loss of his illusions in bourgeois democracy made him discover that socialism really had been achieved in the USSR. In a work entitled Between Two Wars, he made startling discoveries: “Socialist society is not only an abstract idea. It has become a tangible reality in the Soviet Union” (p.169).
He was even to discover that socialism “in one country” was perfectly possible:
“’Socialism in one country’ is entirely possible in an immense country like Russia which has almost all the important raw materials in its soil and can absorb almost all its own products” (p.174).
Let us reserve comment on the economic views of this Marxist who abandoned the international division of labor in favor of autarchy. Let us limit ourselves to the political side of his view. When he wrote such lines, he was aware that Stalin’s regime no longer corresponded to that of Lenin:
“In the first phase of its evolution, the dictatorship conformed approximately to the idea Lenin had of it before the October Revolution” (p.18).
“The dictatorship of the proletariat has become something quite different from its founders’ original conception. This evolution was inevitable” (p.198).
Why was this evolution inevitable? Because Bauer had found that Stalinism was suited to building socialism. He expressed this in striking terms:
“The transition from the capitalist mode of production to the socialist mode of production requires many years. In order for this process to proceed undisturbed and uninterrupted, a stable state power is required. It must be stable enough to guard the process of social transformation from popular criticism midway in its development, when the masses have begun to feel acutely the temporary sacrifices it entails without yet appreciating the gains it promises. This process can be subjected to popular criticism only when the fruits of the socialist revolution have ripened.
“The dictatorship changed ... its function. It enforced the needs of the future of the proletariat against the present wants of the individual proletarians. This task obviously could not be accomplished by a dictatorship of Soviets. Since their members could be recalled at any moment, they would always base their decisions on egoistic desires, on the limited conceptions and immediate wants of their constituents. This task could be mastered only by a one-party dictatorship with an all-powerful police, military, and bureaucratic apparatus. It could only be accomplished by a dictatorship setting its goals on the basis of a knowledge of the future evolution and interests of the proletariat but imposing the means necessary for the realization of these goals even on recalcitrant strata of the proletariat ... Only an iron dictatorship over the party itself could guarantee that it would maintain the unwavering tenacity and perseverance necessary to attain its end” (pp.192-193).
He was opposed to terror against the bourgeoisie in the 1920s but for terror against the workers who had “egoistic desires, limited conceptions and immediate wants” in the 1930s. Thus, Otto Bauer capitulated to the Soviet bureaucracy.
But this capitulation never involved accepting Lenin’s ideas on the special role of the party as the revolutionary vanguard of the working class, nor on the relations between the party and the class, nor on the failure of the Social Democracy in August 1914. Bauer made numerous criticisms of the Social Democracy without personally disassociating himself from it. But he never got to the root of its problem. According to him the main responsibility for Social Democratic reformism belonged to – the working class!
Again we find Otto Bauer citing the “inevitable and the necessary.” Reformism, he says, is not the influence of bourgeois ideology on the working class nor the betrayal of the leaders of the workers parties. It is the ideology of “the Marxist who has understood that reformist ideology and tactics are a necessary and inevitable phase of the development of working-class consciousness in given conditions” (p.273).
“Reformism ... was not, as Lenin said, ‘the ideological subjection of the working class by the bourgeoisie.’ It was the tactics and ideology of the working class itself in a historical situation ...” (p.223).
“Reformist socialism is merely the inevitable ideology of the workers movement in a given stage of its development” (p. 271).
Here is the main lesson the man who swallowed Stalin’s terror drew from the split resulting from the position the Social Democrats took in August 1914 – it was all the Bolsheviks’ fault: “The Bolsheviks provoked splits in all countries and unleashed fratricidal struggle” (p.249). In all his oscillations Otto Bauer showed one constant – the working class had no revolutionary capacities; it was an amorphous mass preoccupied with its “egoistic desires” and “immediate wants.” It was for this reason that the Socialist party leaderships appealed to the workers to fight their class brothers in 1914.
Then after the Bolshevik conquest of power, which the working class achieved because it was full of “illusions,” socialism had to be constructed by means of “an all-powerful police, military, and bureaucratic apparatus setting its goals on the basis of a knowledge of the future evolution and interests of the proletariat but imposing the means necessary for the realization of these goals even on recalcitrant strata of the proletariat.”
The betrayal of 1914 was “inevitable and necessary,” and so not a betrayal; bourgeois democracy – “inevitable and necessary”; the victory of Hitler – “inevitable and necessary”; the Stalin regime, etc. ...
How right Lenin was to see in Otto Bauer’s Marxism an abyss of “stupidity, pedantry, baseness and betrayal of working-class interests – and that, moreover, under the guise of ‘defending’ the idea of ‘world revolution’.” (“Left-Wing” Communism, An Infantile Disorder). Not a word need be changed in this judgment, which applies to the Austro-Marxists of bygone days and the post-Stalinists of today.
 

talin Phenomenon by Pierre Frank 1977


Pierre Frank 1977
The Stalin Phenomenon 
Source: International, Volume 4, no 1, Autumn 1977. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
At last we can say, without being accused of anti-Sovietism, that in Moscow they imprison people because of their political opinions. At last we can say that The Confession is not an anti-communist film. At last we can protest against the foul blow dealt at Wolf Biermann by the government of the GDR. All this is possible today, now that Marchais has given the go-ahead. But why is it that what was yesterday still anti-communism and anti-Sovietism is no longer so today? From Marchais and the French Communist Party (PCF) leadership, today as yesterday, we get only peremptory statements, not explanations. Today as yesterday, we have to take their word for it.
If we want to know more about Stalinism, we have to turn to the man who is today the accredited historian of the PCF, Jean Elleinstein, Assistant Director of the CERM (Centre for Marxist Studies and Research  –  an institution officially sponsored by the PCF), one of whose tasks is the training of PCF cadres on the question of the USSR. Moreover, he was recently the PCF candidate in the by-election in the fifth arrondissement of Paris, symbolising particularly the ‘line of the Twenty-Second Congress’ of the party. Armed with so many titles, he recently gave an account, The Limits and Significance of the Khrushchev Report. About a year ago he published a book entitled The Stalin Phenomenon [1] which enables us to understand the limits and significance of the ‘anti-Stalinism’, if not of its author, at least of the PCF. For Elleinstein did not publish this book on such a delicate subject without having previously obtained the imprimatur of Place du Colonel Fabien. [2]
This book contains many facts which make it very useful for convincing a Communist Party member who is incredulous with regard to the innumerable crimes of Stalin, the place occupied by Trotsky in the October Revolution and the creation of the Red Army, the lies emanating from Moscow concerning the situation in the Soviet Union, and so on. What an enormous difference from the literature of the past! Unquestionably it would produce a shock effect on anyone who has for years swallowed totally apologetic prose, and has been dazzled by brightly-lit scenarios devoid of the slightest shadow.
With this objective, it is necessary to make extensive use of this book, as was recommended by an article that appeared in the magazine Quatrième Internationale. [3] We are going to deal with this book too, to show not what it can be useful for, but what in it must be rejected. Because, for anyone who did not wait for Elleinstein to come along to find out many of these things, his book is still not a truthful history of the Soviet Union and Stalinism. Just as a bottle which is half-full is also half-empty, a book dealing with history which contains even a few half-truths is still a book which lies. We shall not go through The Stalin Phenomenon page by page in order to pick out all the points which require clarification or correction (there would be too many), nor shall we discuss the distinction that Elleinstein makes between the terms ‘Stalin phenomenon’ and ‘Stalinism’. We are not concerned with questions of semantics, but with his use of these terms in explaining what happened yesterday and what is happening today in the Soviet Union.
What He Has Retained of Stalinism
One point should be noted from the start: while Elleinstein recognises the role of Trotsky in the October Revolution, he is as dishonestly anti-Trotskyist now as in the past: ‘We must realise that the Trotskyism of 1931 was not that of 1975, which is distinguished by anti-Sovietism and a dogmatic, backward-looking strategy.’ (p 94) He provides no proof for such statements, especially not the charge of anti-Sovietism. For him ‘outdatedness’ is simply our revolutionary strategy as opposed to the reformist road to socialism.
But anti-Trotskyism is not all that Elleinstein has retained of Stalinism. To that must be added the method of choosing the opponents who suit him, in the style of those ‘weeks of Marxist thought’ where the Stalinists are fond of discussing with all sorts of philosophical, historical and economic currents, while systematically ignoring those Marxists who do not align themselves politically on the current line of the PCF. He is just a little more skilful: he chooses what suits him in, for example, Trotsky or Deutscher, in order to shatter a Bettelheim. Nor does he hesitate to resort to amalgams to combat Trotskyism, talking, for example, about ‘an Italian Trotskyite, Rizzi’ (p 178), when it is common knowledge that the latter fought against Trotsky’s analysis of the Soviet Union as a workers’ state, and that Trotsky refuted at length Rizzi’s theories, later taken up by Burnham, on ‘bureaucratic collectivism’. Starting from an erroneous sentence of Rakovsky’s concerning the Soviet Union, he falsely states that ‘in The Revolution Betrayed Trotsky did not seem sure’ about the characterisation of the Soviet Union as a workers’ state (p 178).
As regards the person of Stalin, he does his best to promote him: ‘Stalin, on the eve of the Revolution, was charged with all sorts of tasks, including in the realm of international relations...’ (French edition, p 46) [4] This last suggestion is simply not true! Stalin only left Russia for two or three short stays abroad, on the occasion of Russian congresses, and to write a pamphlet on the national question. Not exactly ‘international relations’. He also makes of Stalin ‘a talented populariser’ of Marxism (p 65). By contrast, he states that Trotsky ‘was capable of greatness in troubled waters, in calm waters he was always mediocre’ (p 54).
Elleinstein, rather like Alice in Wonderland, has some upside-down criteria of talent and mediocrity  –  and of the nature of historical periods, too. For our author, the period of the Revolution from 1917 to 1923 is one of ‘troubled waters’, while that of Stalinism, when all the old Bolsheviks and millions of Soviet citizens (he admits the figure) were liquidated, is one of ‘calm waters’.
A Distorted History 
At a stretch, let us concede Elleinstein the right to be mistaken about people and historical periods; he has the right not to like revolutionary storms and to prefer stagnant waters. But is it possible to distort the events which marked the rise of Stalinism more grossly than by writing ‘it is very significant that not one of the party leaders  –  despite the disagreements they may have had in the 1923-27 period  –  questioned the political institutions set up in 1922’ (p 53)?
This is manifestly untrue: on the one hand, Trotsky and, on the other, 46 other Bolshevik leaders demanded democratisation of the party as early as 1923; this demand was reformulated in 1926 and 1927 by the Joint Opposition in a platform which also envisaged a substantial reduction in the state apparatus. Of this essential document Elleinstein has not a word to say. Nor does he tell the reader that, as far back as 1923 (in the case of Trotsky, as early as his 1922 report to the Twelfth Congress of the CPSU), the Opposition had been demanding industrialisation and planning. About this period he emphasises only the fact that Bukharin, unlike Stalin, wanted to proceed slowly with industrialisation of the country, and expresses his astonishment that Stalin should have launched into it at full speed. Short of referring to Trotsky, or even to Deutscher, whom he must consider too favourable to Trotsky, he could have based himself on Professor EH Carr (whose works he mentions only when they fit in with his theses)  –  a non-Marxist historian, but one who has both very conscientiously gathered an enormous amount of documentation and very skilfully utilised it to write the history of the Soviet Union. He would have seen: (a) that planning and industrialisation were accepted only after a five-year struggle by the Opposition against Stalin and Bukharin  –  the latter claiming to be building socialism even ‘at a snail’s pace’ (Fifteenth Conference of the CPSU); (b) that both Stalin and Bukharin denied the kulak danger until the end of 1927; (c) that like the short-sighted bureaucrat he was, Stalin only began to make a turn about that time when he actually ran up against the obstacle, and then he embarked on a policy apparently close to that of the Opposition but with methods and rhythms which the latter had not at all advocated. Further on we will give still more examples of Elleinstein’s manner of writing history.
It is true, on the other hand, that he correctly stresses the inadequate realisation of democracy, which did not take long to leave its mark on the progress of the Russian Revolution, ‘... insufficient democracy lies at the origin of the growth and triumph of the Stalin phenomenon’ (p 101). He says, also very correctly, that the conditions of the Civil War, added to the historical backwardness of Tsarist Russia, acted strongly against democratic development in the country. But he insists on pushing the demonstration too far, thereby proceeding, whether intentionally or not, to an old argument of Social Democratic origin which has been taken up by all the enemies of Bolshevism.
It Was Lenin’s Fault Too!
Besides the objective conditions, Elleinstein argues, a certain responsibility for this absence of democracy, and hence for the ‘Stalin phenomenon’, devolves upon Lenin: 
The Russian and Soviet... experiment did not proceed via political democracy... Even Lenin, whose approach to this problem was, however, based on a sound theoretical understanding, always underestimated its importance because he started from his own experience in Russia and only assimilated democratic experiences from the outside... [He]... can only visualise them through the distorted and distorting prism of his own experience... (p 122)
In 1918, and even in 1923, Lenin could not possibly know that, whilst socialism was a period of transition from capitalism to communism, it would last for decades and decades and that the state would take on an even greater role. (p 123)
What monstrous errors there are in these few lines. Thus Lenin, who wanted every cook to be able to fill governmental functions, always (that is what Elleinstein writes) underestimated the importance of democracy because he wore Russian spectacles which deformed his own experience! Not like those good French democrats, in the style of Marchais, who have good eyesight and distinguish things clearly in the limpid atmosphere of democracy and bourgeois parliamentarianism. Poor Rosa Luxemburg too, who, while polemicising at length against Lenin, on, among other questions, workers’ democracy, ridiculed those who considered ‘the farmyard of bourgeois democracy as the agency called upon to realise the most formidable social transformation in history’.
The second quotation from Elleinstein contains a whole Stalinist revision of Marxism. Neither Marx nor Lenin (in The State and Revolution) said that ‘socialism was a period of transition from capitalism to communism in which the state would play a more and more substantial role’. They talked about two stages of communist society  –  a lower one which they qualified as socialist, and another, higher, which they called communist society proper. They differentiated these two stages by the fact that: (a) in the lower stage, the principle of distribution is ‘for equal work, an equal quantity of products’, which still implies ‘the narrow horizon of bourgeois right'; whereas the higher stage will be characterised by the maxim ‘from each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs'; (b) in the higher stage of communism, in fact in the realm of abundance, the state will totally disappear, while in the lower stage, as early as the taking of power by the proletariat, the state will only begin to disappear:
The current, widespread, mass, if one may say so, conception of the ‘withering away’ of the state undoubtedly means toning down, if not repudiating, revolution. Such an ‘interpretation’, however, is the crudest distortion of Marxism... Engels speaks here of the proletarian revolution ‘abolishing’ the bourgeois state, while the words about the state withering away refer to the remnants of the proletarian state after the socialist revolution. According to Engels the bourgeois state does not ‘wither away’ but is ‘abolished’ by the proletariat in the course of the revolution. What withers away after this revolution is the proletarian state or semi-state... This ‘withering away'... is referred to by Engels quite clearly and definitely as belonging to the period after ‘the state has taken possession of the means of production in the name of the whole of society’, that is, after the socialist revolution... The supersession of the bourgeois state by the proletarian state is impossible without a violent revolution. The abolition of the proletarian state, that is, of the state in general, is impossible except through the process of ‘withering away’. [5]
The theory of Marx and Engels on the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat, in the period immediately following the taking of power, started, it is true, from the notion that revolution would come about in a developed capitalist society. The problem was complicated by the fact that neither Russia nor the other countries where capitalism has been abolished were developed capitalist countries (excepting Czechoslovakia and East Germany, where the overthrow was accomplished essentially by outside military intervention). Because of this, these societies, where it was necessary first of all to carry out the task of ‘primitive accumulation’ that the preceding regime had not fulfilled, are today still societies in transition to socialism (the lower stage of communism), rather than socialist societies proper.
Most important of all, neither Marx nor Lenin envisaged that, after the taking of power, social inequalities would be accentuated and the state would play a more and more substantial role  –  as was the case under Stalin, who tried to justify his policies theoretically. It was he who maintained as early as 1935 that ‘socialism’ had been achieved in the Soviet Union, and that it was going to proceed to the next phase, that of communism. It was also he who invented the ‘theory’ that the further one advances in building socialism, the more the class struggle sharpens, leading not to the ‘withering away’ of the state, but to its strengthening as a repressive apparatus, through, among other things, the Moscow Trials. On this plane, Elleinstein has retained virtually all of Stalinist ‘theory’, but he does not want the repression: it’s illogical on his part. We may be mistaken, but we do not think we came across a single reference in his book to the withering away of the state.
To Afford the Luxury of a Revolution...
According to Elleinstein, the circumstances which led Lenin to underestimate democracy and to regard its violation as a norm of the socialist revolution also produced the strategic error of the Comintern for the advanced capitalist countries. In fact... 
What appeared to be the norm in 1919 was to be revealed as exceptional over the following years, and as a result the overall strategy (originally) adopted by the Communist International proved not to correspond to the facts of the real situation in the capitalist countries. On the other hand, it was to correspond much more closely with the situation in the colonial countries, where the national liberation movement was capable of pushing people towards the socialist revolution along paths which were historically different from those of the Russian Revolution, but resembled it in as much as democratic processes played a small part. (p 124)
The strategic schema, that is, speaking clearly, the revolutionary road, is supposedly the exception; but has the other solution, the parliamentary road of gradual development of bourgeois democracy, which is meant to be not the exception but the rule, ever given victory to socialism? That is a question that Elleinstein does not ask himself. Should the revolutionary road have been followed in France and Italy after the Second World War? Let us listen to our strategist of socialism: 
These two countries had been liberated by the Anglo-Saxons, and even if their peoples had so wished, which was not the case, they could not afford the luxury of a revolution which the Americans and British would have drowned in blood without the USSR being able to intervene... (p 141)
‘The luxury of a revolution’  –  to allow yourself that, you have to be Vietnamese, faced by half-a-million GIs, after having fought Japanese and French troops. Good Europeans, whose ancestors won them some rather fragile democratic rights which do not please the Ku Klux Klan and Nazis of all stripes, cannot reach socialism via the revolution. Instead, they will have luxury coaches to take them there.
What, too, can one say about the ‘slight importance of democratic processes’ for the countries which were colonised before overthrowing capitalism? They can put up with a cut-price socialism. It’s not exactly a racist statement, but it stinks all the same.
Thermidor
We come now to another example where Elleinstein, speaking as an historian, tries to pass off Stalinism as the strengthening of the socialist revolution, which Trotsky supposedly didn’t understand: 
Trotsky had not grasped the fact that Thermidor was the prolongation of the bourgeois revolution with other forms, other methods, and even with other men. Bonaparte consolidated the bourgeois revolution just as Stalin was carrying on the socialist revolution. (p 87)
The notion of Thermidor was employed in the Soviet Union in a way that was often confused during the years of the rise of Stalinism. In February 1935, Trotsky admitted this and wrote a self-critical pamphlet to give his definitive opinion on the question. We can read there the following:
Thermidor in 1794 produced a shift of power from certain groups in the Convention to other groups, from one section of the victorious ‘people’ to other strata. Was Thermidor counter-revolutionary? The answer to this question depends upon how wide a significance we attach, in a given case, to the concept of ‘counter-revolution’. The social overturn of 1789 to 1793 was bourgeois in character. In essence it reduced itself to the replacement of fixed feudal property by ‘free’ bourgeois property. The counter-revolution ‘corresponding’ to this revolution would have had to attain the re-establishment of feudal property. But Thermidor did not even make an attempt in this direction. Robespierre sought his support among the artisans, the Directory among the middle bourgeoisie. Bonaparte allied himself with the banks. All these shifts  –  which had, of course, not only a political, but also a social significance  –  occurred, however, on the basis of the new bourgeois society and state. Thermidor was reaction in operation on the social foundation of the revolution... The present-day Kremlin Bonapartism we juxtapose, of course, to the Bonapartism of bourgeois rise and not decay... From the standpoint that interests us, the difference in the social basis of the two Bonapartisms, of Jacobin and of Soviet origin, is much more important. In the former case, the question involved was the consolidation of the bourgeois revolution through the liquidation of its principles and political institutions. In the latter case, the question involved is the consolidation of the worker-peasant revolution through the smashing of its international programme, its leading party, its soviets... Napoleon waged a struggle not only against the feudal world but also against the ‘rabble’ and the democratic circles of the petty and middle bourgeoisie... Stalin guards the conquests of the October Revolution not only against the feudal-bourgeois counter-revolution but also against the claims of the toilers, their impatience and their dissatisfaction; he crushes the left wing that expresses the ordered historical and progressive tendencies of the unprivileged working masses; he creates a new aristocracy by means of an extreme differentiation in wages, privileges, ranks, etc. [6]
We can see that Trotsky really had not ‘grasped’ the significance of the bourgeois Thermidor and that of the Stalinist Thermidor! He would have needed the illumination of an Elleinstein to do that. ‘Under other forms, with other methods, indeed with other men’, the latter tells us. Then how? Stalin ‘continued’ the socialist revolution by eliminating every atom of democracy in the Soviet Union and by executing the overwhelming majority of the leaders of and participants in the October Revolution. Everyone consolidates the revolution in their own way.
The Nature of the ‘Stalin Phenomenon’
But what then is at the bottom of this ‘Stalin phenomenon’, according to our historian? He has a sentence which deserves to be passed on to posterity: ‘It was a phenomenon restricted in terms of time and place and not an historical necessity universally true of socialism, whether past, present or future.’ (p 60)
A phenomenon ‘limited in time and place'? In this earthly world of ours, what is there, apart from the Holy Ghost, phantoms, ectoplasms and suchlike, which is not ‘limited in time and place’. Socialism and communism will be too. Certainly, Stalinism was not an inevitable, fatal, necessity, even in the Soviet Union  –  the Trotskyists said so a long time ago and that is precisely why Trotsky and the Opposition fought against Stalinism from the moment that it took its first steps. What then is the social nature of this phenomenon ‘limited in time and place'? Elleinstein calls into question the party and state bureaucracy, but he does so in terms that have to be closely studied:
* The number of civil servants increased to a significant and unproductive extent. Often party full-time workers and functionaries in the state machine enjoyed material, political and intellectual advantages which gave them certain privileges compared to other people. However, since it is contrary to the facts, one may hardly talk of a new class of ‘privileged’ bureaucrats, as did some Trotskyites in the 1930s and later. (p 83)
It may be conceded that a  –  minimal  –  part of the product of labour which was not shared out among wage-earners (in the form of wages) and which the state took was monopolised to a disproportional extent by the state and party functionaries. Indeed, this is a consequence of the phenomenon of bureaucracy, but the difference between this and talk of surplus-value and a bureaucratic class is huge. These benefits... enable some people to live better than the other Soviet citizens... but for all that, this does not constitute the creation of a bureaucratic class. Social injustice does exist under socialism, that is true, but how utopian it was to have thought it could not. (pp 179-80)
It’s true that the Stalin phenomenon was bureaucratic, but that means that the role played by offices was more important than that of the masses and that administrative decisions outweighed economic stimuli. This meant that the economy could be mismanaged, the towns badly administered, and the kolkhozes badly run, because decisions were taken by civil servants who were incompetent, irresponsible, or who either did not face up to their responsibilities, or who were corrupt... This evil is not specifically socialist ... It is observed in all the capitalist countries. (p 180)
In the first place, what is ‘contrary to the truth’ is to attribute to Trotsky and the Trotskyists, including those of today, the opinion that the Soviet bureaucracy is a class. How many disputes and how many splits has the Fourth International known on this question of whether the bureaucracy is a new class or a privileged social category of the workers’ state! The army and the church constitute not classes, but social categories. But that does not prevent them, in certain circumstances, from running a society based, for example, on capitalist property relations. In the Soviet Union, property relations are of a socialist character; nevertheless it is not the proletariat but the bureaucracy which, since Stalin, has despotically run this society.
In the second place, Elleinstein deliberately minimises the advantages and privileges enjoyed by the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. He says, moreover, that you have to be a utopian to think that social injustices could not exist under socialism. That is true, but it is not the point. Under Stalin, the regime did not struggle, as it should have done, against social injustices in the construction of socialism; it increased them. Its whole policy went in that direction, at the expense of the workers. Here again Elleinstein revises Marx and Lenin, forgetting that they enthusiastically approved of the decision of the Paris Commune to pay its elected representatives and functionaries a salary not exceeding that of a skilled worker, as a means of struggle against bureaucracy. The young Soviet regime, despite itself, was not able to do as much. Because of scarcity and the defection of cadres of the state and the economy, it was able, in the first few years, to respect this norm only in the case of members of the Communist Party. Even this rule was revoked when Stalin became master of the party.
In the last analysis, Elleinstein sees in the bureaucracy not a privileged social category, but only bad methods, incompetent and irresponsible people  –  just like in a capitalist society. But, under a capitalist regime as well as in the Soviet Union, there is no shortage of competent, responsible, uncorrupted bureaucrats. You cannot explain a social regime or political structures by means of individual blemishes. Elleinstein differs totally from the Trotskyist conception of the regime in the Soviet Union as one based on a privileged bureaucracy, which, to maintain itself and extend its privileges, struck ruthlessly and executed those who took up the defence of working-class demands. Unable to find a stable social position corresponding to the new relations of production, this bureaucracy found itself forced to try to set up a supreme arbiter in the person of an individual around whom it celebrated a cult.
Socialism in One Country
Elleinstein takes up the defence of the ‘theory’ of ‘socialism in one country’: 
The opposition, in 1923 or in 1925-26, was greatly at fault not to grasp the necessity of this slogan, which the rural masses could understand because it implied the renunciation of offensive revolutionary war and adventurism. (p 57)
Socialism in one country was the only possible path just after the defeat of the revolution in Europe. (p 187)
He invokes, not the sophisms that Bukharin came up with to justify ‘socialism in one country’, but more prosaic themes. Basically, for him, to be a partisan of the international revolution is to be an adventurer who advocates an offensive revolutionary war  –  which is a dishonest distortion of the opinions of the Opposition. For him, it was necessary to manufacture an ideology for the peasants and more generally for the exhausted masses  –  an ideology which clearly suited bureaucrats who felt that the revolution had lasted long enough and that it was time to rescue the privileges and other advantages necessary for a better life.
Elleinstein recognises that Hitler’s coming to power ‘was a field in which Stalin bore a heavy responsibility’ (p 91). But he fails to see that the Stalinist policy of the so-called ‘Third Period’, which furthered Hitler’s victory by opposing the workers’ united front against Nazism, was one of the most harmful fruits of the ‘theory’ of ‘socialism in one country’. Stalin considered that in order to build this socialism in peace within the frontiers of the Soviet Union, the coming to power of Nazism (which, it seemed to him, would create an unstable regime) was preferable to the existence of a government including the Social Democratic adjunct of world imperialism.
On this subject, let us add that Elleinstein presents Bukharin as having recognised, in contrast to Stalin, the danger that Nazism represented for the Soviet Union. In support of this argument he invokes a few lines of a speech made at the Seventeenth Congress of the CPSU in 1934 (thus after the coming to power of Hitler)  –  lines which are, moreover, drowned in a eulogy of Stalin, and which advance no alternative policy to his. On the other hand, Elleinstein devotes not a line, not one word of his book to the very numerous and remarkable texts of Trotsky between 1929 and 1933, warning against the danger of Hitlerism and advocating a United Front of the Communist and Social Democratic parties to combat it, [7] texts which earned him the most infamous Stalinist calumnies, paving the way for the future ‘Moscow Trials’. [8]
Still in the realm of Stalin’s foreign policy, let us mention, to finish with, another lie  –  there is no other word for it  –  from our historian of the ‘Stalin phenomenon’. After the coming to power of Hitler, it was necessary, according to him, to turn to another policy: ‘The only strategy likely to bar the way to Nazism and the other kinds of Fascism: “Democracy or Fascism.”’ (p 92) The policy which resulted from this was the Popular Front. But, he adds: ‘The Seventh Congress of the Comintern in 1935 confirmed this approach [the Popular Front]. Unfortunately the Stalin phenomenon hindered the application of this new policy and largely prevented its being given the required theoretical dimension.’ (p 204)
This is quite untrue: the policy of the Popular Front, particularly in France and Spain, was never hindered by Stalin. We have found no reference in Elleinstein’s book to the Spanish Revolution, where the Popular Front strategy of ‘democracy or fascism’ was applied, with the results that we know. Those who argued at the time, in a more or less developed fashion, that to defeat fascism it was necessary not to rely on bourgeois democracy, since fascism fed on precisely the inability of bourgeois democracy to shore up the capitalist system; those who said that fascism could only be defeated by carrying through a socialist revolution, were accused then of being ‘Hitlero-Trotskyists’. The Moscow Trials, the first one of which practically coincided with the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, were in fact so many dagger-blows dealt by Stalin against the Spanish Revolution, just as much as against the Soviet Union itself.
Survivals of Stalinism... In the Psychiatric Hospitals
Before we turn to investigate Stalinism nearer home, we may ask: what has become of the Soviet Union today? Here is what Elleinstein says: 
The manifestations of ‘new Stalinism’ which are to be found there [in the Soviet Union] are survivals from the past, manifestations which recur as a result of habits, established administrative structures and of mental attitudes which, as is well known, are hard to change. (p 217)
The publications banned by the censorship, the deportations to the camps, the expulsions from the country, the internment of oppositionists in psychiatric hospitals, the military intervention in Czechoslovakia to impose a new Central Committee on the Communist Party, etc... all these are only survivals from the past, due, like the whole of the ‘Stalin phenomenon’, to the habits of Russians who have never known democracy. Besides, it’s so difficult to change people’s mentality... I could be listening to my grocer: in these words of Elleinstein his petty-bourgeois mentality is revealed in all its nakedness.
Is the aim of the workers’ movement not to change society, and thus habits, attitudes of mind, morals? If the leaders of the Soviet Union are particularly inert in this field, what should the working masses of that country do? What programme does Elleinstein propose to them? On that point you will find nothing in his book. We presume that this is done in the name of non-interference in the affairs of a fraternal party, that hypocritical formula which has permitted the Western Communist Parties to sing the praises of the Soviet Union on every subject, no matter how irrelevant, but to say nothing about the crimes that have been committed: at the very most today, several decades later, they can manage to say rather unconvincingly that they no longer approve of certain actions of the Kremlin leaders; no more than that.
It’s the Fault of the Comintern and Others!
Let us leave the internal and external policies of Stalin on the governmental level, because there is more to the ‘Stalin phenomenon’ than that. In spite of the ‘theory’ of socialism in one country, Stalinism did not remain confined within the borders of the Soviet Union and did not refrain from interference in fraternal parties; on the contrary, it affected every Communist Party in the world. What Elleinstein writes on this subject is, let us say, at least as inexact as what he writes on the Soviet Union. Why did the Communist Parties faithfully follow Stalin in all his lies and crimes? For Elleinstein, it was quite simply the fault of the Comintern: 
The foreign Communist Parties claimed that they were lies and bourgeois propaganda... information mainly filtered through via Soviet turncoats who had fled to the West (Krivitsky, Orlov, Kravchenko), via Trotsky and Trotskyites, and via university study centres in the imperialist countries... The Communist Parties and their leaders had all been trained by the Comintern. The Communist International had made the unconditional defence of the Soviet Union one of the pillars of its policy... (p 152)
It was also a little the fault of Stalin’s victims: 
How could people have any doubts about the plot when they heard Zinoviev or Kamenev declare that they were agents of the Gestapo and had plotted the assassination of members of the Politburo... (p 109)
Add the ‘Cold War’ and you will understand how ‘so many people of good will, especially abroad’ could have been taken in for so long by Stalin (pp 86-87). It is true that a very large number of workers believed all the lies, believed all the Stalinist infamies. But what can one say of those ‘well-meaning’ leaders of the Communist Parties who, even well after the Comintern had been dissolved, did not know, did not know a thing! As we check these pages, the Political Bureau of the PCF has just said that it kept silent about the Khrushchev Report because its delegation to the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU was asked to say nothing. Today, it is their turn to confess, to make ‘confessions’ that no one and no terror has extracted from them; they knew, but they said nothing, and that did not start in 1956. Certainly all the members of the Central Committee ‘did not know’ in quite the same way. Perhaps some particularly unintelligent ones even understood nothing of what was going on. But the real leaders, the ones on the Political Bureau, knew; they knew very well what was happening in the Soviet Union and they approved  –  these fine people, who claim to be highly qualified, indeed the only qualified, leaders of the workers’ movement, were nevertheless incapable of seeing that in the Soviet Union the Kremlin was committing crimes against socialism. They knew  –  we would like to give a proof which has probably escaped the person who provided it. During the recent discussion which followed the showing of the film The Confession on French television, Arthur London, the author of the book, [9] was asked by a viewer why he had not proclaimed his innocence before the tribunal which judged him, why he had not repudiated the statements which had been forced out of him under torture. His reply was, in essence: such an action would have been of no use. I remembered that when Krestinsky  –  the former Soviet Ambassador to Berlin and former Secretary of the Bolshevik Party  –  had tried to retract his statements, they had cut off the microphone and taken him out of the court; and at the following session he confessed to everything they had made him say. This happened at the third ‘Moscow Trial’ in 1938, where Krestinsky was a defendant along with Bukharin and others. Thus London had noticed this incident and still remembered it 20 years later, thereby showing that in his heart of hearts he knew the essence of what had happened in Moscow during those years of the apogee of Stalinism. Like other Communist leaders, he probably did not understand the motives behind Stalin’s policies  –  his book illustrates that he has grasped the mechanism of the regime but not what Stalinism is; but it was a situation in the face of which he considered himself powerless and which he thought he would be able to get through with the hope that nothing would happen to him personally.
They Knew and They Used the Same Methods
Not only did top leaders like Thorez know, but they applied similar methods, and policies identical to those of Stalin, minus state power. Elleinstein tries to tone down as much as possible the PCF’s policies and methods, to the point of changing their basic features: 
Even the Western Communist Parties practised it [the Stalin cult] in a modified form. (p 199)
There was undoubtedly a certain sliding in the attitude of the PCF towards Stalin, whose cult it had been induced to celebrate on several occasions... On the theoretical level it had not been spared from Stalinist dogmatism, but it would be contrary to the truth to derive from that an argument against the policies followed by the PCF, which in fact had a profoundly democratic practice. (French edition, p 245)
It is all rather like the case of the unfortunate virgin who gave birth to a child, but only such a little one... Elleinstein’s formulas are so convoluted that the reader may imagine the PCF to have practised only the cult of Stalin and not that of Thorez. Only he has forgotten the bulletins and campaigns of recruitment to ‘the party of Maurice Thorez’, the domestic servants, the villas and other little gifts for the ‘first Stalinist of France’.
Rouge has already recalled the methods employed against Marty and Tillon, described by the latter in a book quite appropriately entitled A Moscow Trial in Paris. Tillon made ‘confessions’ after having been forced to write text after text until he produced one that suited the leadership. He thus with difficulty secured for himself a paltry pardon. Later, when in May 1968 he plucked up courage again, defended the ‘Marcellin-Leftists’ [10] and denounced the treatment to which he had been subjected, he was expelled. As for Marty, who consistently refused to yield to this treatment, to real moral torture, he was witch-hunted out of the party as a ‘policeman'; today, they will tell you, mezzo-voce, that he was a bad character. Policeman or bad character, such a minor distinction! The ‘cases’ of Marty and Tillon had nothing to do with the ‘defence of the USSR’. All the same, it is Elleinstein who tells us that the PCF always respected democracy...
Let us take another example. In his book Elleinstein writes: ‘In biology, Lysenko became the high priest of an anti-scientific “church” which criticised Mendel’s theses, which were considered to be idealistic.’ (p 149)
Lysenko ‘criticised’ Mendel’s theses. What a euphemism! A ‘criticism’ which consisted of driving from the laboratories, and even having imprisoned, a whole top layer of Soviet scientists! But is the PCF white as the driven snow on this question? In default of knowing what happened in the Soviet Union, the ‘historian’ Elleinstein ought at least to know the history of his own party. When Lysenko’s star appeared in the Moscow firmament, there was, among the members of the Central Committee of the PCF, a scholar, biologist and Sorbonne professor, who had furthermore belonged to the general staff of the Francs-Tireurs during the Resistance: his name was Marcel Prenant. He stood up against Lysenko’s theses, saying that they were not scientifically grounded. Another member of the Central Committee, Aragon, whose qualifications in the realm of biology are still unknown to the world, published a special number of the magazine Europe in support of Lysenko’s theses. It was Prenant who was excluded from the Central Committee, the first step towards his departure from the party. But Aragon is still there, and no one has yet heard the slightest ‘self-criticism’ from him or from the party on the Lysenko question.
We could easily write page after page on various subjects, with plenty of quotations in support, to illustrate to what degree the PCF followed Stalin  –  this party which, even among other Communist Parties, was considered for a long time (at the least, until two or three years ago) as the Kremlin’s favourite son, just as France was the favourite son of the Catholic Church. We will limit ourselves to a single example of substance.
‘Laissez-les Vivre’
Because there are better and worse examples, it is very much a matter of taste. In his ‘construction’ and ‘consolidation’ of socialism, Stalin made the Soviet Union take a big step back in the spheres of women, the family and children, abandoning the bold attempts of the young revolutionary regime and, among other things, banning abortion in a most scandalous fashion. Trotsky, in The Revolution Betrayed, expressed his indignation in vigorous terms, ‘the philosophy of a priest endowed also with the power of a gendarme’, to condemn the remarks of the Stalinist jurist Soltz, who explained that since there were no unemployed in socialist society, a woman had no right to reject ‘the joys of motherhood’. [11] And what did the leaders of the PCF do on these questions, under the impetus of Maurice Thorez and Jeannette Vermeersch? They unhesitatingly followed in Stalin’s footsteps, condemning abortion and contraceptive methods in terms which  –  minus the reference to socialism  –  would have done credit to the publicists of Laissez-les Vivre (the French equivalent of the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child).
In the 1950s, Jeannette Vermeersch denounced abortion and contraception in the following terms: ‘Working-class women do not seek right of access to the vices of the bourgeoisie.’ François Billoux, in an article in France Nouvelle entitled ‘The Right to Motherhood’, expressed himself thus: ‘We explain to mothers and prospective mothers that the solution to their difficulties does not lie in the clandestine abortion of today, any more than in legal abortion tomorrow, nor in the use of methods of contraception.’ Maurice Thorez carried the question on to a ‘theoretical’ plane: ‘The party cannot adopt an anarchistic theory at the moment when it is making big steps forward as the guide of the nation, bearing the hope of our people.’
At the Fourteenth Congress of the PCF (Le Havre, 1956) he had persuaded the party to adopt theses in which we can read: 
... the ruling classes prefer to propagate the inhuman doctrines of neo-Malthusianism, degrading for the individual, brutal for the country. Neo-Malthusianism, an ultra-reactionary concept, brought back into fashion by the ideologues of American imperialism, is a weapon in the hands of the bourgeoisie, to divert the workers from the struggle for immediate demands, for bread, for socialism.
Neo-Malthusian concepts are one thing, abortion and contraception something else entirely. One can defend the latter without in the slightest sharing neo-Malthusian ideas. In any case, doctors and journalists who were members of the PCF had enormous difficulties with the leadership at this period. There were even expulsions from the party over the question. Today, the PCF is taking up new positions so as not to be left behind the majority of the public opinion. But we have never heard of any ‘self-criticism’ whatsoever by the party. So where were the democratic policies of the PCF? Moreover, despite changes in these fields, the PCF is still today only at the level of the dullest petty-bourgeois morality.
Thorez... Anti-Stalinist
In his zeal to embellish his party and its leaders, Elleinstein pushes things a bit far. Mentioning Thorez’s statement to The Times of 19 November 1946, in which he envisaged the march towards socialism taking other roads than the one followed by the Russian Communists, Elleinstein writes: ‘This statement... nevertheless marked a crucial date in the rejection of Stalinist theory by the General Secretary of one of the most powerful Communist Parties in the capitalist world.’ (p 205)
Thorez, champion of the struggle on the theoretical level against Stalinism  –  now we've seen and heard everything. This statement did not reject Stalinism either theoretically or politically; it simply stated for the first time, after many years of practice, that the policy followed by the PCF was not a revolutionary policy like that of the Russians in 1917, but a reformist policy. As was the case with Social Democracy, this theorisation came several years later, as a confirmation of day-to-day practice.
It seems to us that we have illustrated sufficiently the political limits of the PCF’s ‘anti-Stalinism’, without forgetting that Elleinstein is still the one who so far has advanced the furthest in this domain. All the same, we are going to deal with a typical aspect of the ‘changes’ of the PCF leaders before passing on to an examination of the political significance of their new statements on the subject of Stalin.
No Moral Crisis
Reading Elleinstein’s book, and following the often gross explanations and distortions of someone who has read a lot, probably even more than he would really like to let on, one is tempted to think that he is playing the fool in order to hide opinions that he doesn’t want to express, or doesn’t yet want to express publicly, so as to help the PCF. On the other hand, he has been subjected to criticism by certain elements in the PCF itself. Both Elleinstein and his critics, however, are acting under the aegis of the leadership, for reasons which are not precisely known. At the top of the PCF, disagreements probably exist  –  which are evidently not explicable in terms of a search for scientific truth  –  concerning what can and must be said on the subject of the Soviet Union. If Elleinstein is at the moment committing himself heavily and the party only a little, the leadership must be uncertain of the consequences that these revelations could have for the party.
In any case, and irrespective of his own future, Elleinstein is trying at present to serve the PCF well, with all that it retains of methods inherited from Stalinism. Just like PCF leader Kanapa, who, when asked in the television debate on The Confession mentioned earlier if he had ever written a somewhat outrageous Stalinist sentence, replied: probably, I couldn’t be certain and I'm not ashamed of it, so Elleinstein states: ‘In 1975 it is easier to arrive at a calm evaluation of these matters... Unlike some people, I do not feel that I ruined my youth and sacrificed it for an empty ideal.’ (p 152)
By remarks like these, the Kanapas and Elleinsteins of the PCF show that no moral crisis has touched them. They carried on for years like counterfeiters, buying and selling Stalinism as socialist gold, and now they come along and say, in substance: we did it and we don’t feel any remorse, we were right to do it. In the PCF, moral crises were all very well for a few Central Committee members after they had read the Khrushchev Report. Of course, we do not share Robrieux’s eulogies of Servin, Casanova, Pronteau, etc... or think that they could have succeeded in transforming their party. But it is clear that they really did seek some changes in the behaviour of the PCF, for which Thorez, with the support of the Kanapas of various kinds, broke or expelled them. Moral crises are also fine for those ‘fellow-travellers’, those intellectuals and artists, devoid of any pretensions to political leadership, who only wanted, by giving of their talents and themselves, to support the struggle of the workers for the emancipation of humanity. Grievously duped by the Stalinists, these people, whose crisis is very movingly depicted in Simone Signoret’s book La nostalgie n'est plus ce qu'elle était (Nostalgia Is No Longer What It Used To Be), and who had nothing to reproach themselves with personally  –  these people suffered a great deal. But the men who were really guilty, because they knew that they were lying, today say without shame: we lied, but we were right to lie, because it was for the party.
This ‘Party’ becomes transformed into an entity standing above those who constitute it and above society. Such an attitude reveals that, despite certain shifts in the day-to-day politics of the PCF, its methods remain fundamentally those of Stalinism, even if they are more hypocritical. The recent declaration of the Political Bureau of the PCF on the ‘Khrushchev Report’, stating that the French delegation to the Twentieth Congress was aware of this report but had not spoken about it at the request of the Russians, is of an unheard-of impudence. By this statement they confess that they were under the orders of the Kremlin, keeping quiet about the crimes that had been committed in the Soviet Union, because it had been asked of them. Who is going to believe them when they say they did not know? Had they not kept quiet before at the Russians’ request? And who can believe them when they say: we won’t do it again?
The ‘Aggiornamento’ of the PCF
This enables us to grasp in its deepest sense the present ‘anti-Stalinism’ of the PCF. Just as Pope John XXIII embarked on the Second Vatican Council to check the crisis of the Catholic Church by an ‘aggiornamento’, just as Khrushchev tried to do the same for the Soviet Union at the Twentieth Congress, so it is also an aggiornamento, not a regeneration, that the PCF is undertaking at present, with a fairly noteworthy difference in Khrushchev’s favour, in comparison to Marchais and his Kanapas and Elleinsteins. Because, far from denouncing the unreserved participation of Thorez in all the misdeeds and political crimes of Stalin, they try either to reduce it or to conceal it by silence. In this respect, they are much closer to a Brezhnev than to a Khrushchev.
The argument of the PCF leadership, according to which the party has recognised its error and should no longer have it held against it, is simply laughable. (Let us note in passing the invocation of ‘the party’ in general  –  which spreads the burden of the leadership among the entire membership which had no direct responsibility.) Can the leadership of a party reject, not one or other of its particular political positions, but the whole of its politics and methods in the course of several decades, as one might throw away a pair of worn-out socks? Even more, can it do this while reproaching the Socialist Party for its past? It cannot at the same time accuse the PS of retaining the heritage of Blum and refuse for itself the heritage of Stalin. Neither of the two mass workers’ parties will ever shake off all the betrayals of the cause of socialism that they have perpetrated. Up to now, their history is the history of these betrayals and these crimes.
Without claiming to have exhausted the subject of the present ‘anti-Stalinism’ of the PCF, we must still examine why this aggiornamento is taking place now. Many people have noted that the PCF leadership, for so long the most obstinate of Communist Party leaderships in aligning itself with Moscow, is today one of those who are seeking to mark their divergences on some points with surprising rapidity. As far as it is possible, Marchais today appears even more sharp towards Moscow than Berlinguer. What has made him take the bit between his teeth? The ‘qualities’ of Marchais  –  his vulgarity, his inability to appreciate nuances, a brutality that he controls with difficulty  –  certainly count for something as to the form, but they do not explain the core of the matter. He does not have a Political Bureau at his beck and call in the style of Thorez; decisions on the question of ‘Stalinism’ are probably among those which are most discussed on that body. It is above all reasons specific to the political situation in France that explain the present attitude of the PCF leadership. It has only been behaving like this for two to three years. Why?
A Nail In Its Shoe
When the Common Programme of the Union of the Left was signed, the PCF shouted victory; was this not the outcome of 15 years of efforts to obtain such an agreement with the Socialist Party? Only a greater expansion of the party seemed possible as a result. The PCF had managed for the third time, following the Popular Front of 1935 and the Tripartism of the immediate postwar period, to ally itself with the PS. Each of the preceding operations had resulted in a strengthening or consolidation of the PCF, while the PS had receded, especially within the working class. The PCF had become the ‘first workers’ party’ of France, and even went so far as to claim to be the only workers’ party. The Union of the Left, or so the party leadership thought, was going to have the same effect.
But the result they had been counting on did not materialise. Shortly after the signing of the Common Programme, the opposite happened. From the by-elections of September 1974 onwards, the PS demonstrated that it was regaining strength and winning votes, while the PCF stagnated, and in fact receded a little. These tendencies have been reinforced since then, and the PS has become, on the electoral plane, ‘the first party of France’. Certainly, the PCF is still hegemonic in the factories. But for a party which has not been revolutionary for a long time now, which looks forward to accession to government by electoral and parliamentary means, and even sees this perspective as realisable in the near future, it is a misfortune to lose votes and be left standing by its political ally. For such things affect the number and distribution of ministerial portfolios. The PCF has no alternative policy to that of the Union of the Left. Both the PCF and the PS are stuck with it; and whichever took the initiative of a break would be faced with disaster.
What could the PCF do under such circumstances? As will be remembered, the leadership’s first reaction was to attack the PS vigorously and directly on a whole number of questions; but that gave no results at all. The leadership claimed in the course of its polemics that it did not have to take lessons in democracy from anyone. It was then that it realised its lack of credibility on this question and began to feel its ties with Moscow like a nail in the shoe causing considerable pain every time it took a step. Starting from that moment it has formulated, somewhat noisily, its differences with Moscow, and Elleinstein has been able to write books ‘on the line of the Twenty-Second Congress of the PCF’. For indeed, this line consists of proclaiming urbi et orbi its criticism of Stalinism in the name of the most vulgar bourgeois democracy. To check stagnation and electoral decline, slight though they may be  –  such is the political objective of the PCF leadership. But what it wants to achieve is one thing; the consequences of its line towards Moscow will be quite another.
Who Benefits From the PCF’s ‘Anti-Stalinism'?
For many a long year the PCF has managed to keep several irons in the fire, and it is still doing so. Communist to one person, it was and is democratic to a second, internationalist to a third, revolutionary to a fourth, reformist to a fifth, etc... But that cannot last for ever. As events unfold, irksome setbacks are inevitable. In the field of patriotism, de Gaulle appeared much more credible in the eyes of many voters who had previously supported the PCF  –  as is well known, the party lost nearly a million votes in 1958. Today the pendulum is swinging to the left, and, whether we like it or not, Mitterrand appears, despite his unhappy political past, to be more credible than Marchais on the issues of democracy and parliamentarism. Furthermore, the ‘anti-Stalinist’ campaign of the PCF, far from serving to strengthen it, will above all help the Socialist Party.
When Elleinstein writes that Lenin was mistaken on the question of democracy, that after 1923 the revolutionary perspectives of the PCF became incorrect, that the Comintern should have been dissolved as early as 1935, he is providing, in the shape of ideological arguments, grist for the mill of those who want to ‘reverse the verdict of Tours’ [12]  –  he is fostering a tendency within the PCF to rejoin the PS one of these days. It is very likely that, in the leadership of the PCF, there are those who see the danger in this ‘line of the Twenty-Second Congress’, and who are trying to tone down or efface altogether some of Elleinstein’s arguments  –  which explains some of the criticisms which have been addressed to him from within the party.
In any case, in the framework of the reformist politics of the Union of the Left  –  and the PCF cannot get out of it  –  it is above all the PS which will reap the profit, especially among the broad masses. These masses will certainly not be moved by Elleinstein’s arguments, of which they are unaware, but by much more striking themes. They now find themselves in the presence of two reformist parties, whose political lines on the main problems are close if not identical and whose differences, in any case, do not really justify the existence of two distinct parties. Both of these parties have quite murky pasts, but the PS’s seems to them to be less so than the PCF’s, which includes both the sinister name of Stalin and the ill deeds of his successors. Besides, in electoral terms, it is the Socialist Party which has the greater chance of taking votes from the bourgeois parties and thus benefits from the ‘vote usefully’ approach: Mitterrand, President of the Republic, perhaps; Marchais, definitely not.
But ‘anti-Stalinism’ will not help only the Socialist Party: the PCF has also been losing ground on its left ever since 1968, and things are only beginning. History, that old lady with such a capricious gait, so unexpected, so hesitant, who too often limps along, goes up blind alleys or sinks into quicksand, finally makes at certain moments lightning revolutionary strides that carry her forward. We can predict with certainty, in the light of June 1936 and the great crisis of May 1968, that when she takes such strides again, even if the PCF wanted to manoeuvre by means of some ‘revolutionary’ proposals  –  which would not be an easy thing for it to do  –  it will not be able to profit from them. Just as was the case with de Gaulle and patriotism, or Mitterrand and democracy, its manoeuvres will have the opposite effect. It will be those whom the party and Elleinstein qualify today as dogmatic and outdated, having formerly treated them as ‘Hitlero-Trotskyists’, who will find the ear of the working masses.
Notes
1. Published in France in 1975 and in London by Lawrence and Wishart in 1976. All page references are to the English edition except in two instances where the passage cited has been omitted in translation (see note 4).
2. Place du Colonel Fabien  –  the PCF’s headquarters.
3. See the criticism of this book by JF Godchau in Quatrième Internationale, no 22, Autumn 1975.
4. The Lawrence and Wishart translator must have been aware of the enormity of Elleinstein’s assertion here, since this last phrase, ‘including in the realm of international relations’, is omitted from the English edition  –  without any indication to the reader that this alteration has been made. Perhaps Elleinstein would now like to make clear whether or not he approves the intentions of his English translator.
5. VI Lenin, The State and Revolution (Peking, 1970), pp 19-20. [Available on the MIA at < https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/staterev/ch01.htm >  –  MIA.]
6. LD Trotsky, ‘The Workers’ State, Thermidor and Bonapartism’, Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1934-35 (New York, 1974), pp 168, 181. [Available on the MIA at < http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1935/02/ws-therm-bon.htm >  –  MIA.]
7. See LD Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Penguin, London, 1975).
8. In his book, Elleinstein also makes, with regard to Nazism, an incursion into another realm than that of Stalinism. He writes: ‘The great democratic capitalist states of the West had not grasped the novel character of Nazism and the threat to civilisation that it represented...’ (p 120) Ignorant wretches that we are, we thought that there existed capitalist imperialist democracies, concerned with surplus value, and not ‘democratic capitalist states’, interested in civilisation. It’s probably ‘Trotskyist dogmatism’ to say that Churchill, Roosevelt and de Gaulle made war to defend the positions of their own imperialisms against the claims of German imperialism.
9. For an English translation, see Arthur London, On Trial (London, 1970).
10. This was the slanderous amalgam employed by the PCF leadership to characterise the far left in 1968. Marcellin was then the Gaullist Minister of the Interior.
11. LD Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (Pathfinder edition), p 150. [Available on the MIA at < http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1936/revbet/ch07.htm >  –  MIA.]
12. The congress of the French Socialist Party at Tours in December 1920 voted by a two-to-one majority to adopt the name ‘Communist’ and affiliate to the Comintern. A small right-wing minority split off, retaining the name of the Socialist Party.
 


 Pierre Frank Archive




e Frank: Mr. X Versus de Gaulle (Article 1)




Mr. X  |  P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Mr. X Versus de Gaulle
*
The French Left Unveils Their Candidate Mr. X
PARIS, Jan. 15 – Since the arrival of de Gaulle to power, political life in France has been almost non-existent. The few referendums and elections have left the masses largely indifferent, preoccupied as they are with the daily struggle. (The figure for strike days during 1963 was the highest in ten years.) The workers’ parties receive big votes in the elections but mobilize nobody.
However, the so-called opposition of the left; that is, under the circumstances, the clubs of the politicians, top functionaries, etc., feels that a means has been found to revive political life. This is around the election of the President of the Republic.
It is more than 110 years since a President of the Republic was elected by universal suffrage. The experience of the Second Republic with the election of the man who was to become the second Bonaparte (see Karl Marx, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte), following a coup d’etat, created among republicans a tradition hostile to the election of the head of the state by means of universal suffrage. The fear was that a man backed by a plebiscite would go beyond the parliament. The republican tradition was even opposed to political leadership by the President. On de Gaulle’s gaining power through the coup d’etat of May 13, 1958, the bonapartist tradition replaced the republican tradition, and the President of the Republic is to be elected through universal suffrage.
Legally, the election must take place by 1965, but de Gaulle can precipitate matters at any time. During a recent tour in the provinces, he let it be understood in his usual equivocal way, that he might seek a new mandate. It is likewise not impossible that he will seek reelection not through an electoral campaign but through a referendum.
 
Democratic Pond Stirred Up
For all these reasons, the democratic frogs have been stirring for some time in their little clubs, seeking to settle on a candidate for the presidency from here on out in opposition to the candidacy of de Gaulle.
It should be noted that among these frogs are to be found quite a number of neocapitalists who seek a “modern state”; that is, a “strong” bourgeois state, with a vigorous President of the Republic, in which parliament in the final analysis would play a permissive role. In brief, these gentlemen are not too displeased with the present regime. What they want in place of the arbitrary de Gaulle, who is hostile to the elected intermediary bodies, is a personage who acts in a more regular way with the traditional political circles.
Under present conditions, a candidate running in opposition to de Gaulle does not appear to have any chance of coming out ahead. But our frogs are busy with intricate calculations. There will likely be a candidate of the right who could take about five per cent of the votes. If the candidate of the left obtained a little more than forty per cent of the votes, then taking into account the abstentions, de Gaulle would risk being elected by only a minority instead of an absolute majority, and he would be quite capable of rejecting these results. Even if he doesn’t pull out in a huff, our augurs add, de Gaulle is close to 75; he is not immortal; and it is good to run a candidate to get him known and prepare his triumph over a candidate of the right who will not have much weight once de Gaulle is no longer here.
To all these considerations, there must be added the fact that two big workers’ parties exist, the French Communist party (PCF) and the Socialist party (PS), without whose support a candidate cannot hope to win a massive vote.
The astuteness of these strategists is limitless. It is necessary to find in the Socialist party an adequate personality, one who adheres unquestionably to “socialism,” but who, at the same time, is able to maintain his “independence” in relation to the party. To have him nominated as a candidate by his own party would, under present conditions, tend to force the hand of the leadership of the Communist party. This party, not wanting to bear responsibility for splitting the votes of the left, must likewise hesitate at presenting a Communist candidate who would not be able, given the character of the electoral rules, to register under his name all the votes won by the Communist candidates in the legislative elections.
 
What We Want Is Mr. X
We have not yet come to the end. To have a candidate meeting such qualifications is not sufficient. It is still necessary to find the means of making him acceptable without too much trouble. Looking across the Atlantic, something might be learned, it seems, concerning presidential elections. It is necessary to operate the way advertising campaigns are launched: create the demand, publicize the features of the product in demand, and do this in such a way that the consumers will conclude: the only product I want is the Such and Such brand.
The first part of the operation was launched without a hitch. An opening press campaign raised the disturbing thought: the left runs the greatest risk if it doesn’t have a candidate right now for the presidency of the Republic. Came the second round: we’re not concerned about the name of the candidate; let’s call him “Mr. X” for the time being; but let’s reach agreement on the features he needs!
With the appearance of the very first article, there were plenty of explanations as to what was going on behind the scenes, but that didn’t stop things from proceeding in their course. Those in on the game began to say during the speechmaking windup at some of the truly republican banquets: “For me, ‘X’ can’t be anyone but Deferre.”
On being interviewed, Gaston Deferre, the Mayor of Marseilles, candidly replied, “I don’t know if I was made for that. I’ll have to think it over.”
The timing required a major move, otherwise the campaign could lose momentum and end in something the very opposite of what was wanted. The leadership of the Socialist party was summoned to take a stand. The movement was strong enough among the party chieftains to bring this about and they decided to call a special congress of the Socialist party on February 1 with only one point on the agenda, the candidacy of Deferre.
 
Mr. X Unfurls His Banner
Some fifteen days before the congress, the Marseilles Mayor, during a congress of his federation, announced his views. The press, radio, television, gave him top billing. All his speech was concerned about was to make clear that he stood on a neocapitalist platform. Socialism is not involved, neither now nor later. Deferre stands for the firm application of the Gaullist constitution, against the poor record of de Gaulle in this respect.
In other words, he stands with both feet planted in the present bonapartist regime. For him, his candidacy is thus not a challenge against the regime but a proposal for trimmings. He does not intend to talk about any “program” which he promises to carry out in one way or another; he will attempt to solve problems as they arise.
Finally, while affirming his loyalty to the Socialist party, he wants to be the candidate of the whole “left.” There is no question of drawing any line to the right. On the other hand, he took a categorical position against any negotiations over his candidacy with the Communist party. The Communist party, he said, must vote for me or assure the election of de Gaulle.
This is the way things stand on the eve of the special congress of the Socialist party. Guy Mollet and the official Socialist party newspaper Le Populaire are silent. It is known that Deferre’s candidacy does not exactly enjoy Mollet’s blessing, but it seems that he will not be able to block it at the congress. The congress may see some shrewd maneuvering to deny Deferre the free field he demands; but how this will turn out cannot be predicted.
 
An Indignant Cry from the CP
The Communist party reacted strongly to Deferre’s speech, particularly his haughty attitude in their direction and insisted on the necessity of agreement on a program – bourgeois democratic, it should be noted in passing – letting it be known that a Communist candidacy is always possible for the first round of balloting in the absence of an agreement.
We have summarized the circumstances surrounding the preparations of the left, a very respectable left, for the presidential election to be held in the still undetermined future. As of now the maneuvers of narrow circles, of smalltime Machiavellian hopefuls, seem to be succeeding. But the real problem is not touched by these combinations.
The only force that can bring an end to the Gaullist regime is the working class; and, at the present time, its activity – including its interest in a candidate for President of the Republic – hinges first of all in the relations between the Communist and Socialist parties. Minimum agreement between these two parties would give different meaning to a candidacy. The relations between the Communist and Socialist parties are no longer war to the knife as they were for the past fifteen years; they are undergoing a change, although it cannot yet be discerned where the discussion now underway between these two formations will end.
 
Part 2
 

e Frank: Mr. X Versus de Gaulle (Article 2)




Mr. X  |  P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Mr. X Versus de Gaulle
*
Can French Socialists and Communists Get Together?
PARIS, JAN. 22 – France has passed through a series of political and social shocks since 1934 and will not find stability until the working class, led by a revolutionary party, takes power. One of the essential tasks of such a party will be to achieve revolutionary unity in action of the French working class which has been divided on the political level since 1920. One of the greatest failures of the French Communist party in the period when it sought to be a revolutionary party as well as later when it was dominated by Stalinism, was that it could not orient itself correctly on the question of unity of action, of the united front of the working class. In general, it could be said that it has oscillated between a sectarian policy towards the Socialist party and an opportunist policy in the wake of the same rival.
The question of the relations between the PCF and the PS is again on the agenda. The setting for this was de Gaulle’s coming to power and the installation of a bonapartist regime that does not bother about playing parliamentary games. But it is likewise placed in a historic development that weighs on these parties and on the workers. To understand current developments and what is projected, it is necessary to bear in mind, at least in broad outline, the history of these relations.
After the split at Tours in 1920 which gave birth to the Communist party, nothing outstanding occurred until 1934, due to the lack of big struggles in the country. Each of the two parties acted without paying much attention to the other. The Communist party at certain times made proposals for a united front with the Socialist party; at other times it sought to undermine it with a policy of “united front from below”; i.e., with the ranks of the PS to the exclusion of their leaders – a bizarre concept of Stalinism not noted for its success.
In 1934, after Hitler’s victory in Germany, reaction and fascism rose dangerously in France. On February 6, 1934, a reactionary coup d’etat was attempted. Immediately following this, an almost spontaneous mass movement surged up in France, giving birth everywhere to anti-fascist vigilance committees. The two leaderships were impelled under this pressure to sign a pact for joint anti-fascist action. The leaderships hastily transformed this agreement, widening it to include the bourgeois radical party, thus creating the Popular Front.
This alliance between the workers’ parties and a wing of French capitalism coincided with a rapprochement between France and the USSR on the plane of international relations. In 1936 the Popular Front won a parliamentary majority; then it limited and halted the gigantic movement of occupation of the plants and left capitalist property and the capitalist state intact. Once this was achieved, the capitalists seized the initiative, and in 1937-38 the Popular Front was ruptured, relations between the Communist party and the Socialist party becoming envenomed.
 
The Ups and Downs
From the signing of the Hitler-Stalin pact in August 1939 up to the day of Hitler’s attack against the Soviet Union, the PC and the PS were virtually at sword’s points; the Socialist ministers, during the first months of the war, underwriting the repression of Communist militants forced into the underground.
During the Resistance and Liberation period, Communists and Socialists cooperated again, first of all in the struggle against the German occupation, then ... in the reestablishment of the capitalist state and economy; the principal differences between the experience of 1944–47 and that of 1936-38 being that this time the MRP (Christian Democrats organized in the Mouvement Republicain Populaire) replaced the Radical party as the bourgeois ally, and the Communists had representatives in the government, beginning with Thorez, Vice-President of the government presided over by de Gaulle.
In April-May 1947, partly under the pressure of the workers at Renault who went on strike against the advice of all the trade-union leaders (Stalinists and reformists), and more directly because of the “cold war” that erupted, the break between the PCF and the PS widened again.
Parallel with these developments on the political level, the trade-union movement, split in 1921 by the reformists, was reunified from 1935 to 1939, then again from 1943 to 1948.
It is to be noted that the relations within the workers’ movement have hinged considerably on relations between the leading factions of French capitalism and the Soviet power. At bottom, the interests of the French bourgeoisie have counted much more to the Socialists than the specific interests of the French working class. With the leadership of the PCF the primary interests have been those of the Soviet bureaucracy.
Since the end of the Second World War and, above all, since the “cold war,” two factors have not ceased to weigh on the Socialist cadres in their relations with the PCF. Unlike the period before 1939, the PCF has largely held the majority in the working class. [1] There is this and the “Prague coup”; that is, the events that assured the transformation of Czechoslovakia into a workers’ state in 1948. [2]
* * *
From 1947 until de Gaulle’s coming to power in 1958, the “cold war” raged continually between the PS and the PCF. Even in 1956, during the administration of the PS leader, Guy Mollet, although the Communist deputies voted for this government, and particularly for its infamous “special powers” which were aimed at bolstering the war in Algeria and installing a fascist power there, the Socialists refused to take the Communist votes into consideration.
Even more, in distinction from what had always been the practice in the past, this attitude was widely supported by Socialist voters. In the second round of balloting, a Socialist candidate would continue to oppose a Communist candidate who had made out better in the first round, or would withdraw in favor of a bourgeois candidate. Unlike former times, the Communist candidates did not receive even a small part of the Socialist votes.
It is absolutely true that the important, even decisive, factor of the prewar period had definitively disappeared – there was no perspective whatever for an important wing of French capitalism to seek an alliance with the USSR against American imperialism. The factor of “foreign policy” went directly against a rapprochement between the PCF and the PS.
 
Affected by the Workers
But both of them are workers’ parties, both of them distant from the revolutionary struggle for socialism, but both with deep roots in the working class, unable not to take into account the interests and the democratic rights of the workers in capitalist society. If this was evident for the PCF, it was likewise true for the PS, no matter how it had been affected by the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie during the years of the Fourth Republic (1945-58) when the Socialist party was in power or never far from it. This was rapidly shown upon the installation of the Gaullist regime.
If the rebellion in Algiers on May 13 permitted de Gaulle to make his bid as a candidate for power, it was Guy Mollet above all who succeeded in having him accepted by the political circles of the Fourth Republic and who, despite strong resistance from the Socialist parliamentary caucus, blocked any united action by the workers against the turn.
Up to this day, Guy Mollet defends his attitude toward de Gaulle at that time, even declaring that in identical circumstances he would do it again.
But the installation of the Gaullist regime resulted from the beginning in bringing about a profound change in relations in the working class. This did not take any of the spectacular forms of the years 1934–35. On the contrary, the new tendency was not easily perceptible. In the municipal elections of 1959, for the first time an appreciable percentage of Socialist voters were noted to have voted on the second round for Communist candidates despite the slogans of the Socialist party.
But it was on the occasion of the legislative elections of November 1962 that the turn was taken by the Socialist leadership.
In the elections, the Socialist party appeared in a combination called the “cartel of the no’s,” an assemblage of parliamentary formations extending from the right to the left of the Fourth Republic (PS, Radical party, MRP, independents) who came out against the election of the president of the republic by universal suffrage. This cartel had no common program, the candidates being united solely on a commitment to withdraw on the second round for those who made out best on the first.
Four days before the election, Guy Mollet made a public declaration the gist of which was that he saw no reason for not withdrawing on the second round for a Communist candidate. Such a declaration was equivalent to breaking the electoral cartel of the no’s, and the other partners interpreted it as a break. On the second round, the Socialists withdrew in many areas in favor of Communist candidates, and their appeals were met with enthusiasm by more than seventy-five per cent of the voters. A chapter had ended. What would the future hold?
 
Miners Judge the Turn
Guy Mollet declared that only an electoral operation against the personal Gaullist power was involved, that there was no political agreement between the two parties, no common program, no reciprocal engagement. This was formally true, but it was no less true that this could not be the end of the matter. The mass of workers, who had something to do with this Socialist decision because of what was developing silently within their ranks, felt stimulated; for them it heralded a new situation. A few weeks later a great strike was staged by the miners, a fraternity where these relations have always been decisive for their struggle.
In 1963 the Socialist party congress decided to hold a public discussion with the PCF on their reciprocal relations, and a delegation of the PS that included Mollet and Deferre went to Moscow where they talked at length with Khrushchev.
The discussion between the PS and the PCF was launched at the beginning of 1964 with a rather odd opening: the two participants began talking about different questions without entering into a dialogue. The leadership of the PCF raised the question of the program for joint action, including the presidential campaign. The leadership of the PS raised in its way the problems of the split of 1920, the “21 conditions” for adherence to the Communist International, etc. The leadership of the PS has remained silent on the question of the program for current action; the leadership of the PCF has said nothing about the doctrinal questions underscored by the Socialists.
It is evident that the leadership of the PCF is seeking above all to mobilize their party for an action in the direction of the Socialists and towards the outside, whereas the leadership of the PS does not want to become engaged in a possible action without having previously prepared their ranks. For them, joint action is equivalent to supping with the devil, and, as is known, to do that it is necessary to have a long spoon.
Soon the special congress of the Socialist party will be held. Perhaps new factors will enter into its deliberations. We shall see ...
 
Part 3
 
Footnotes
1. Whereas in 1936, the relation of votes was around 65 to 35 in favor of the Socialist party, since 1945 the same relationship shifted in favor of the PCF. It is understandable that in view of this important change, many Communist militants, not grasping the conditions as a whole that led to this result, have not been able to see tha policy of the Popular Front as injurious since it led to the strengthening of their party. Contrariwise, the Socialists, without condemning the experience of the Popular Front, have felt some bitterness over the results it appeared to bring their party.
2. It is pointless to cite the details of the Prague affair, which the Khrushchevists refer to as an example of the peaceful and parliamentary road to socialism, whereas the Socialists point to the way the Communists utilized their posts in the government. Both of them appear to forget the presence of the Soviet Army at the time in Czechoslovakia.
 

e Frank: Mr. X Versus de Gaulle (Article 3)




Mr. X  |  P. Frank  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Pierre Frank
Mr. X Versus de Gaulle
*
Special Congress of French Socialist Party
PARIS – The special congress of the Socialist party, which met at Clichy February 1–2, ended in a unanimous decision to run Gaston Deferre as candidate for the presidency of the republic. But the congress was greatly divided throughout its sessions. “They asked us for an amicable agreement on nominations [to a resolutions committee],” Deferre said at one time, “in the name of a friendliness and spirit of conciliation which, I must say, has been rather scarce for several weeks.” It took five hours of argument behind closed doors to reach agreement.
However, on the big political problems there were actually no differences. In substance, the quarrel involved mainly the relations between the candidate and his party. (Not the party and its candidate.)
Guy Mollet is incontestably the man who best understands the importance of the Socialist party in French politics as the hinge between the bourgeoisie and the working class. He understood the role it could play in 1958 in bringing de Gaulle to power; and he seeks to maintain its capacity for the inverse operation, in case of need. Deferre, in contrast, is one of those Socialist politicians, common in France, who utilize the Socialist party to gain election but who have their own electoral following and who feel no need to abide by the decisions of a congress if they find it inconvenient. One of the strongest objections to his candidacy – from Mollet to activists in the most distant provinces – was that he was imposed upon the party by a series of maneuvers. From the way he treated his party in becoming its candidate, it can be guessed how he would act toward it if he were elected president of the republic. If he were elected ...
 
Count Chicks Before Hatched
A comic aspect of the debates at the congress was the care which both Mollet and Deferre displayed through hours of oratorical dueling in refraining from calling things by their right name. Deferre saw himself already elected; Mollet similarly visualized himself – the head of a victorious Socialist party – as prime minister. A lot of wind went into haggling over the relationship between the president of the republic and his prime minister.
But can they be thinking, in case they win, of maintaining the Gaullist constitution of 1958? Certainly. “Elected in accordance with the constitution of 1958, he will carry out the duties pertaining to his office and will uphold the constitution in spirit and letter,” declares the unanimously adopted resolution of the Socialist congress.
What they accuse de Gaulle of is not having respected his own constitution, of having made “improper and erroneous interpretations” of it.
Finally, don’t think that it’s only a short-time business. The resolution also mentions “reefs to be avoided,” among them “an upset, innovations so great that there would be a risk that the public would not understand clearly what we want.”
Moreover, in undertaking an electoral campaign, “the party maintains its complete freedom for the day, without doubt very distant, when the problem will be posed of over-all structural reform.” (My emphasis.)
There is not much to be said on the “program.” The truth is that the candidate Deferre does not want a program but only “options” (?); the partisans of Mollet don’t want a program either, the pretext being that it is up to the head of the government and not the president of the republic to handle this. The net result was a document of less significance than the platforms produced by the major party conventions in the United States. It commits no one.
 
Avoid “Force de Frappe” Issue
However, one point should be noted. Not a word is said stopping the “force de frappe” (de Gaulle’s nuclear striking forces).
Deferre’s eel-like capacity to wriggle was well demonstrated when he was asked what his stand was on this at a press conference February 5.
“We are for general, controlled disarmament,” he said, “thus we are for the suppression of national striking forces. To ask French political figures today, ‘Are you ready to stop everything?’ is a false problem. The real problem will be posed in two years. If many are taking a stand against the national striking force, a part of the public is in favor of a European striking force. At the moment, it is not possible to undertake a formal engagement. My intention is not to say what I would do if elected. Thus I will refrain from any demagogic promise. What is certain is that it is necessary to provide France with a modern, and if possible European, force.”
Still another very significant aspect of the Socialist congress should be noted. At a time when the Socialist party leadership is attempting to “discuss” with the Communists (in a bizarre way, as I noted above), the rare times when the question of the French Communist party came up clearly the intention was revealed to ignore it in this business of the presidential election. No one asked that the Communist party be consulted in regard to the campaign.
The explanation is very simple. So far as the election is concerned, the Socialist delegates (there was not a worker among them) had their eyes turned to the right, toward the Radicals, the Christian Democrats in the Mouvement Republicain Populaire, and others who would be repelled by dealings with the Communist party.
To this passing consideration should be added something more profound, related to the fact that sooner or later contact must be established. “At a time when a thaw is beginning in the Communist world,” one of the delegates said, “we must keep the CP dangling on our ideological conceptions.”
The “left” thus has a candidate now who does not wish to frighten anyone. It would be incorrect to believe that this nomination will not exercise a certain influence on political life in France. This will come much less from the “style” that Deferre is trying to give his candidacy, and the vague themes he is now elaborating on, than from the fact that regardless of what is said about the spirit and letter of the Gaullist constitution, the candidacy, in the eyes of the masses, will appear as an alternative – for or against de Gaulle.
In short, whether Deferre likes it or not, the struggle can force him to take positions on the problems of genuine interest to the masses, and the struggle can have a certain logic which is not necessarily that of a candidate who fears innovation.
 

