 Garrett: The GM Strike and “Free Enterprise” (3 December 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
The GM Strike and “Free Enterprise”
(3 December 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 49, 3 December 1945, pp. 2 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The world’s largest union has struck one of the largest corporations in the world. Under any circumstances this would make the strike of the United Automobile Workers against General Motors Corporation a strike of unusual significance. But there is more involved in this strike than the simple matter of size. The auto workers’ strike has a significance rare in the history of the labor movement in this country, or any country, because in it basic issues of principle between capital and labor are presented on a new and fundamental level.
There have been big, important, vital strikes before. Many of them. Our history as a labor movement is full of them. Strikes established labor’s right to union organization. Strikes established the eight-hour day. Strikes have raised the wage level. The auto workers themselves played a heroic part in the great sit-down strikes of 1936 which defended the principle of industrial unionism and resulted in major union gains. The sit-down strikes, the mine strikes, other strikes, were each of them milestones in our history of struggle. The difference between these strikes and the present strike is that labor has here for the first time, through a union that speaks for 1,000,000 workers in a basic industry, clearly and specifically challenged the system of private enterprise.
There is, thus, more at stake in this strike than a demand for a thirty per cent wage increase. For, to effectuate its demand for a wage increase, the union has demanded the right to participate in the determination of prices and the distribution of profits. And the adamant stand of the company executives derives not only from their unwillingness to pay the increase demanded, but from their decision to make this a defense of their system of free enterprise. Let us, then, examine both sides of the argument, sec who is right, who is wrong.
 
GM Is “Right” ...
In what sense, though? In the sense that they are defending the interests of the employers, the capitalist system of free enterprise For, that is how they are putting the fundamental issue.
On the surface is may appear that they, and other spokesmen of big business, are engaged in what is no more than a union-smashing campaign. That is, to be sure, involved. They would like to smash the unions today, as always. More so. But they know they can’t do it. Behind their promotion of antilabor legislation, behind their circulation of ponderous documents that “unions are against the public interest” lies this fundamental issue.
They are right in defending the system of free enterprise. It is THEIR system; they thrive on it. THEY know that the logical consequence of labor interference in price and profit regulation is the end of capitalist free enterprise. THEY know it leads to workers’ control of production and that workers’ control of production leads to a workers’ government.
The corporation views as intolerable the union's demand that it Open the books. It tells the union to “abandon your attempt to negotiate wages on the basis of past profits, assumed future profits and our selling prices.” Under the system of free enterprise the employers are free to exploit labor, are free to foist their own monopolistic prices on what they so tenderly call the “public,” and are generally free to gouge as much profit as they can out of labor. And all of this makes sense if that system serves your interests, provides you with wealth and luxury.
Free enterprise is no longer entirely free when labor can look at the books and tell the boss: “You’re making too much profit; you’re soaking the public loo much for this product; you’re able to pay a thirty per cent increase and still make undeserved profits.”
General Motors is right. As a capitalist corporation it defends capitalist principles. But ...
 
Reuther is Right ...
That is to say, he is right from the point of the working class and – give this close attention – from the point of view of society as a whole.
How has the union argued for its wage increase? Show us the books and we – WE, the men and women who actually produce General Motors products – we will decide your (the corporation’s) ability to pay wages, the extent of your profits, the necessity, if one exists, of an increase in prices. In other words, the union is telling the boss that it wants a voice in the operation of the industry. And what does that amount to but the undermining of the system of free enterprise.
Reuther, as leader of the auto workers in this struggle, has already marshalled incontrovertible, Statistical facts on the company’s ability to pay the wage increase without an increase in prices. The capitalist press has either had to grudgingly admit the validity of the union’s position, the impressiveness of the union’s figures or (in greatest concern over THEIR system of free enterprise) shied away from their publication.
In effect, in making these figured known, in demanding that GM open the books so that the accuracy of these figures may or may not be established, the union is proposing to dictate wage, price and profit policy. And, we repeat, it is right in doing so. The men and women who actually operate the machines, turn out the product and produce the profit are most legitimately concerned with what the bosses make out of the workers’ sweat.
Further, it is the union that, in making these demands, displays itself as representing the genera) interest of the people. GM may say all it wants to about the interests of a mythical public. In GM terminology the “public” equals those who profit from capitalistic big business.
GM defends its right to soak the consumer any price it chooses to fix on its products. The union, however, says NO! In doing so it reveals labor as the champion not only of its working class interests, but of the entire people (excluding only profiteers, coupon clippers, editors of the capitalist press and others of their ilk whose welfare is exclusively linked with the system of exploitation called free enterprise). Thus, Reuther is right-right for auto workers, right for labor as a whole right for the mass of people generally – just as GM is right for the capitalist class. We get, however, to other aspects of this discussion, and we find that ...
 
GM Is Wrong ...
Wrong from the point of view of which we have just spoken. The system for which it speaks is against the interest of the vast majority of the people, is outlived, is bankrupt, stands in the way of progress.
Free enterprise is a fetter on production. That’s a phase out of any socialist text. It organizes production exclusively with the purpose of providing the owners with the highest possible profit. At one time, historically, this corresponded with the progressive development of the productive machine, its ability tq produce limitless quantities of articles for the satisfaction of human wants.
But the productive machine has now reached a level where it is impeded by free enterprise. It has the capacity to produce plenty for all. The class interest of the employers, the exploiters, denies this plenty to all. Instead of plenty there is want, wages do not cover the necessities of life, there is unemployment.
When GM circulates a statement by a Chicago professor (who at least knows on which side his bread is buttered) which reads: “For my part, I simply cannot conceive of any tolerable enduring order in which there exists widespread organization of workers along occupational, industrial functional lines,” it is merely saying that the organization of labor is a threat to ITS system of order. When it speaks of the “public interest” it is speaking of its OWN interest.
Are workers part of the “public”? Are farmers? Are others whose interests are best served by the struggle of labor? There is no such thing as a “public” interest. How can corporation executives and working men possibly have the same interest? Does it mean the mass of people? Then it is clearly obvious, on the basis of the argument that we have already made, that the GM stand is wrong. There is more to it, however, than that, for ...
 
Reuther Is Wrong ...
He is wrong in so far as he does not fully appreciate the far-reaching consequences of his own logic. There is one logical development of the union position, namely, to advance toward the nationalization of industry under workers’ control. Because the union’s demands as they stand are fundamentally incompatible with a system of free enterprise, it is impossible to reconcile them with or to confine .hem within the framework of this bankrupt system.
In making this criticism, we are not in any way belittling the position of the Auto Workers Union. Reuther and the auto workers have already immeasurably raised the level, the political and economic and social level, of labor’s struggle in the United States. They have performed a tremendous service to the labor movement, elevating the quality of its struggle to encouragingly new heights.
That is precisely why it would be wrong to go no further. The issue has been raised. It cannot be eft in mid-air, nor will it permit itself to be left in mid-air because of the very potency of its logic.
The time is ripe for the next step, and Reuther, as spokesman for this huge and powerful body of workers, is in a position to raise the issue for, solution in all its intrinsic lucidity.
As we have already said, GM knows that the existence of free enterprise is at stake. Victory for the auto workers does not automatically abolish the capitalist system. It would, however, represent a major triumph over that system. GM knows as much. It is wrong for labor not to equally understand the implications. We have to understand plainly that our future depends upon how we come to grips with free enterprise, and upon how we declare ...
 
What is Right? ...
And let us summarize what is right. Industry, in this case through General Motors, has declared itself incapable of providing a decent wage and acceptable standard of living for the working class. Against the needs of the working class, and of the vast majority of the people, it pits its “right” to wrest unlimited and uncontrolled profits out of its private ownership of industry.
The monopolists have admitted that they cannot operate industry in the interest of society as a whole. The Workers Party, in a statement issued some weeks ago, at the beginning of the strike wave, called this a challenge, a challenge that the auto workers, who have implicitly recognized the situation for what it is, must take up completely.
“This is a challenge. It should not remain an empty phrase. If it is to mean something, the organized labor movement must say:
“The monopolists stand in the way of the life interests of the masses of the people. They are confessed bankrupts. We demand the nationalization of big industry [and General Motors is big industry] under workers’ control?”
Labor is fully capable of operating industry – and operating it in the interest of society! This is no extravagant claim. Labor has the industrial know-how. And its interests are one with society as a whole. The auto workers have demonstrated this in their price control demand. They have also demonstrated, in the argument they have made on the financial condition of the company and in their earlier recommendations on organizing production that labor lacks nothing in the knowledge necessary to operate industry.
The bloodsuckers who call themselves “captains of industry” have confessed their bankruptcy. The auto workers have already, in their demands, taken steps that LEAD, in our opinion, to freeing production from the restrictive, bankrupt hands of these monopolists, and putting it in the. hands of labor. We know that labor is capable of operating industry. From that it .follows that industry must be nationalized UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL.
Nationalization will not be given us on demand. The “captains of industry” will not readily yield their system of monopolistic enterprise (for that is what so-called “free” enterprise really means). Nor will the government give it to us, for it is the government of the industrialists. It is THEIR government. It is based on this system, which breeds insecurity and want on one side, and incredible wealth and indulgence on the other.
Just as the issue of higher wages raises the issue of the entire system of capitalist enterprise, so too it raises the issue of the kind of government we want. They will not give us nationalization of industry under OUR, the workers’, control. But a workers’ government will! That, then, must be the ultimate goal of our struggle: from demanding a decent wage standard – to genuine year-around security – to nationalization of industry under workers’ control – to a workers’ government.
Yes, brothers of the union movement, that is socialism! But that is RIGHT. That is how we can give DECISIVE meaning to our struggle. And in conclusion let us quote again from our Workers Party statement:
“All that socialism sets itself to do is to achieve plenty for all, peace, brotherhood, security, freedom. As socialists, we of the Workers Party march hand in hand with the workers in every step they take toward improving and strengthening their economic, social and political position. That is, we are unreservedly with the labor movement and with the just demands that it is making.”
 

 Garrett: Behind the Pearl Harbor Exposé (December 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Behind the Pearl Harbor Exposé
What They Don’t Dare Tell
(December 1945)

From New International, Vol. 11 No. 9, December 1945, pp. 283–285.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

This is a war for mastery of the world, and not for national independence. Japan’s oppression of China has its counterpart in the three centuries of British oppression of India. In these two cases is symbolized the imperialist reality behind all the pretensions of the democratic spokesmen on the one side and the Axis on the other. This is a war of finance capital; this is a war for oil and steel and coal; this is a war for rubber and tin and tungsten; this is a war for stocks and bonds and profits; this is a war for rule over countless millions of colonial slaves. This is a war conceived and bred by world capitalism – not by this or that country alone, not by this or that statesman alone, but by the rotten, decaying, poisonous reaction of the capitalist system which these statesmen represent and defend. – From a statement issued by the Worker! Party immediately following America’s entry into the war, and published as a lead article in Labor Action of December 15, 1941, one week after Pearl Harbor.
The Congressional Committee investigating the Pearl Harbor “incident” is still in session as we write. It is, however, possible to draw conclusions on the findings of the committee before it completes its sessions and issues its report, conclusions both as to Pearl Harbor and as to the investigation itself. Briefly stated, these conclusions are:

That while Roosevelt was reassuring the American people – in Boston, on October 30, 1940, he promised: “your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign wars” – he was waiting for the Japanese to make the mistake that would galvanize a reluctant people into an enthusiasm for war.
 
That Japanese and American officials alike knew war was the inevitable end of their imperialist rivalry, and prepared for it while they engaged in peace discussions.
 
That, through having broken the Japanese code, the US State Department knew virtually every detail of the Japanese program.
 
That military intelligence had reported Japan’s massing for an attack-according to one version, the night before the attack; according to another, too late to be forwarded to the military and naval commanders at Pearl Harbor.
 
That Administration leaders are trying to pin responsibility on Admiral Kimmel and General Short, though not too strenuously, earlier investigations having backfired.
 
That Republican Party leaders are seeking to pin the responsibility on Roosevelt in order to make the investigation their No. 1 issue in the next presidential campaign.
 
That all panics concerned are protecting the real criminal, capitalism, while they busily and vituperatively engage in shifting responsibility from one scapegoat to another.
 
That a genuine investigation by a people’s court would be equally distasteful to the Administration and its critics.

Each side in the dispute is faced with a dilemma. Thus the Administration is trying to prove at one and the same time that (1) Japanese “aggression” came as a complete surprise, compelling it to respond by a declaration of war; and (2) that its efficiency was not wanting in any respect, that it was prepared for war except insofar as the isolationists stood as obstacles to national unity.
And the critics of the Administration, notably the GOP and the Patterson and Hearst press, face the dilemma of indicting the criminal without establishing a motive for his crime: Roosevelt forced Japan’s hand, then deliberately kept silent on Japan’s plan to attack Pearl Harbor in order to catapult the American people into war. But the motive? At this point their testimony resolves itself into a quibble over incidental fact and counter-fact because it spells a genuine indictment of imperialism.
 
Press Shields Imperialism
It is difficult to establish which of the charges, which of the defenses are true. The Administration is working especially hard to secure an acquittal, and in this it is generally aided by the purveyors of information, the press. Apart from the Hearst and Patterson papers, who are exploiting the situation for their own reactionary ends, the press as a whole has displayed a truly responsible attitude toward American imperialism. It was one thing when Kimmel and Short were hauled before an investigating committee. The issue could still be kept within the confines of military efficiency – did the Army and Navy cooperate? Did commanding officers at Pearl Harbor display sufficient enterprise and initiative? It was still within the realm of permissible news exploitation, depending upon which side of the capitalist political fence they were, when it was merely a matter of investigating negligence in the State Department or making a little Republican capital against Roosevelt. It is something else again when the investigation comes dangerously close to revealing the real background of war, the motives. Thus, in the spirit of their responsibility to the basic interests of imperialism, the pro and anti-Roosevelt press is generally and generously help ing the Administration to dominate the investigation. And so, too, in this same spirit, thirty-nine Republican members of Congress have disassociated themselves from leaders of their party who, in using the investigation as a political football, may find themselves unloosing something they will be unable to control.
What are the principal issues in the dispute? John T. Flynn, pre-war America Firster, who some time ago wrote a largely substantiated exposé of the Pearl Harbor “incident” for the Chicago Tribune, and who is now covering the investigation for the Hearst press, contends that at 10 p.m., December 6, Roosevelt received an intercepted Japanese message breaking off negotiations with the United States and indicating immediate Japanese action, and that Roosevelt deliberately delayed forwarding the information to military commanders in the Pacific Against Flynn’s charge, the Administration is presenting a bewildering number of witnesses to prove that the vital part of the message, the 14th part, was not decoded until 10:30 a.m. of December 7, that steps were immediately taken to notify all commanders concerned but that a series of tragic delays ensued: Army radio could not raise Hawaii that morning, commercial cable was used and the warning to General Short was not decoded until four hours after the attack had already begun. This is big issue No.1.
It is pointless to try to discern the particular truth in the pages upon pages of testimony and denial. And it serves no real purpose. Whether General Marshall was horseback riding when he should have been working is the Army’s affair. The same for whether General Short was sleeping on the job or whether he should have maintained cordial relations with the Navy commander. The same for whether Army Intelligence reported the pending attack and disposition of Japanese forces. It. is, however, of real concern to the people of this country that they know why and how they were dragged into the war.
 
Location of the Fleet
Big issue No.2 was explored in two and a half days of testimony by Admiral Richardson, who was relieved of his Pacific command early in 1941. Richardson testified that he had informed Roosevelt Pearl Harbor was inadequate to prepare the fleet for war. He had proposed that the fleet be returned to the West Coast to be built up, then deployed for action. Roosevelt felt that it was necessary to maintain the fleet in Pacific waters to present a show of force to the Japanese.
“They (the Japanese) could not always avoid making mistakes and that as the war continued and the area of operations expanded, sooner or later they would make a mistake and we would enter the war.
So Richardson reported the gist of Roosevelt’s position. Welles, testifying after Richardson, justified Roosevelt’s action on grounds of diplomatic expediency.
Be that as it may, entry into the war was a foregone conclusion from the start. Long before Pearl Harbor, Churchill urged Roosevelt to lay his cards on the table in negotiations with the Japanese. Roosevelt, however, preferred something milder than a warning that the United States would resort to war, something like the traditional warning against aggression; he had still to line the American people up for war. Testifying before the committee, Sumner Welles, former Assistant Secretary of State, admitted that as of mid-September, 1941, it was clear to him that there wasn’t “the remotest chance” of peace with Japan. For weeks before Pearl Harbor it was known to American diplomatic and military leaders that Japan was planning to attack at one of several places when the negotiations broke down. Incredible as it may seem with the extraordinary information at the disposal of US Intelligence, the Administration contends it suspected half a dozen points of attack, but none of these was Pearl Harbor.
 
Plot Against the Peoples
We have cited only the barest fraction of the evidence. Mountains of it have piled up in testimony, state papers, photostats, exhibits of one kind or another. There is in addition the mountain of evidence accumulated during the two previous Pearl Harbor investigations. We are in no position to examine the testimony for accuracy. And, in any case, we are far from convinced that the hour at which Roosevelt received the decoded Japanese message is the principal issue. We are concerned with the entire pattern, and the pattern unmistakably reveals that both United States and Japanese imperialism were engaged in a plot against their respective peoples.
And this much can be said as a certainty: whether or not Roosevelt, apprised of the situation, could have prepared the Hawaiian command against the Japanese attack, whether or not it came as a “surprise,” he could hardly view it as a disaster. For, whatever ships or men may have been lost, the military cost was well worth the political gain to him.
There is no doubt from the evidence that the Japanese were preparing for war. There is equally no doubt that they would have preferred not to go to war with the United States, but had no choice short of restricting their imperialist ambitions. Japan became an imperialist nation of importance largely through the aid of the United States, which promoted its development as an obstacle to British and Russian influence in Asia. While Japan was developing its expansionist policies, imperialist rivalries for control of the world were sharpening. During the First World War, Japanese and US interests still coincided sufficiently in the Pacific to make her an ally of the United States. By the time of the Second World War, the world had become so much “narrower – that imperialist mastery of the world could not be shared. Having embarked on its program to build a Japanese “co-prosperity – sphere several years earlier in China, Japan moved to establish total domination over the East when the European war engaged the energies of the Allied powers.
The United States entered the war against the Axis power late, but it was actually in the war from the start, and not merely in it, but in it as a principal contestant. Just as its imperialist interests dictated a contest with Hitler Germany for world domination, so, specifically in the East, its interests could not tolerate Japanese domination. Capital investments in the East were involved; so were the resources of the enslaved colonies – rubber, oil, tungsten, tin.
Moral issues were not involved. Aviation parts that were used to replace Dutch slavery by Japanese slavery, and also used to bomb American ships at Pearl Harbor, were sold by Bethlehem Steel Corporation to Japan almost up to the declaration of war. A big patent cartel in the United States schooled the Japanese in how to make high octane gasoline as late as 1939. These and other disclosures were made to the Senate Kilgore Committee by the Economic Warfare Division of the Justice Department at the same time that Pearl Harbor hearings were in session, yet they hardly created a ripple in the press. The scandal of scrap iron sales is well known. Business remained business up to the last moment.
 
Roosevelt’s Conspiracy
American business did not lose an opportunity to make profits until the larger issue of American or Japanese control came to the showdown of war. Not all the representatives of big business, however, saw the situation in the same light. Where the general interests of United States capitalism dictated Roosevelt’s war policy, there were elements whose individual interests were best served by peace with Japan (or Germany). Hence isolationism; hence too, in, part, the vigor of the Roosevelt “smear” campaign in the current investigation.
Those who are most active in the “smear Roosevelt” campaign know full well that he acted for the general welfare of capitalism – including the Hearst and Patterson and GOP interests. The war, however, is won. Japan as an imperialist rival is crushed. There are differences of opinion in American capitalism as to what foreign policies will best serve their imperialist interests in the East (or, for that matter, Europe). And the Pearl Harbor incident makes, in any case, excellent presidential campaign material.
For it is true that Roosevelt engaged in a conspiracy of deception against the American people. His fireside chats dripped with the syrup of non-involvement while he was not only preparing for war, but deciding the course that war entry would take.
Through the speeches and literature of the Workers Party, through Labor Action, through The New International, we exposed Roosevelt’s policy for what it was: a policy of preparation for imperialist war. Read The New International or Labor Action for the year before Pearl Harbor and you will find that we predicted that Roosevelt, confronted with mass anti-war sentiment at home, awaited only the incident that would make the war palatable to the people. Did we say this to “smear” Roosevelt? No, not then, any more than now. We were not and are not interested in Roosevelt as an individual except as he represents a class and the policy of that class. We are, however, admittedly very interested in smearing imperialism – Japanese, German, Russian, British or American – and the evidence at the Pearl Harbor investigation does smear imperialism, if so mild a word as smear may be used.
What becomes of the moral indignation against the “sneak attack”? Surprise or no surprise, Roosevelt expected exactly such an act – at Pearl Harbor or some other American possession. And what becomes of that most favored hypocrisy, “aggression”? In imperialist wars there are no aggressors. Each side is as an aggressor against its own people and against the peoples of the world. Who strikes the first blow is either a matter of maneuvering or of military or diplomatic strategy, as the case may be.
The United States did not go to war to avenge the massacred Chinese, the enslaved Javanese. It did not go to war against the Dutch because they enslaved the Javanese before the Japanese did, nor against the British because they oppressed the people of Singapore before the Japanese did, any more than it is going to war against them now because the Dutch and British are massacring Javanese today. The United States went to war to pursue its imperialist aims, to crush a rival imperialism that would not confine itself to the rôle assigned to it.
We of the Workers Party are proud that, ALONE among the parties in the United States, we issued a manifesto at the outbreak of the war denouncing it as imperialist, describing Pearl Harbor as the fabricated excuse it was. Turn back to the beginning of this article. Read the quotation from our manifesto. We are confident that a people’s inquiry into Pearl Harbor and the war would arrive at the same summary of conclusions.
 

 Garrett: CIO Breaks with Truman (10 December 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
CIO Breaks with Truman!
Need for Labor Party Posed by GM Strike
President Truman Plays Role of Strikebreaker
(10 December 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 50, 10 December 1945, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

It takes exceptional gall to suggest that the auto workers return to work while a committee “finds facts.”
It takes equal gall to propose that Congress legislate a “cooling off” period before strike action.
Yet both have been proposed. By whom? By the President, that is, by the head of the government.
That should give those of us who do not yet understand the role of the government as strike-breaker something to think about. Specifically: it demonstrates that the kind of government we now have is a government of the capitalists, a government that serves them, a government that acts in THEIR interest. Specifically: it demonstrates that the kind of government we need is a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT, a government that will serve us, act in OUR interest.
Let us look into these outrageous proposals made by President Truman before we go any further.
Here is the situation: 225,000 auto workers have struck General Motors’ plants from coast to coast. The auto workers’ union, the UAW, has presented a bookful of irrefutable FACTS – facts that demonstrate not only the necessity of a thirty per cent wage increase, but the auto workers’ RIGHT to this increase. The union is so confident of its FACTS that it sought to force the company into public negotiations. GM hasn’t even attempted to refute the union’s FACTS. It has refused to negotiate. And so utterly conclusive are the union’s FACTS that even the capitalist press, at least its more honest section, ‘has had to admit grudgingly the validity of the union’s case.
 
A Lack of Facts?
Is there then a lack of FACTS in the situation? Hardly. But let us say that there are facts still not available to the “public.” Very well, the union provided for this in advance with the slogan that gives this strike exceptional significance: OPEN THE BOOKS! For if there are any facts not yet known, they can exist only in the books. Open the books, then. Let the workers see what they show on wages, prices and profits!
We have no objection to President Truman appointing one or a thousand fact-finding committees. We are always strong for the facts – not the kind that may be dreamed up by a GM press agent while the executives keep a tight lid on the books. Facts, real facts, are mighty weapons in labor’s struggle.
We don’t care how many committees President Truman has poking around for facts ALREADY presented in all their incontrovertible truth in the union’s brief. We do, however, object strongly to the brazen request that the auto workers return to their jobs while a committee “explores” the situation. What other effect can it have than to break the strike? The auto workers know this and they are fighting it.
Strikes are won on the picket line; they are not won in committees (and certainly not in government committees weighted on the side of the employers). We repeat: strikes are won exactly where the auto workers are now – on the picket line! Go back to work while a committee looks for facts, while arbitrators leisurely confer? That is equivalent to breaking the morale of the strikers, of breaking the strike. And that is precisely what Truman has in mind.
You doubt it? Link it with his second, long-range proposal for handling the growing strike wave: to enforce by congressional enactment a cooling off period. John L. Lewis has called this an effort to straight-jacket labor, and he is right.
The strike is the only real weapon labor has at its disposal in redressing grievances, in winning its demands. Workers in any industry decide that it is necessary to use their strike weapon. Their determination is high. Their plans are made. They must choose the moment best suited to THEIR struggle.
What would happen, though, under the Truman proposal? Workers decide to strike. The strategic moment to strike might be the next day or the day following. Under the Truman proposal they “cool off” for approximately thirty days, dissipating their energies in Congress-decided procedures. Meanwhile, the employer, gaining time by this anti-strike legislation, makes his plans to fight the strike.
 
What About Workers’ Government?
No, we don’t think this proposition will kill the strike action of the American working class. Labor just isn’t in a mood to take that kind of stuff as gospel. We think it will respond to “cooling off” by getting indignantly hot.
It’s because of this mood that Truman dares not go further in his strike-breaking. He can’t get away with it any more than the government or the capitalist class it represents could get away with an explicit union-smashing drive today. American labor is too powerful, too well organized – and it is confident!
But Truman has gone far enough. If conditions allow, he’ll go further. For, and we cannot repeat this often enough, the government HE speaks for is not our government.
What would our government, a workers’ government, do in this situation? Yes, it would publish the facts. It would then tell GM: you say you cannot pay those who actually do the work a decent living wage, guarantee them security; we will therefore end your private ownership, the thing you call “free enterprise”; we will nationalize your plants and put them under the workers’ control.
In our opinion, the auto workers have already raised the issue of “free enterprise” and thus pointed to other vital aspects of a fundamental labor program.
Labor Action and the Workers Party take the view that the auto workers have contributed a new and revolutionary factor to American unionism. By demanding that the books be opened, that labor have a hand in determining wages, prices and profits, they have, in effect, challenged the system of “free enterprise” and clearly established that labor, and labor alone, truly stands for the interests of the entire people.
We shan’t go into this aspect here. Last week we devoted a long article to the subject and it is treated elsewhere in this issue, but we will return to it in future issues of Labor Action. For the auto workers’ strike is inexhaustible in its lessons and deductions. So far we’ve discussed primarily the economic implications, the advances in economic principle made by the auto workers. But these principles lead to the further issue of politics – of politics and POLITICAL ACTION.
 
Labor and Society
In every situation we see how intimately related politics and economics are. Thus we have a capitalist, a boss, economy. The plants, the machines, the buildings are not owned by the men who produce them; they are owned by men who contribute nothing to actual production yet syphon off the profits of that production, by a tiny few who luxuriate in the resources of swollen bank accounts while working men have to take to the picket line to force a wage increase that will provide for the necessities of life.
The government we now have is the government of these monopolists, these industrialists, these capitalists. Its laws, its whole operation, are designed to bolster, to protect, to effectuate in political terms this capitalist system. Its personnel is derived from the parties that represent the interests of this class – principally the Republican and Democratic Parties.
And just as it makes sense for General Motors to resist labor’s encroachments on its system of “free enterprise,” so it makes sense for its government to act against labor. Yes, this government pretends to act for the entire people. But that is as false as when GM says it pretends to uphold the interests of what it calls the “public.”
Labor is truly the champion of the great mass of society. You need proof? Who speaks for the best interests of society in the auto strike – the auto workers, who want a voice in determining prices so that prices may be held down, or GM, which stands on its capitalist right to keep its books secret and charge any price it can get away with? Under Roosevelt the trusts developed the cute theory that they are really the guardians of the “public” interest, operating their colossal “free-monopolized enterprises” in the people’s behalf. But the auto workers have showed that lie to be as colossal as the trusts.
The capitalists have THEIR politics. We have to have ours. Concretely, that means we have first to create a political party of our own. Not a caricature of a political party such as we have too often seen, a party that presumably is labor’s but is actually tied with capitalist parties and capitalist politicians. The auto workers, who have already done much to heighten labor’s position, ought, for example, to put pressure on the CIO’s Political Action Committee to sever its devitalizing and disreputable relations with capitalist political machines and politicians.
 
What We Stand For
Our struggles on the economic field cannot be given genuine and lasting meaning unless we combine them with independent labor political action. That is why the Workers Party, a party of revolutionary socialism, the party we of Labor Action speak for, declares that a mass political party of labor is our prime need today. Such a party would include the unions, would represent the great body of American labor, would champion the interests of workers, farmers, professionals – of everybody except the exploiters and profiteers. Such a party, did we put it in power, would not put pressure on the auto workers as does Truman; it would put the squeeze on the bosses.
We cannot delay. Class conflicts are becoming sharper, reaching new levels of activity. The auto workers have posed the issues; open the books, Invade the privacy of capitalist industry, intervene in determining prices and profits. Thai LEADS to imposing workers’ control on industry; that leads to nationalization of industry under workers’ control. It must also lead to the creation of a Labor Party which will fight our battle on the political front as unions fight our battle on the economic front.
And all of this leads finally to a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT that would make our program real. A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT would not seek to straight-jacket labor the way Truman does and keep it dangling in the pit of capitalist insecurity. A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT would not run errands for capitalism. A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT would wrest industry from the hands of the self-confessed bankrupts who admit that it violates their interests to operate industry so that it would provide security and a living wage. A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT would nationalize industry under workers’ control and usher in the age of freedom and plenty for all.
 

ett: What “Open the Books” Means (10 December 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E. Garrett Replies to a Reader
What “Open the Books” Means
(10 December 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 50, 10 December 1945, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Dear Comrades:
In the December 3 LABOR ACTION, Emanuel Garrett in his article, The GM Strike and ‘Free Enterprise’, says “The union (UAW) has demanded the right to participate in the determination of prices and the distribution of profits.” The writer further states that these two demands are something new in the labor movement.
There is no disagreement with the novelty of demanding to participate in the determination of prices, but I think it incorrect to say that the UAW is demanding the distribution of profits and, therefore, in this respect, is opening a new page in union history.
In demanding the right to inspect the company’s books, Reuther has said that he would scale the union’s demand from 30% down to 0 if the company’s profit figures warranted it. He doesn’t say what method he would use to evaluate GM’s profit position, but if we assume that, were the company’s books (by some miraculous miracle) to show a profit position at the present time similar to the immediate pre-war years, Reuther would settle for the same wage scale as prevailed in 1939. According to Reuther’s argument that is the reasonable assumption to make, and judged on that basis, I see no question of the UAW “demanding the distribution of profits.”
Rather I would say that the UAW is tying the wage scale to the level of profits (instead of demanding a decent living wage regardless of GM’s profit position) and is not at all departing from the traditional trade union practice as formulated by Engels in Condition of the Workers in England (published in 1844). As quoted in the educational bulletin of the Workers Party on the Role of the Trade Unions, Engels wrote: “Their (the trade unions) object was to regulate the rate of wages according to the profit of the employer, to raise it when the opportunity offered, and to keep it uniform in each trade throughout the country.”



 


Comradely yours,
Sid



*
Comrade Sid has raised a point that validly demands explanation. His is a legitimate question, but we think he errs in failing to understand the revolutionary change in union struggle embodied in the UAW proposal.
The relation between wages and profits has long been recognized in socialist economics. Thus, Karl Marx who was the great genius of socialist theory and whose works we recommend to our readers as essential reading matter, wrote in his little pamphlet, Wage Labor and Capital, the following:
“What, then, is the general law which, determines, the rise and fall of wages and profits in their RECIPROCAL (our emphasis – EG) relations? They stand in inverse proportion to one another. The share of capital (profit) rises in the same proportion in which the share of labor (wages) sinks/ and vice versa. (”Share” here refers to the share of each class in the values created by labor power – EG.) Profit rises in the same measure in, which wages fail, it falls in the same measure in which wages rise.”
In that sense it has been standard union practice to try to raise wages “when the opportunity offered,” that is, when profits have risen.
But there is something altogether new in, the UAW position, so new that we feel justified in calling it a revolutionary development – in union concepts. The UAW demands the right to examine the books, and on the basis of what it there sees, it proposes to tell the boss what it considers a legitimate wage, hence a legitimate profit, and with that to tell the boss what price is justified, hence the UAW demand is not the simple economic demand traditional in union struggle.
 
What Is New
Do not forget that the union’s slogan is “Open the Books.” Yes, the demand has been made before; so too, unions have previously sought to intervene in price regulation. The needle trades unions have, for example, asked to see the books. But never before has a major union in a major industry, the largest union in the world, made it the platform of its struggle for higher wages. The UAW’s action has introduced a new and far-reaching element into union activity, more correctly it has introduced a new concept into union politics. This will become established trade union program because its logic is irresistible, and it creates the possibility of further advance.
No, it will not abolish capitalism. But it makes a dent in the capitalist system. That we tried to prove in last week’s article. It is one thing to demand higher wages, to argue, in demanding higher wages, that profits are sufficiently high to make the increase possible. It is entirely different to tell the corporation: we’ll examine your books, and we’ll decide the size of your profit along with the size of our wages. Isn’t that equivalent to demanding a hand in the distribution of profits?
To be sure we socialists go further. We demand the abolition of the profit system altogether. But we recognize the tremendous advance it constitutes in union politics when workers intervene in the prerogatives of free enterprise, and weaken to that extent the capitalist system. The next and logical step is workers’ control of production, nationalization of industry and a workers’ government. For these in our opinion necessarily follow, and so we argued in our article. The entire issue of capitalist enterprise versus labor’s interests (and the interests of the great mass of the population) is raised and a challenge presented; equally well the issue of government, of politics. That is the point. We repeat, it is a tremendous advance.
 
Where the Letter Errs
Comrade Sid, however, asks this: suppose the books reveal lower profits, what then? In asking the question he overlooks, first, the value of the principal that the UAW is seeking to establish; second, the confidence of the auto workers to get what they want by action; third, the matter of agitation that is involved. No union ever started on a wage campaign by saying that the employer couldn’t pay. The UAW in making its wage demands does so on the basis of the corporation’s ability to pay, but in doing so introduces this new principle.
Will the union accept a wage cut if the books reveal the impossible? Of course not. We are quite sure that Reuther, and certainly the auto workers, would accept nothing of the kind. And why not? Because they have already demonstrated their advanced fighting position, by the very demand they have made, not to speak their confidence in themselves as a powerfully organized body of workers. We are not at all concerned with profits. Neither, we are sure, are the auto workers. They want a living wage regardless of profits. That is precisely where their slogan has effect. For they propose to distribute profits, to tell the boss that he cannot have as much as he wants. Be assured that the corporation executives. understand the implications of the UAW position. They understand too that workers who challenge “free enterprise” by demanding: “Open the Books,” will not bear the cost of profit losses by wage cuts.
We cannot exhaust the subject in this reply, or even in a lengthy article. We shall have to return to it again and again. For, permit us to use the word again, it is a revolutionary development.



 


E. Garrett



 

 Garrett: Why Every Reader of “Labor Action” Should Read “The New International” (19 November 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Why Every Reader of Labor Action
Should Read The New International
(19 November 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 47, 19 November 1945, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We know that you are already a reader of Labor Action. You may even have guaranteed regular receipt of the paper by subscribing to it. If you haven’t yet subscribed, you should. But it isn’t the purpose of this article to sell you Labor Action. We want to talk about another publication, one you ought to read as regularly as you do Labor Action. This other publication is the New International.
Actually the two publications, one a weekly paper, the other a monthly magazine, go hand in hand. The informed worker is the worker that reads both of them, as well as such other printed matter as is issued under the imprint of the two periodicals and the Workers Party.
We have to understand our problems so that we can solve them. It’s no small job working to replace the powerful, complicated, entrenched capitalist system by OUR system of society, SOCIALISM. To do it, and we MUST do it, we must know how capitalism operates in all its complexities, what makes it tick and grow deathly sick – and deathly sick it is. We must know how to destroy it, how to build socialism. We must, in short, understand and discuss every phase of our contemporary social, political and economic life – including those matters of international politics and socialist program that may seem far-fetched and distant at first glance.
The capitalists don’t neglect education. They have at their disposal schools, newspapers, radio stations and countless other vehicles through which they justify, propagandize and educate for THEIR social system. More than that, the university mills, political machines and numberless institutions of learning or colleges yearly turn out thousands trained in the justification and operation of capitalist society.
We haven’t the money they have, and we haven’t the facilities. But we have something far more powerful. They don’t have it, and they know it. We have the unassailable doctrines and principles of socialism with which to confute them, and to DEFEAT them. But we have to know these principles thoroughly, and we have to apply them to the problems of the world.
And, applying them, we must organize, band together, join a revolutionary socialist party, the Workers Party, so that we can actively intervene in the struggle of workers everywhere against the capitalist system everywhere.
Very well, isn’t Labor Action sufficient? No, we of Labor Action say it isn’t. Labor Action is our fighting paper. Through it we intervene in the daily issues of working class life – jobs, union militancy, against fascism, against imperialism; and while we advance our program for the immediate solution of these pressing problems, we agitate for the fundamental solution of ALL these problems, and many more – namely. Socialism.
But space, and the things we must concern ourselves with in Labor Action make it impossible to cover all the problems that need to be covered, or for that matter all the aspects of any given problem, in the columns of Labor Action. Nor will we able to do this in the eight-page Labor Action that is an absolute necessity. That is why we say that New International is an indispensable reading supplement to Labor Action. We, that is we of Labor Action and the Workers Party, and you who merely read Labor Action and are thinking of joining the Workers Party, we both of us need the New International for our education and better understanding. An educated worker is a socialist worker, and a socialist worker is the most effective worker.
You have heard that the New International is “deep stuff.” We call it a theoretical organ of revolutionary Marxism, that is revolutionary socialism. But theory, this “deep stuff,” is, as we understand it, fundamentally related to the practical issues of our daily factory or union life. It’s a theory of working class action, investigation and politics, and therefore it is not too “deep” for a worker to understand. Certainly, we must try to understand it.
Let’s take one case. You will read in the New International articles of policy, analysis or discussion on the question of National Liberation in Europe. That seems far off, doesn’t it? But how well we understand the problem of the European working class, its economic and political situation is of the deepest concern to us. The European workers will be our brothers in creating a universal society of brotherhood and freedom. The better we understand their problem, the better we can help them, the better they can help us.
Or we could take any one of several “domestic” cases – the articles on Jim-Crow, wages, housing, and so forth. Suppose we merely cite several of the articles that appeared in the last two issues: Balance Sheet of the War, Atomic Energy and Socialism, For a New Trade Union Program, Agrarian Struggles in the United States, The International Significance of the British Elections. And these do not exhaust the contents of the last two issues alone.
The idea then of this article is to persuade you that the New International is a reading NECESSITY. The question then arises as to how you can best be sure of getting the New International to read. As with Labor Action, there is no better way than to subscribe. The New International is now carrying on a subscription campaign, and its offer is attractive. But we leave that to the Business Manager of the magazine. You’ll find his offer elsewhere in this issue of Labor Action. Turn to it now; clip the sub blank; become a regular reader of the New International!
 

ett: Truman, Attlee Meet in Diplomatic Secrecy (26 November 1945)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E. Garrett
Truman, Attlee Meet in Diplomatic Secrecy
(26 November 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 48, 26 November 1945, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We think it would be unkind to say that it took all of five days to produce the atomic bomb statement that issued from the conference of Messrs. Truman, Attlee and King. We are sure that the delegated heads of the governments of the United States, England and Canada were occupied with genuinely weighty matters that are onny inferentially included in the public statement. We are further so highly convinced of their seriousness that we should like to spike the complaints of those who perhaps thought it mere capriciousness on the part of the conferees to meet in the closest secrecy.
Secret diplomacy did not end with the war. Newspapermen may protest all they will at being excluded from the conference, at being compelled to draft daily dispatches on the basis of rumor, back-door handouts or public ceremonies. The diplomats of imperialism do not propose to let the people in on their agreements or their real discussions – be they at Potsdam, at Washington, or any place.
Suppose the working class of this country, of England, of Canada and of other countries had before it a stenographic record of the conference. It would find, we think, the following items: (1) Given the continued rule of world capitalism (and of Stalinist Russia) a Third World War is inevitable: (2) the United Nations Organization is a dead duck in every vital sense, and that as an instrument of world peace as much can be expected from it as from the League of Nations (remember?); (3) the atomic bomb is the mightiest military weapon yet conceived, and there “can be no adequate defense against it”; (4) other nations, notably Russia, are a cinch to discover the industrial know-how of the atomic bomb, but the United States means to keep a jump ahead of them pending the day, five, ten or fifteen years from now, when the Third World War gets started; (5) the only type of world organization conceivable under imperialism is that achieved through the conquest of nations by a world power.
 
Working in the Dark
Possibly much more was discussed, It is possible that the conferees went into detail with respect to each imperialist rival. In that sense the secrecy of the conference was designed not only to keep the great mass of people in the dark, but the other imperialisms as well. However, the five points we have listed above are all of them implicit in the public gibberish solemnly handed a waiting world by the conference. To be sure it presumably says the contrary. It talks of preventing the “use of atomic energy for destructive purposes.” But it doesn’t say. how. It promises to “promote the use of recent and future advances in scientific knowledge, particularly in the utilization of atomic energy, for peaceful and humanitarian ends.” Again, how? It seeks “the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction.” We’ve heard that before. And it proposes “effective safeguards by way of inspection and other means to protect complying states against the hazards of violations and evasions.” Violations, already?
How much all this means is evident in the wails of the commentators who lull each other to sleep with the delusion that peaceful world organization is possible under capitalism. In the Stalinist and pro-Russian periphery there is real anguish. PM’s Max Lerner virtually froths at the mouth in criticism of the statement and the same newspaper’s Blair Bolles sheds bitter tears because the statement rang down the curtain on “the era of hope that sovereign states could settle their differences in international organization.”
It is true that United States imperialism hasn’t yet devised a clear-cut general policy. There are within the general framework of United States imperialism different views, some conflict of interest – as in the uncertainty over occupation policy in Germany. On the whole, however, it is based on the recognition that the end of the Second World War left the world with two great imperialist powers, the United States and Russia. It recognizes also that the issue of world mastery will sometime have to be settled between these two giant powers. And, in a cold sweat, it further recognizes that outside the interests of either of these two, or of any imperialism or combination of imperialisms, lies the interest of the peoples of the world who are in ferment and may not again wait for the issue to be decided between the imperialisms but may decide their own issue with all the imperialisms through insurrectionary decision.
 
Guarding the “Secret”
England’s role is necessarily more modest. It is a beaten, weak, hard-pressed imperialism that would like to hold on to what it has and perhaps build itself up again to its former magnificence. It is, for the present, it has to be, content with its continued role of junior partner in the Anglo-American firm, snatching a concession here and there. Thus a columnist in the New York Post, discussing the statement on the bomb, writes that Truman wanted a stipulation that “other powers participating in the secret” – meaning Russia, of course – [would] “put forth a frank statement of their territorial and other aspirations.” Attlee thought it wasn’t wise, so Truman conceded.
In net effect, no one is, going to “participate in the secret.” The statement provides for “effective safeguards” before any exchange of secrets. Since any “safeguard” against war in an imperialist world is an absurdity, the United States will continue to produce the bomb, and the Russians, if they do not already know how to produce it, will continue their research and learn how to produce it a year or two from now.
Other powers will share the secret according to how alignments shape up. And, while research and production continue, the United Nations Organization may outlaw the bomb. This will make a big splash in the press, but not produce so much as a ripple of delay in actual work on the atomic bomb.
 

 Geltman: Trial by Confession Sentences Cardinal - Aimed at Opposition (14 February 1949)






Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Geltman
Trial by Confession Sentences Cardinal;
Aimed at Opposition
(14 February 1949)

From Labor Action, Vol. 13 No. 7, 14 February 1949, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The trial of Cardinal Mindszenty before a Stalinist Court in Budapest, Hungary, ended, formally on Tuesday, February 8, with the imposition of a life sentence. What the sentence has not ended is the worldwide protest occasioned by the trial, and the universal revulsion, outside of the Stalinist circles, against the sinister methods of “trial by confession.”
Arrested on December 27, 1948, the Cardinal was charged with plotting to restore the Hapsburg monarchy, with black market operations, with seeking foreign intervention in Hungary. Evidence to support the accusations consisted of a “confession” by the Cardinal before the court, and of various documents, purportedly in the Cardinal’s writing. Thus, the trial fitted neatly into the pattern of previous “Moscow Trials,” and like them must be stamped a frame-up – no examination before an open and free court, no defense, except as authorized by the court, no witnesses or documentation subject to OBJECTIVE examination, no jury free to decide on the basis of the evidence presented the guilt or innocence of the accused; the “defense” attorney instead of defending, constantly excusing himself and his client and apologizing for his actions.
Thus, every accusation could conceivably be true, in one degree or another, and yet the trial would bear the indelible mark of frame-up!
On the first day of the trial, Cardinal Mindszenty admitted to “guilt in principle and in detail of most of the accusations made.” Specifically, he admitted: (1) to discussing with another defendant, Juszin Baranyai, a possible third war between Russia and the U.S., and the new government that might be formed after such a war; (2) to meeting Archduke Otto of Hapsburg in a Chicago nunnery in 1947; (3) to trying to influence the 1947 elections as a royalist; (4) to writing a letter, while under arrest, to U.S. Minister Chapin, asking for assistance in escaping; (5) to writing various documents found in his palace, documents which establish his connection with black market dealings, other governments, etc.
Against this confession there is the Cardinal’s statement in a letter written last November that any confession he might make would be “a consequence of human frailty and, in advance, I declare it null and void.”
Not enough detail was presented in the trial, as reported in the press (severe limitations were imposed by the Hungarian government on press coverage), to even submit the accusations to critical examination. The confession (with its admitted authorship of the documents) was the sole proof. For example, it is entirely conceivable that a Catholic prelate would be sympathetic to a monarchy, and equally that he met Archduke Otto of the Hapsburg dynasty in Chicago. But something more than the court’s say-so, and the Cardinal’s confession, is required as proof. Are there witnesses? Is there any objective evidence?
 
Evidence of Fraud
Or, with respect to the admission of seeking Chapin’s aid in escaping. It is entirely conceivable that the Cardinal might have wanted to escape.
But: (1) would he be so stupid as to write the details in. a letter and think he could get it to Chapin; (2) having written a letter, on the assumption that he could get it to the U.S. ministry, how did it fall into the court’s hands? (3) would he have offered the U.S. minister $4,000 to get a plane and a pilot?
Or, the documents found in his palace: would the Cardinal have left them lying around in the palace cellar to be picked up by the police?
Further, parts of the accusations could be entirely correct, and still not constitute a crime in any state but a totalitarian state; opposition to the regime, for example.
However much the accusations might seem to jibe with overall Vatican views and objectives, past experience with Stalinist trials is itself sufficient to cast infinitely more than a reasonable doubt on this trial. The whole business of “trial by confession” is an abhorrent contribution of Stalinism, no matter against whom used, whether a revolutionist or a Catholic.
 
Moscow Trial Pattern
The press has speculated on the use of drugs. No one can say for sure what methods were employed, but it is hard to imagine the Cardinal confessing except under some form of duress.
A whole generation of revolutionists was wiped out in the infamous Moscow purges of the thirties. Possibly, the same methods used to force confessions then were used now: possibly different ones. It is likely that many different devices were used to exact confessions in the Moscow Trials, from outright physical torture, to insidious forms of mental torture, to appeals in the case of those to whom Russia still represented a socialist fatherland (however degenerated), to serve the cause of humanity by a final act of sacrifice, suicide by confession. The Cardinal may have been drugged, may have been tortured, who knows?
There is, of course, an important distinction between the men and women exterminated in Russia, and the Cardinal. The accused then were revolutionists who could not possibly have committed the acts with which they were charged. One of them might have turned against a lifetime of dedication to socialist struggle. But all of them, almost the entire generation who led the Russian revolution to victory in 1917 – for them to turn against their achievement, their principles and resort to terror, complicity with fascists, etc. – Impossible. Despite this distinction, the court’s case against the Cardinal does not stand up.
The Cardinal, as a servant of the Vatican, with its pro-West and anti-Stalin orientation, could possibly have negotiated with Western nations for one or another purpose. But even this important distinction means nothing against the absence of evidence. The Vatican is most decidedly a reactionary institution. But its accusers in this case are not a revolutionary, democratic, socialist government, but a monstrous dictatorship.
The trial might have had some credibility had the Cardinal been able to choose his lawyers from outside Hungary, to freely prepare his defense, to ask for witnesses in his behalf, to solicit independent handwriting experts, to impose the burden of proof on the accuser (which in the case of Stalinists is a double burden for they will not hesitate to utilize any fraud). As it is, the trial must be held a frame-up.
For example, it makes no matter in this case that the Cardinal opposed the secularization of the schools under its control. Secularization of the schools is normally a progressive achievement, and the Cardinal’s opposition was as typically reactionary as his church. But few things are done for progressive purposes in Stalinland – Stalinist controlled schools will educate as little as Church controlled schools. This occasioned a big struggle last November. The Cardinal then ordered the ringing of all church bells in mourning. And, it was in November that he wrote his disclaimer of a confession. But the pros and cons of that dispute, or others like them, have nothing to do with the trial!
 
Why the Trial?
The Vatican has been known to accommodate itself to the most totalitarian of regimes. It got along fine, for the most part, with Mussolini. It is not inconceivable that the Stalinist government might have worked out a settlement, a modus operandi, if only a temporary one, with the Cardinal. Or sought to bring the Cardinal under its control, as it is apparently doing with the bishops of Hungary. After all, 65 per cent of this predominantly peasant country is Catholic. Why not try to wean the peasants without outraging too violently, in the initial stages of establishing the authority of the regime, their religious affiliations.
And there we think lies the possible answer to the whole ratty affair. The Vatican is committed to the West. Agreed. The Vatican and Russia, for reasons implicit in the authoritarian nature of each, and for dozens of other reasons as well, are mortal enemies. Agreed. But that the Stalinists should have chosen this moment for an attack of this kind solely on the ground of its anti-West objectives is unlikely. It has stimulated wide opposition. It has given the U.S. government, the Catholic Church of the U.S., and the press an opportunity to howl loudest at the very moment that Stalin is vigorously promoting propaganda moves to win sympathy. It will not sit well with the people of countries like France and Italy whose support the Stalinists are particularly anxious to win.
The reason must lie primarily in Hungary itself. The Catholic Church there is the channel through which peasant opposition against the government’s program is expressed. The Church is a base of organized opposition. It goes without saying that the Church, above all the Catholic Church, is more than a religious institution. It does engage in political affairs. In Hungary, whether the peasant program is good, bad or indifferent, this program was voiced by the Church.
Something more along the same lines is equally involved. It has happened in the past (under Hitler), and it will happen again: where other channels of opposition are destroyed, the people will utilize the Church as a means of organizing, of getting together, of fighting for democratic rights (if only the democratic right to freedom of religion). Even the reactionary Catholic Church can be come the center of a democratic movement in a totalitarian country. (Pastor Niemoller became such a symbol in Hitler Germany.)
In these we think lie the motivations for the trial, a trial in the Stalinist manner. Perhaps there are socialists who react with sympathy for the jailers because the jailed has on his side a Cardinal Spellman, and because his victimization is utilized by sundry capitalist politicians and the press to cement the fortifications of the cold war. Nothing could be more dangerous. Nothing more harmful to the interests of socialism.
Socialism is the champion of democracy. Socialism is the enemy of Stalinism. The one is equal to the other. A frame-up is a frame-up against no matter whom practiced. A “trial by confession” is a “trial by confession,” no matter who the victim. It is the way of tyranny. It outrages democracy.
The trial of Mindszenty is a “trial by confession.”
It stands as a frame-up!
 

 Garrett Geltman: Atlantic Treaty Marks New High in Cold War! (11 April 1949)







Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett Geltman
Atlantic Treaty Marks
New High in Cold War!
(11 April 1949)

From Labor Action, Vol. 13 No. 15, 11 April 1949, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The Duchy of Luxemburg declared that it would consider an attack on the United States as an attack upon itself. The United States reciprocated and declared that it would similarly consider an attack on Luxemburg as an attack upon itself. In all, twelve nations (including, in addition to the above two, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Portugal, Britain, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway and Belgium) affixed their signatures to the North Atlantic Pact.
The time: 4:51 p.m. on April 4, 1949. The place: the Departmental Auditorium on Capitol Hill in Washington, where the first numbers in the World War II draft were drawn. The master of ceremonies: Secretary of State Dean Acheson, of the United States.
The signators and visiting politicians joined in affirming that the pact was the mightiest blow against aggression and for peace struck in the history of the world. President Truman, topping the ceremonies with an address to the delegates, flatly avowed that had the treaty existed in 1914 and 1939, both wars would have been averted.
Off on a side, the Marine Band included George Gershwin’s It Ain’t Necessarily So, in its serenading of the solemn occasion.
The pact now goes to the Senate and to the legislatures of the six other nations who helped to frame the text (Britain, Canada, France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxemburg) for discussion and ratification, after which the terms of the treaty become effective. There will undoubtedly be considerable discussion, and there will undoubtedly be ratification.
 
War Blocs Gear
Rarely has an event been attended by more solemnity, and with good reason. Rarely, too, have speeches, seemed quite so hollow as those made, in alphabetical order, by the foreign ministers of the participating nations.
From Acheson to Count Sforza of Italy, from Truman to Spaak of Belgium, the statesmen strained to attach the meaning of peace to their act, The labored sentences carried little conviction. But the reality, which poked its way through them, carried an infinite amount of conviction – the reality of a war bloc gearing itself for world decision.
Where such other famous agreements of recent times as the Atlantic Charter evoked general enthusiasm (except among such skeptics as we) in exact ratio with the hypocrisy of Its promised Four Freedoms, this newest and most real of agreements appears to have evoked little enthusiasm among the masses of people who seem to sense its depressing import.
With the signing of the pact, the United States secured formal recognition from the signator nations that it alone is the sovereign imperialism into whose plans the others must fit their fates. Marking the final finish of U.S. isolationism, the pact formalized, in cold-war terms for the present, the new stage of U.S. imperialism in which all areas of the world become the responsibility of the-master imperialism.
President Truman remarked that “we are like a group of householders living in the same locality” – the “same locality,” stretching as it does from Frisco to Florence, being the world.
In fifteen typewritten pages, the Pact provides that:

Article 3. “The parties * * * by means of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, will maintain and develop their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack.”
 
Article 4. “The parties will consult together whenever * * * the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the parties is threatened.”
 
Article 5. “The parties agree that an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them all; and consequently they agree that, if such an armed attack occurs, each of them * * * will assist the party or parties so attacked by taking forthwith, individually and in concert with the other parties, such action as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force, to restore and maintain the security of the North Atlantic area.”
 

U.S. Is Imperialist Center
Inasmuch as “the individual and collective capacity to resist” is militarily entirely dependent on the United States, inasmuch as the central imperialist contest of our times is between the United States and Russia, the fate of the signator nations, and of others who are not here included only because they are outside of the “North Atlantic” region, is bound to be the design of U.S. imperialism.
At least, the U.S. imperialists hope it will be so. The people of these and other countries might decide otherwise, might decide not to serve either of the giant imperialisms. The pact is consequently framed as much against them as against Russian imperialism.
However vain and stilted were the speeches in their routine, for the record, efforts to encompass the pact in the framework of world peace, the serious excitement on a diplomatic level which attended the signing is a key to the true nature of the pact. The pact is no mere propaganda device, no piece of rhetoric concerted to snare the hearts and minds of men. It is serious business.
Never before in Washington history have so many high ranking dignitaries from other lands gathered in that city for a conference. It was fully in keeping with the situation that the United States should have been host. No pretense here that the United States was sending its envoys to another capital to sit as equals with the representative of Iceland.
Lost in the shuffle of attention given this significant and concrete imperialist achievement, the United Nations prepared for the opening of its Spring Assembly sessions two days after the signing. Secretary of State Acheson and a few other major diplomats intend to be on hand for the opening day, but the. session is expected to have fewer major envoys than other previous UN session. The real business of the world, its western half anyway, had been taken care of in Washington.
Even as a sounding board for the cold war, the UN is losing importance. Russia, of course, will sail into the pact at the UN. But its major assault on the pact will be demonstrated by its Stalinist henchmen on the streets of Paris and Rome, and through its own war bloc of satellite nations.
Thus, with the signing of the pact, the cold war has moved to new and more menacing levels.
 

 Geltman: Budget Allots Billions for War Machine (17 January 1949)






Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Geltman
Truman’s Fair Deal: Gear for War,
Hamstring Labor, Promise Reforms
Budget Allots Billions
for War Machine
(17 January 1949)

From Labor Action, Vol. 13 No. 3, 17 January 1949, pp. 1 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The bare realities of administration program are revealed in the President’s budget message to Congress with a sharpness that is only assumed in the two messages which preceded it. Where the State of the Union message, and the economic report, concerned themselves with domestic program, with heavy emphasis on the President’s fulfillment of campaign promises in various fields of legislation, the budget message illustrates what is the unalterable framework of the over-all program: preparation for an atomic Third World War through explicit all-out prosecution of the “cold war.”
Proposing an unprecedented peacetime expenditure of $42 billion, the President allotted in his recommendations more than half of this staggering sum to what he called “our international and national defense programs,” with additional requests for special purposes under this plan indicated for the future. Specifically, the President asked for $14,268,000,000 for “national defense,” and $6,709,000,000 for “international affairs and finance.”
The implications of these requests are manifest. They establish the fundamental political and economic orientation of the whole United States system. The billions proposed in war preparation today are, so to speak, down payments on the war that the leaders of government and business expect in the future, however remote that fearsome future may be at the moment.
They are billions which condition the nature of economic activity, providing the only vital stimulus for a high production level and employment that a decayed economic system can find.
They are billions thrown into the wastefulness of production designed not to better the lot of man, but to destroy him – today in the “cold war” with despotic Russia, tomorrow in the “hot” war – while in both situations the peoples of the world serve as expendable pawns in a ghastly war that can benefit no rational part of humanity.
 
Other War Costs
Actually, far more than is stated by the actual allotment figures (and more or less, the budget will generally be legislated with few significant changes, at least in this sphere of expenditure) is slated to go to the various war enterprises. Thus, whatever other benefits may accrue to the people from the sums asked for improving natural resources, transportation, etc., it seems obvious that part of them fall into the pattern of military needs.
Further, we must add to the explicit billions asked tor “international and national defense,” and the hidden millions referred to in the above paragraph, those other billions which are payments on previous wars. Here we have a picture of the intolerable burden imposed upon us by capitalism – yes, that most comfortable, energetic, stable of all capitalisms, United States capitalism.
Approximately one eighth of the whole budget, or $5,496,000,000, is asked for veteran’s services and benefits. This is one item of war expenditure we heartily endorse! By all means, the men and women who bore the pain of imperialist war have every right to be remunerated, and far more adequately than is provided for in the budget. For example, there is no provision for a national veterans’ bonus. We favor the expense, but should we not at the same consider the cause of the expense?
 
Making a Comparison
It is in the light of these billions that other appropriations requested must be seen. The State of the Union message may have left one saying ... well, however narrow, however inadequate, however limited, the President was coming across in his proposals for social legislation, and the real job is therefore to see that Congress enacts at least as much as the President seems to be asking.
Increased social security, public housing, aid to education sounded tine, if not all that is required, in the State of the Union message. But read in terms of the budget statistics, they seem pitiful indeed.

$2,358,000,000 is provided for social welfare, health and security. That is somewhat more than last year’s figure, but under the 1941 figure (the big drop-coming in work relief requirements.)
 
$388,000,000 is provided for housing and community facilities, which is a slight jump over last year’s figure. About a third of this is intended for a public housing program.
 
$414,000,000 is provided for education and general research, which is a big jump (some five times) over last year’s figure.

These three items, plus others under agricultural aid, preserving natural resources, etc., are commendable requests. Compare them, however, with the multi-billion requests for the armed services, with the $800,000,000 for the single item of universal training, with the $740,000,000 requested for the atomic energy commission (of which $210,208,875 is to be directly allocated to atomic weapons.)
$144,000,000 for public housing is better than nothing. That is one way to look at it. But, compared with the billions for war preparation (all right, “national defense”), it is nothing! $144 million will help some. However, it can come nowhere near meeting the need, for which an appropriation in the neighborhood of $5 billions would make sense.
So too, on the other items. It is understandable that a rich nation such as ours should spend billions on behalf of its citizens. Billions for what, though? For housing, for education, for social security? That’s rational. That’s sane.
 
Irrational, Insane System
Capitalism is, however, neither. It is caught in the impasse of being unable to meet the challenge of totalitarian Stalinism, in any other Way than war, or the anticipatory skirmishes of war.
It cannot appeal to the people of Europe and Asia, and the United States, to withstand and crush the Stalinist advance by asserting themselves, by independence, by dictating their own future through governments of their own.
It cannot appeal to the people trapped in the monstrous slave camp of Stalinism by telling them to free themselves, so that they can exercise control over industry and politics themselves, in common striving for a world of peace and plenty with the workers and farmers of other lands.
It cannot, because what it has to offer is no kind of desirable substitute – only the chaos and misery of capitalist imperialism, which has, in fact, made possible the advance of Stalinist imperialism.
And so, today, pending more terrible days of disaster, it imposes a 42 billion dollar burden on the people of the United States more than half of which is intended in one way or another for, destructive purposes, in order that U.S. imperialism may assert its dominance over a shaky world.
 
Socialist Opposition to Budget
Is it unreasonable to request billions for housing and other useful purposes? We know that the legislators, confronted with such a demand would raise their eyebrows in horror. Where to get the money? Well, one source suggests itself immediately: from the war budget. Simple.
Unfortunately, there is no one in either House of Congress who will oppose the budget on a socialist basis. One or two Stalinist stooges will oppose it, but their purpose will be to facilitate Russia’s campaign, to strengthen Russia’s hand, and not to promote the welfare of the people. They too are preparing for war, but for the other side. Perhaps some left-over isolationists will quibble about the size of the amount. Their plaints will do nobody any good either.
A socialist could oppose the military appropriations, and put the whole thing in proper perspective. He could ask the billions for housing, etc., and give that lift to the confidence and wishes of the people which could serve ultimately to block the imperialist war makers on both sides by laying the groundwork of a mass people’s opposition.
There are no socialists in Congress to speak for us. We must therefore speak outside the halls of Congress, and press through our unions and other representative organizations, for those measures we consider essential – bigger appropriations for housing, education, and so forth. And educate everyone to understand the meaning of the budget which is the real presidential message.
 
Where the Money Comes From
How does Truman propose that all this money shall be raised? He is asking for a raise in taxes. His proposals, except insofar as they call for greater taxes, do not appear to affect the lower income groups.
He has not been specific, but it seems likely that taxes will not be raised on incomes up to $5,000. The increase is to come from higher corporation taxes, and increased taxes on high incomes. Very good. However, we note something most interesting. Truman, in his new, aggressive liberal mood, does not ask for as much as he requested in what might be called his less liberal, pre-election campaign days: namely, an excess profits tax. Why not?
Not to impose a greater tax burden on the low income groups is welcome escape. The fact remains that present taxes are in themselves a burden.
One forgets what is the contribution of the low income group. Of $18.5 billion in taxes to be contributed in individual income taxes in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1949, $9,500,000,000 comes from those who make less than $5,000, $6 billion from those making between $5,000 and $25,000, and $3 billion from those making over $25,000.
Obviously, the nine and a half billion is spread over a vastly greater number of people. Still, it is a burden, a burden which concretely cuts into the standard of living, a burden which in our opinion ought to be borne by the fewer people who make the big dough.
Our slogan has been and remains: Soak the Rich! By all means an excess profits tax. By all means, a steeply graduated income tax above $5,000 with a $25,000 ceiling on individual incomes.
The rich ought to be soaked, and in our opinion they ought to be soaked to provide the revenue for socially useful enterprises instead of the socially destructive enterprises for which the greatest part of the budget is now allocated.
In conclusion, the budget, and all those matters like taxes which relate to it, are things that require the closest study by labor. The budget indicates to what we are heading. It also indicates those demands which not only serve our immediate, special interests in housing and the like, but which can serve as well to head off the disaster that a “healthy” and temporarily prosperous capitalism is preparing for us.
 

 Garrett: Carlo Tresca – The Life of a Rebel (10 February 1947)





Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Despite the Current Myth, He Was Not a “Respectable” Liberal
Carlo Tresca: The Life of a Rebel
(10 February 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 6, 10 February 1947, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Four years ago, in the month of January, Carlo Tresca was murdered on the streets of New York. Since then we have published regularly reports of the activity of a committee established to press for an investigation of his murder. Norman Thomas is chairman of the committee which, quite properly, includes people of many different political hues, united on the single point of ferreting out the fascist thugs who killed Tresca. It is more than proper that these people, an ex-judge, Dorothy Kenyon, various union officials, etc., should be on the committee; it is their duty. However, in reflecting on the activity and publicity releases of the committee, and reviewing the speakers and speeches at the Tresca Memorial Meeting, we feel it necessary to say something about the man and the FALSE legend that is growing up around him. And we feel that were Carlo alive today, he would be the first to protest with us.
Carlo Tresca, above all else, was a rebel! And as a rebel he was a man of rare attainment and courage. Though our political views differed widely, we are proud to number him among our heroes, for he was forged out of the steel that makes revolutionists. But in violation of everything that Tresca stood for, an image of Tresca is developing as a pink-tea anti-totaliiarian, a lovable, genial character, and nothing more. To be sure, Tresca was lovable. Few came near him who did not feel the warmth of his devotion to the ideals of liberty, of his love for humanity, of his contemptuous disregard for the conventions of this bigoted, oppressive society we live in. All that is true, but there was far more to the man and rebel. He was indeed an anti-totalitarian, but we would prefer seeing him described for what he really was: an anarchist-syndicalist.
It reflects poorly on the man to hide his political philosophy behind vague and pale generalizations. We differed with him, but we respected his convictions as he respected ours. The more so because Tresca was not a dilettante anarchist, idling away his hours in futile talk at a bohemian tea shop. For years, the press referred to him as “Tresca the Troublemaker.” And the capitalist press, which despised and feared him, was right to this extent: where there was trouble, where a man of courage was needed, Tresca was there. We well remember how Tresca laughed at the “bomb plots” the police were always involving him in, how at meetings he would tell the story of his many arrests, his clashes with the respectable powers that be, proud that the enemy knew him as an implacable fighter.
 
A Rebel from His Youth
Born in Sulmona, Italy, Tresca organized in his youth the first Socialist Party in that city. At the age of twenty-two he was secretary of the Italian Railroad Workers Union. Indicted for “libelling” some big-wig, Tresca was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. Having forgotten to file an appeal, with characteristic contempt for the judiciary, Tresca fled Italy and eventually came to the United States. From the day he arrived, he was up to his neck in the struggles of the American working class, and his name is linked with unforgettable pages of our history. In this country, he was arrested at least 36 times, tried by jury seven times on accusations ranging from shouting “Viva Socialismo” in a cop’s face to sedition. During the famous Paterson silk strike alone he was arrested seven times, tried by jury three times and held in $30,000 bail. Paterson, Lawrence, Pittsburgh, Mesabi Range, and in others too numerous to list – in every one of the battles which marked the first decades of this century, Tresca was organizer, speaker, fearless fighter. Where Tresca was needed he went, summoned to this trouble and to that one by Vincent St. John, the great leader of the Industrial Workers of the World.
In a pen sketch of Tresca, Max Eastman tells a story about Tresca and the “Socialist,” Jacob Panken (who later became a judge) in the hotel strike of 1913. The strike was a difficult one. At one strike meeting, Panken, who loved flowery oratory, was haranguing the strikers with the admonition to settle their grievances at election time. When Panken finished, Tresca moved to the front with slow and dignified calm, mounted the platform, and in the English that he refused to master, fired the audience to cheers with the simple speech that began with these words: “Fellow workers, a strike, dat is not a course of lectures – dat is a fight.” Panken, so far as we know, was not at the Memorial Meeting, but others like him, and we repeat altogether justly, were there. It is worth musing on what the Tresca of Paterson and the hotel strike and a host of bitter battles would have said had he been able to speak.
 
How Carlo Tresca Fought The Fascists
At this meeting, many tributes were paid to Tresca as an anti-totalitarian, a tireless foe of fascism. It is a pity that Tresca could not address some of the speakers who believe that the best way to fight fascism is to ignore it, to let the fascists hold their meetings uninterrupted. While Tresca was alive, Mussolini’s Black Shirts in this country scarcely dared hold a meeting in New York. One of our comrades who was with Tresca at the time, tells of an occasion when Tresca went to a small coal town in Pennsylvania, predominantly Italian in population, where the Black Shirts had severely beaten a miner. Tresca called a meeting at which every last Italian coal miner was present. He publicly asked the fascists to come, and prepared the miners, who truly loved him, to receive them. The Black Shirts came, and Tresca defied them to start something, taunted them, asked them if they were brave men only when ranged as a gang against one man. While the audience cheered, the Black Shirts slunk out and never again dared raise their ugly heads in that town.
Many times Tresca risked death. He was shot at countless times and Mussolini’s forces tried repeatedly to kill him, until a bullet did finally lay him low on Fifth Avenue. Tresca scorned them, defied them, challenged them in the open. And not only the Black Shirts. Deputy Sheriffs, armed vigilante bands many times threatened him. Once in Grand Rapids, Minn., during the Mesabi Range strike, he was ordered out of town by an armed band of deputy sheriffs. He left town in a car with some companions, followed by five carloads of deputy sheriffs. At the next town, the streets were filled with deputy sheriffs and respectable citizens armed to the teeth. It looked like a lynching party. Tresca refused to permit his companions to risk their lives. He halted the car and calmly, slowly walked down the main street. The stunned sheriffs did nothing.
 
His Relations with the Trotskyists
It is possible to tell endless tales of Tresca the rebel. We remember his speeches at the time of the Sacco-Vanzetti case. Delivered in Italian, it did not matter if we did not understand the language. The fire in them spoke clearly the rebel’s call to fight. And we remember too the many times that Tresca came to Trotskyist meetings in this country, to defend them against Stalinist attacks, to join with us in whatever was the action at hand.
Tresca was available for Trotskyist meetings when we needed him, because, whatever our differences, he respected us as we respected him: as rebels!
We record with particular gratitude and pride Tresca’s work on the Dewey Commission to investigate the charges against Leon Trotsky. He could not be intimidated by the Stalinist gangsters any more than he could be by Mussolini gangsters. When asked to serve, Tresca did not hesitate for a moment, and bent his efforts to organizing the Commission and getting its work started. It was one of the last great acts in the life of this rebel.
Tresca is dead now. Every effort must be expended to press the investigation of his murder, and to involve in this work every human being in whom there still beats a spark of decency. At the same time, we think it important to keep his memory clean and sharp. Something of the same as is now happening to Carlo Tresca happened to Gene Debs. Over the years, the great rebel Debs has been prettified into a sanctimonious, if lovable, spineless, if benign, plaster-sainted liberal. Debs and Tresca were indeed wonderful human beings in the fullest sense of the word. It is disheartening to see the Gene Debs of the Pullman strike, of the Canton speech, in which he spat defiance at the warmakers and slaveholders of the world, to see this Gene Debs depicted with the pink water-coloring of genial liberalism. Equally with Tresca! Let us remember the man as he was: A REBEL!
 

 Garrett: Jim Crow Georgia Offers a Lesson in “Democracy” (27 January 1947)





Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Jim Crow Georgia Offers a Lesson in “Democracy”
(27 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 4, 27 January 1947, pp. 3 & 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

WITH the approval of a slim majority in the state legislature, Herman Talmadge, darling of Georgia’s degenerate hoodlum gangs, has installed himself as governor in the state to succeed his father, Eugene Talmadge, who died before he could take the oath of office. Ex-Governor Arnall for several days insisted he would hold on to his position until the courts decide in favor of M.E. Thompson, elected with the late Eugene Talmadge as Lieutenant Governor. He has, however, stepped down, and M.E. Thompson has taken the oath of office as Acting-Governor.
Both sides are issuing warrants, making appointments. Thompson has instructed the Attorney General to bar Herman from making use of state funds. At this writing it is not known whether the Attorney General, a Thompson man, will do so, or whether it will matter if he does. Herman has behind him an armed band of followers who are making merry in the corridors of the Capitol, and are prepared to do all that is necessary to maintain Herman’s power.
Various agencies of the federal government are reflecting on their right to intervene. In the more than a week that has passed, however, no branch of the federal government has made a move. What is the meaning of all this? Whom do these people represent? How did it happen? What should be dope about it?
 
Rotten Borough and Jim Crow Voting
1,000,000 votes were cast in Georgia’s state primary last July. The million votes do not represent all those who wanted to vote; only those who were permitted to vote. These did not include Negroes! A man called Carmichael polled the largest popular vote, but, under the state unit system, Klan candidate Eugene Talmadge won the nomination.
In Georgia, as in so many other states, the Democratic primary is the real election. The other election, the “real” election, is a technicality suffered as a Constitutional nuisance. That’s been the system for years, accepted alike by Talmadge and such of his enemies as liberal (Southern style) ex-Governor Arnall. The primary system is furthermore rigged as an additional safe-guard against any accidental democratic expression of opinion by those permitted to vote under Jim Crow rules. By virtue of a rotten borough primary system, Carmichael, Arnall’s candidate, lost the nomination (election) despite his popular plurality.
Thus, we find it strange that Georgia has today only two governors. According to the logic of Georgia’s Jim Crow, Klan-ridden electoral system, Carmichael could plausibly set up headquarters in an alleyway of the State Capitol. However, we have seen nothing in the press reports about Carmichael claiming the governorship, and so we assume that he is backing M.E. Thompson. Thompson, having been chosen Lieutenant Governor in the elections, claims succession to the governorship according to the generally practiced and accepted legality of the United States.
Acting Governor Thompson is somewhat at a disadvantage. The State Capitol itself has been usurped by Herman Talmadge, Eugene’s son, who has taken possession of the governorship by virtue of having claimed it with armed force, according to the right of divine inheritance and the wishes of the Ku Klux Klan, and by virtue of having polled 697 write-in votes in the elections. (We are tempted to ask if these were not cast in anticipation of Eugene’s death, because we have seen no other reasonable explanation for the 697 write-ins for this chip off the old man’s storm-trooper block.) And it is a fact that the write-in votes did make him runner-up to the late Talmadge. That says nothing at all about Herman’s right to succeed his father. It does, however, speak volumes for the electoral system in Georgia, and the South.
 
An Instructive Lesson in Politics
We have, then, a situation in Georgia which can be viewed as strange only by overlooking the entire social and electoral structure in the South. Two factions of the Democratic Party are struggling for power: one, the Talmadge faction, openly flaunting its arms and seizing the governorship by an act of violence; the other, the Thompson-Arnall faction, threatening the use of the militia, but concentrating on court action.
While in the first few days it seemed to some as though there might actually be an armed struggle, it is most unlikely. When Arnall left the Capitol unguarded, before he made way for Thompson, we are quite sure that he expected Herman to do exactly what he did do – take possession. No other explanation makes sense. An armed contest would unleash forces neither side could control. There are, for example, over a million Negroes who might choose such a moment to vent their hatred against the entire system which has degraded and oppressed them. That is why we suspect the Northern capitalist press, which at first reacted with anguished horror, is now tempering its indignation, sort of growing accustomed to the idea, quite willing to let the case drag through the courts for an indefinite period of time.
However, the very situation which threatens violence, and which has already seen the occupation of the Capitol by an armed force, is a matter for serious thought. We have here a microscopic struggle for power, not between classes but between factions of one class. The capitalist prosecutors comb the books and periodicals of the working class movement to find quotations which justify the defense of a workers’ government, the expression of popular will, against the attack of capitalist reaction. Suppose, just suppose, a workers party, with a mandate from the people to operate the government of Georgia which Talmadge does NOT have, had found it necessary to occupy the state Capitol by use of its defense guards. In such a hypothetical situation, how long would the federal government have deliberated before sending in its troops? How legalistic would the capitalist press be? How many years would they wait to hear the case argued in the courts? Yes, it is a tantalizing thought.
 
Georgia Democracy and Klan’s Support
There is much else to consider in this Georgia situation. Not the least incredible feature of this situation is that M.E. Thompson represents in some small way democracy, against the whip-lash and terror of the Klan and the powerful interests which support it. In Georgia, Thompson can be a democrat. Like the man who opposed Eugene Talmadge in the primary, Carmichael, M.E. Thompson insists he is as loyal to the viciousness of “white supremacy” as the Talmadges, father and son.
Thompson was chosen as nominee for Lieutenanf Governor in a Jim Crow primary. If he had any violent disputes with Talmadge on principles, it has not been revealed. Why then the fuss? The Klan, and the powerful interests behind them, prefer one of their own kind, someone who takes naturally to the rope and faggot, someone who, even if he doesn’t object too strenuously to lynch law, won’t be too queazy in applying it.
That is how it happens that Thompson represents some small vestige of democracy in Georgia. For if any one has the right to claim the governorship, pending the only real solution of a new election, it is he.
Before we return to the mater of a new election, let us examine the people behind Herman Talmadge. The Klan’s connection is well established. The papers have referred openly to the Georgia Power and Light Company. But why have they been so reticent in naming the soft-drink corporation that has contributed heavily to the Talmadge campaign? Why the indirect references to a “coke corporation,” a “nationally famous softdrink,” etc.?
We are not saying, but we are asking: do they mean Coca-Cola? Why not name names? Maybe a few million people would like to do something about the “soft-drink” company that backs Klan terror!
 
New Election Is Democratic Solution
According to the rule in all states which have lieutenant governors, the lieutenant governor succeeds to the governor’s post in the event the governor dies. That Talmadge died before taking the oath of office is a legal wrinkle best argued by the Constitutional experts. As matters stand, Thompson is apparently right in claiming the governorship. But we think that the people of Georgia should have the opportunity to choose a governor democratically. A new election, a free election, is the only real solution.
We note that Thompson is not pressing for such an election, preferring an appeal to the courts for the present. Talmadge is obviously opposed to an election. All the more reason, then, for the people of the state, encouraged and assisted by every opponent of intolerance and racial discrimination in the other forty-seven states, to press for such an election. That is admittedly no small matter. For it to be a real election, it must also be an election in which Negroes can vote. That will take a bit of doing, but in the process of that doing the situation in Georgia, in which the Klan is today riding high, can be turned to the advantage of the people.
In this, the labor movement has special opportunities. We read with anger the report that an AFL official Voted for Talmadge. That man has no business in the labor movement, and certainly no right to be a labor official. And we hope that the AFL unions will make their protest clear. The AFL and CIO Operations Dixie are in Georgia. They cannot help but be involved in this struggle for power in Georgia. By entering into it vigorously they can mobilize in common action the mass of Negro and white workers. We would like to see the unions in Georgia banding together for a political campaign, demanding a new election, and declaring their readiness to put their own candidate, a candidate that will really fight Jim Crow, in the field.
 
Defense Guards Are an Urgent Need
There is a man fiddling in Talmadge headquarters who acquired considerable fame some thirty years ago fiddling over the body of a lynch victim. His fiddling engagements will increase if Talmadge goes unchallenged, if his Klansmen and guardsmen are not met with the organized opposition of the Georgia people, Negro and white. Talmadge’s hooded cohorts will ride against labor organizers as readily as against Negroes, Jews and Catholics.
While the contest runs its course in the courts, and the issue of a new election is debated, the situation calls for the mobilization of the Negro people and the unions to prepare their defense against the Talmadge forces. It is idiotic to rely on the federal government. It has not intervened so far; its experts are debating precedent: does the Arkansas precedent under Ulysses S. Grant apply, or does it not? The federal government acts quickly only when strikers are involved – and then not on behalf of strikers, but on behalf of just such institutions as the Georgia Power and Light Company, and the unnamed “soft-drink” corporation.
Thus, we think if necessary that the unions and the Negro people organize their own defense guards. It is simply a matter of self-protection. It Is simply a matter of demonstrating that Georgia’s people, black and white, will not let themselves be terrorized by hoodlum bands. It is simply a matter of saying that we have no taste for a certain kind of fiddling.
 

 Garrett: Truman and GOP Jockey on Anti-Labor Offensive (13 January 1947)





Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Truman and GOP Jockey on Anti-Labor Offensive
(13 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 2, 13 January 1947, pp. 1 & 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

President Truman, in his State of the Union message, extended an offer of harmony to the Republican majority in Congress, proposing that Democrats and Republicans unite in fashioning an olive branch of peace that can be used as a whip against the labor movement. Though Truman disclaimed any bid for punitive measures against labor, and restricted his suggestions to a few “mild curbs,” his message makes it absolutely clear that the labor movement will have to be alerted against a legislative assault.
It is not without reason that virtually every single newspaper in the United States headlined Truman’s request for “curbs” on labor’s right to strike. For that was the real essence of his message, and the essential content of his peace offering to the Republicans. That Republican and Democratic leaders, for the most part, expressed high satisfaction with Truman’s proposals is, in the nature of things, to be taken for granted. That some labor leaders, however, also expressed themselves as satisfied indicates the clearest need of rousing the vigilance of the union movement.
Admittedly, the proposals were “mild.” They are nevertheless sufficiently vicious to open the gates to sterner anti-union measures. It is interesting to note that Truman is hardly as specific in .other sections of his message as in its labor section. Here he concretely proposes three measures: to ban strikes over the interpretation of a contract; to ban jurisdictional strikes; and to ban, within limitations, secondary boycotts.
 
Why So Cautious?
They are a far cry from the extremes of anti-labor legislation threatened by various Republican and Democratic Congressmen. And for good reason.
• In the first place, Truman, and for that matter the more astute Republican leaders, realize that they dare not venture too far afield, lest they be smitten by the strength of an aroused and powerful labor movement.
Regardless of how weak may be the spine of this or that labor leader, the fact remains that the labor movement is much too confident of its ability, and much too sensitive of its rights, to permit any legislative tampering with those rights. Hence the calculated attempt to present these proposals as mild, inoffensive and reasonable.
• In the second place, Truman is tossing the ball to the Republicans. The big elections come in 1948. Organized or unorganized, there is such a thing as the labor vote. Accordingly, the “responsible” Democratic and Republican Party leaders propose to proceed with more than a little caution, despite the wild-eyed threats of this or that individual.
It is one thing to make a bid for the middle class vote against labor. It is quite another thing to so antagonize the labor movement, and possibly broad layers, of the middle class as well, as to weaken party chances in 1948 ... and possibly encourage what has already been given concrete expression in many localities, namely, a Labor Party.
Thus we see, and will continue to see throughout this session of Congress, no small amount of jockeying. Truman is, in effect, saying: this is how far I propose to go, and I offer it as a working basis against labor; if you want to go further, I may be “compelled” to sign your bills, but the responsibility will be yours.
Let us examine these concrete propositions, these “mild” curbs:
• Truman, you see, is not asking that labor’s rights be invaded in any important sense, merely that small irritations be outlawed. After all, are not jurisdictional strikes injurious to labor as well as to management? They are.
But it will, be far more injurious to labor if they are outlawed in Truman’s way. Like bureaucratism and other evils that injure the best interests of the union movement, the cure lies not in the intervention of the capitalist government and its agencies, but within the labor movement itself.
All such matters are the business of labor itself, to be handled by encouraging the vigilance and interest of union rank and files. Otherwise they lend themselves to a pattern that could mean the ultimate strangulation of the union movement, as the capitalist government dictates to the unions today on jurisdictional strikes, tomorrow on compulsory arbitration, the next day on the basic right to strike.
• And having “put one over” on jurisdictional strikes, Truman gingerly advanced to a ban on secondary boycotts and strikes over contract interpretation.
Secondary boycotts are hardly on the same level as picket-line strike action. Perhaps they are a small thing to yield, not worth bothering with? Decidedly not! They are indeed secondary operations, but the labor movement must protect its right to their use. Even Truman recognized that, with a complicated industrial structure such as we have, secondary boycotts are sometimes necessary weapons of union operation.
And as for a ban on strikes over contract interpretation, little argument is necessary. Eliminate the right to strike, and the union is at the mercy of the employer in interpreting a contract – notwithstanding how many “impartial” government boards are assigned to investigate.
 
No Mention of FEPC
At least fifteen of Truman’s forty minutes were devoted to labor. That is why we have examined that section of his address in detail. Reading or listening to Truman is at best a thankless task. However, the rest of his address is worth examining if only to study its emptiness and to discover what is missing.
• First, a very important omission must be noted. NOWHERE IN HIS ADDRESS DID TRUMAN CALL FOR A FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES ACT!
Many other things are missing, including an anti-poll-tax bill. But we single out FEPC for mention because this was part of the 21-point program Truman presented to the last Congress. As with the Republicans, who through Joe Martin have warned Negro Republican leaders that they had. best forget’ about FEPC, so the Democrats have shelved FEPC now that the vote-getting season is temporarily over. It may be resuscitated in time for the next election. Between times, they will do nothing to enact FEPC into law.
 
Wage-Price Zero
Most of what Truman did say, apart from his labor proposals, constituted little more than a great big zero. However, the very ambiguity of his other proposals speaks volumes. So, for example, on wages and prices, Truman offered the wisdom that prices must be held in line. How? By advising industry to hold prices down, and to cut them where profits allow. That is exactly what Truman proposed when he abolished price ceilings on almost all commodities. We all know how it has worked out.
He also advised: labor not to seek wage rises that Would lead to price rises. In the concrete, since Truman is definitely not going to uphold the CTO’s crucial contention that wage increases can be granted without price increases, that will mean a continuation of Truman’s strikebreaking.
Last year, having publicly taken the position that labor was entitled to wage increases, Truman thereupon launched into a vicious display of strike-breaking. Starting more “moderately” this year, proposing no wage increases, Truman will at least have the benefit of greater consistency. It must be remembered that Truman’s declaration ending hostilities did not declare the duration ended. He therefore still has, and may seek to use various wartime emergency powers against the labor movement in the event of a national strike wave.
 
Empty Talk
• In an effort to balance his labor program, Which, however “mild,” is sure to provoke Widespread protest, Truman recommended to Congress that it “considers the extension and broadening of our Social Security program, better housing, a comprehensive national health program and provision for a fair minimum wage.” There is an obvious need for all of this, but Truman did not so much as by a phrase indicate how any of this was to be done. It was clearly added for impressive padding.
• Reduced to its essentials, all Truman could offer on housing was an appeal to private enterprise. Plus the specific advice to veterans that the “primary responsibility to deliver housing at reasonable prices that veterans can afford rests with private industry and labor.” Plenty of ventilation here, but no housing!
• As his “second major policy” next to labor, Truman offered a disquisition on restricting monopoly. But it is so vapid, so utterly vain, as to require no comment.
• Though he did not say so in so many words, Truman implied that he would not ask for any tax cuts. Proceeding on our own, by implication too, we can expect that any major tax revisions will be designed to help the wealthy and leave the poor with the same scandalous and disproportionate burden they have been carrying.
Last week, in ending hostilities, Truman announced that various excise taxes would be lifted by July 1.
Interestingly enough, they were all on luxury items. Excise taxes that drain the pockets of the poor remain.
• Much else was crowded into the 25 minutes that remained of Truman’s address after he had finished with his labor program. He made it clear that he would oppose a veterans’ bonus, saying that no revisions are needed in present veterans’ laws. He took a clear and unambiguous position – yes, we’ll say that for him – on merging the armed forces into a single department, and on universal military training (which has more than a fleeting connection with his strike-breaking inclinations). He mumbled something about extending civil rights in a manner which he will explain later. He told the farmer that he was entitled to a fair income. He suggested that immigration be revised to permit more displaced persons to enter – an excellent suggestion – but steered clear of concrete proposals. He advised the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission to “foster the development of atomic energy for industrial use and scientific research.” Sounds nice, doesn’t it?
 
Do Not Be Deceived!
There may be a few points we have overlooked. If so, they aren’t important. For, we repeat, the core of the address concerned itself with his labor program. Given his record, Truman may very well reverse himself on everything he said – as he has reversed himself time and time again since he took office. If however, he reverses himself on labor, it will most likely be to shed the sweetness of his “moderation” for government by injunction or the like.
We must not be deceived by this “moderation,” either in the meaning of the specific proposals or in what can follow. While AFL President William Green has already rushed into print with a halting approval of Truman’s address, CIO President Philip Murray, other AFL and CIO leaders and railroad brotherhood spokesmen have not commented. We hope they will advise Congress that any move in the direction of legislating Truman’s proposals will be met with a storm of labor protest and action! And that they will then turn to the business of leading an aggressive national wage drive, this time keeping clear of the White House corridors!
 

 Garrett: Viewing the British Elections (1950)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Viewing the British Elections
What Course for the Labor Party Government?
(March 1950)

From The New International, Vol. XVI No. 2, March–April 1950, pp. 69–75.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

From any point of view, the victory of British labor in 1945 was an event of rare interest. The British people expressed their lack of confidence in capitalism. Where it wasn’t an outright affirmation of the wish for socialism, it was at the very least a declaration of willingness to experiment along socialist paths. Thus, the evident bankruptcy of British capitalism, and the restiveness of the British masses combined in the victory of the British Labor Party to reaccredit reformism both as a system of theory and as an instrument of action. By its victory and in its accomplishments, the British Labor government raised issues of profound importance for the socialist movement, and for the capitalist world as well.
Whatever the conclusions one might arrive at, the rule of the British Labor Party certainly elevated into the area of discussion a variety of questions settled in historical experience many times before; notably, the reformist or revolutionary road to power. Here was no MacDonald government of unlamented and shameful memory. Here was a government that had pledged itself to certain aims, and actually carried them through. The aims were limited, but the record of accomplishment was unprecedented.
The years clearly had wrought almost as many changes in the Labor Party as it had in the British Empire. As types, Attlee and Bevin may have represented little advance over MacDonald; they were pressed in the same mold. As leaders, they were inept where they were not criminal, insensitive where they were not bureaucratic, diffident where they were not cowardly. Still no socialist could fail to recognize that changes had been effected in the Labor Party and by the Labor Party. Above all could he not fail to appreciate that this was the party of the British working class and that this working class had resisted both political dispersion and Stalinization.
No amount of underscoring could do this justice. Against an almost universal trend toward the atomization of the socialist movement, the British working class strengthened its cohesion as a political class unit, and gave ample evidence that it expected socialist results. This obviously dictated a course of action to revolutionary socialists; it meant that they could not hope to advance their ideas and organization save by joining with the masses in the party of their socialist (albeit Fabian-reformist) allegiance, and there acting as the leaven for the leftward elements. Even the most unimaginative sectarians had to succumb to this reality.
* * *
All the more reason then to assess the recent election most carefully, and with that to weigh the past and future course of the Labor Party. In the election, the Labor Party majority was reduced from overwhelming superiority to a bare majority of six against the combined totals of the Conservatives and Liberals. Was this, then, a defeat for British labor? To answer “Yes” is much too simple. That is the first point that must be made in analyzing the elections.
To be sure, it was generally reported as a defeat in the press. The bourgeoisie the world over was immensely relieved by the revival of the Conservatives. They know that the Labor Party leaders are socialists of an exceedingly mild and tractable disposition. Yet any kind of socialism is to them nightmarish for the times are so uncertain that even a Bevin cannot be relied on to leave private property intact. It is, of course, understandable that the bourgeoisie should seek maximum consolation in the election results. But for the Labor Party leaders to tread timorously in accepting the verdict of “defeat” is quite another matter and only reflects their own political nature.
The working class in its virtual entirety voted Labor. That seems to us a central fact uncontested save in labored reference to random individuals. Moreover, the Labor Party vote increased by roughly a million over the 1945 election; and it would appear reasonable to account for this vote by the adherence of new young voters. In any country, such a vote would be of unsurpassable significance: the whole working class casting a class vote! Think of what this would mean for the United States. And consider its particular meaning for England where the working class is probably closer to being an absolute majority of the population than in any country of the world. The key class of modern society, on whose dynamic strivings rests social progress, registers its conviction. To speak of that as a defeat is ludicrous in the extreme.
* * *
But the Tories also increased their vote – and by some two million. We are not trying to minimize any part of the facts. Quite the contrary. If we insist upon the significance of the working class vote, it is precisely because we wish to appraise it in relation to those elements in the situation which impede the progression and consolidation of working-class victory, which undermine the intentions of the working-class electorate. The Tories have reestablished themselves beyond the expectation of any sober analyst, let us say a year ago. To which, we must add: they reestablished themselves beyond any limit’ that need have been allowable given better (socialist) Labor Party policy and leadership.
If a couple of years ago the bourgeoisie in England was a frightened, spiritually splintered class, incapable of defending itself seriously, and certainly incapable of holding its lower middle-class sections in line, today they have undoubtedly regained a considerable measure of confidence and class adhesion. In part, this is inherent in the very situation itself. Fabians notwithstanding, it was certainly unreasonable to expect that the bourgeoisie would not at some time flock to its colors in defense of its basic property positions. With ruin rampant, one section would be played against the other in a limited program of nationalization – 20 per cent said the Labor Party in 1945. But social impulsions are not arrested because a Herbert Morrison fixes a 20 per cent limit.
Nationalization, so to speak, breeds nationalization. There is no justifying the nationalization of railroads, and not of steel; there is no justifying the nationalization of steel and not of chemicals. Not to the. working class anyway; nor to the pressures of economic growth. And beyond the simple legislation of nationalization lies a truly “appalling menace” from which there is no hope of retreat: the pressure to democratize that nationalization. It is grist to the socialist mill if the bourgeoisie lies down and permits itself to be walked over; it is criminal irresponsibility to rest a policy on their never rising to give whatever battle they can.
The very stabilization effected by the Labor government served to encourage the aggressiveness of the bourgeoisie. However, there is no justifying, in socialist terms, the degree of recovery managed by the Tories. (We omit special reference to the Liberal Party, which commands an important position parliamentary-wise because its eight votes can have balance-of-power effectiveness, but which is otherwise of scanty consequence. An anachronism of little social import, it is essentially no different from the Tories on the basic issues, though its representatives can be expected to vote with Labor on some issues. A feeble remnant of a once-powerful party, it literally has to apologize for its existence. The bourgeoisie is unable to afford the luxury of two parties.) Many of the votes added by the Tories may have come from those who were too apathetic or too paralyzed to get out and vote in 1945. This time, the Tories with their hard-driving campaign, did presumably succeed in getting these people- to vote. If so, it still remains to be asked why the Labor government could not have neutralized or won these people over.
* * *
In a very true sense, the election was a contest for the middle class – revealing the strength of the Tories and the weakness of the Laborites. In its halcyon period,, the Labor government attached to itself sections of the bourgeoisie trying .to ride – or, perhaps, control – the wave of the future. Generals, admirals, even some industrialists hopped on the wagon. But the upper reaches of the capitalist class could naturally be expected to stand fast on their Tory principles and organization. Similarly there was. no real contest for the working class. Who could even imagine that workers would vote Tory? The Tory party? Impossible. They may be (and are) dissatisfied, with Labor Party policy, but they know the Tories; and they know on which side their class bread is buttered.
There is no way to dissect the vote in such a way that its class components are unmistakable! However, we can draw on the evidence of the pre-election campaign, and from the general evidence of observable trends. Actively or passively, the middle class had little alternative but to go along with Labor in 1945, and a large section of it did. The Tories offered nothing but total doom. As the Labor government initiated its reforms in social services, housing and industry, the middle class went along, and, it would appear, with a fair amount of enthusiasm. However, a point was reached where the best achievements of the Labor government were of only limited value to the middle class. Obviously free medical services mean more to the low-paid proletarian than to the shopkeeper. With the hobgoblins of utter economic collapse chased, the irksomeness of austerity and regimentation could be exploited as an inequitable and unprofitable burden on the middle class unless – unless they had before them a social view so compelling and dynamic in its richness that it would override the irritations.
Attlee did indeed make a conscious play for the middle-class vote. But nothing could have been better calculated than that to lose it. Some left-wingers in the Labor Party emphasized the socialistic aspects of the Labor Party program, but they were not the real voice of the Labor Party officialdom which ignored whatever was socialistic in the formal election platform, and emphasized the moderation of the party, its caution. Attlee presented a true enough picture of himself and his policies. The working class had to stomach it, for the real alternative was unthinkable. The middle class could choose Churchill who at least had the gift of imagination. The Tory program, except in so far as it promised an end to socialistic innovations, was as devoid of specific content as any program could be. Yet its rhetoric was apparently sufficient to captivate a large pan of the rural and middle class electorate.
* * *
How value any particular act or statement in an election campaign? There is no standard of judgment However, Churchill’s carefully timed call for a meeting of the Western Powers with Stalin undoubtedly had its effect. It was hypocritical and meaningless, but it was at least a proposition aimed at a region of vital sensitivity – the longing for peace. It was effective the more so as Bevin and Attlee had nothing, absolutely nothing, to say in reply. They called him a blatherskite and his proposition a fraud, neither of which was news. But they had no proposition of their own.
The inability of the Labor Party leadership to propose anything that contains the promise of peace, touches on the core of domestic and foreign policy. By and large the issues of overriding interest in Britain these past four years have been domestic. What progress the government made in the handling of these problems, it contradicted and undermined with a foreign policy as abysmal and indefensible as any that could have been conceived. It is .inconceivable that the people responsible for it should have had even a nodding acquaintance with socialist principles. If the government loosened the Indian jewel in His Majesty’s crown, it was a matter of unavoidable necessity, and hardly a gesture of fraternity. The government’s unspeakable policy with respect to Palestine is too raw and recent to require repetition. Give a point or take one, its behavior in international relations has not been radically distinguishable from that of any imperialist government. Whether with respect to Germany, or the Atlantic Pact, or Truman-sponsored Council of Europe, the record is a damning one.
(During the campaign, the leftist Tribune group, of which Health Minister Aneurin Bevan is the most prominent spokesmen, made journalistic reference to the ECA report which pictured the utter futility of capitalism in Germany, its dependence on the US, and so forth. The party could scarcely exploit this point. For what could one say about the role of the British government in the Ruhr, in the occupation of Germany – in the encouragement of socialist victory in Germany through the action of the German people? What, indeed!)
At its best, Labor Party international policy is manipulative, bureaucratic, “diplomatic” as imperialism values diplomacy. Yet it is here that the most digestible intentions of the Labor government must ultimately founder, even did it envisage uninterrupted rule in the British Isles. International policy cannot be divorced from domestic policy. A socialist policy at home, such as it is, cannot – if only in self-defense! – be separated from a socialist policy abroad. England cannot stand alone, not with twenty, fifty or one hundred and fifty per cent of socialism at home. Socialism in one country is no more tenable an illusion for England than it was for Russia, or would be for the United States – less so. When repulsion is not overwhelming, one can sympathize with the travail of the British representatives in the councils of diplomacy. They maneuver, they try to keep themselves from being entangled in the decrepit economies of Europe, from being vassalized by the United States. Maneuver will not do it, any more than necessary or unnecessary manipulations of the pound sterling will do it.
What possible hope for survival can the British Laborites have economically, what possible vision of peace can they offer – except as they make effort to cement the economic energies of the Western European people, independent of the capitalist colossus overseas and the bureaucratic-collectivist colossus on the continent? How disengage themselves from US talons except by sponsoring a mass, democratic movement for Western European unity, acting in it as the representative of a socialist working class, and thereby breathing into it a democratic, socialist content? How else provide the European masses with an effective instrument to withstand the ravages of Stalinism?
* * *
The Labor Party position is indeed a troubled one. Six votes are not enough to maintain a stable government. A new election will likely come in a short time. It is difficult at this time to sec exactly what Conservative policy is. There were indications that the Tories did not intend to provoke a new election too soon. (They would have no easier time governing with the tiny majority which is the best they could hope for.) However, they have at this writing challenged the government on two issues – steel, after Attlee had been stung by Tory pressure into mumbling that his government would effect the laws of Parliament (namely, nationalization), and housing. It may be that the Tories merely wanted to test their strength, and caution the government, rather than actually upset it. In any case, whether the Tories decide it is expedient to force a new election or not, is of relatively small consequence. What is of consequence is that the government pursue such a policy as it has been mandated to by the working class, and which alone can gain ground for Labor should a new election come soon.
It is reported that Richard Crossman, presumably Aneurin Bevan, and a few other prominent Laborites have called for fulfillment of the party’s platform. This seems to us the only defensible policy, although it is one that the party leadership will effect only under the greatest pressure. There is no other way in which the wish of the electorate can be realized (Labor does have a majority in Parliament!) and there is no other way in which the issues can be gainfully posed should a new election be necessary.
It is not a question of imposing socialism by a 51 per cent parliamentary ballot. Socialism cannot be imposed on a people at all. If socialism rests on the class vitality of the proletariat, it also requires for its success the attraction of the great body of the farming and middle class population. The working- class of England wants socialism. That much it has made clear. It has repudiated the perversion of socialism that is Stalinism. (The Stalinists were beaten in every contest, even in those few areas where they had previously been able to return candidates.) It has, generally, a gradualistic conception of the road to socialism. All right. But it does want advances towards socialism – and so it has mandated its party. Only as its enthusiasm, its creative example, infects the middle class, can the middle class be won to solid support of Labor. The danger is net that the working class will cease to want socialism. Or that it will succumb to the gibberish that things will be the same under the Tories, and that the Tories will not do away with any of the accomplishments of the last four years. Nor is it the greatest danger that they will lose the election when next it comes. (The Australian Labor Party, which is a pretty poor excuse for a working-class party even by comparison with the British Labor Party, lost an election recently. While the bourgeoisie is licking its chops over what it can accomplish while its party reigns, everyone – bourgeoisie included – fully expects a labor victory in the next election.) The danger is that the enthusiasm of British labor, the will to promote its convictions, will be dissipated.
British labor voted for the Labor Party. But not one informed observer has failed to note its disgust. We lack the space to detail its grievances – on wages, prices, a list too large to record. The enthusiasm which characterized Labor’s victory in 1945 is absent in 1949. Austerity and regimentation are tolerable so lone as they pay off ... in less regimentation, in an improving standard of living. in democratic involvement of the masses in socialist construction. And that has not been the direction of Labor Party policy.
The Labor Party accomplished far more than anyone believed it would. That much must be admitted. Very few believed that the Labor government of Attlee-Bevin-Morrison-Cripps would actually nationalize the 20 per cent it promised to in its 1949 platform. Yet it did. One ingredient was lacking, and the working class soon detected it, consciously or otherwise. The Labor leadership was willing, up to a point, to attack the basis of capitalism, that is, private property. It was unwilling to loose the creative energy of the people, to mobilize them for democratic control of industry and the nation. It preserved British democracy, but let it go no further than it ever had – that is, kept it out of production.
What bungling idiocy! The unwillingness of the Labor Party bureaucracy to democratize its nationalization program is understandable, if indefensible. But not even bureaucratic self-interest or reformist timidity can justify their total lack of imagination. There is the example of nationalization of coal, achieved after so many, many years. Were huge celebrations arranged, ceremonies to make the miner feel that this had become his property, that something big had happened? No, the whole thing was handled on a bureaucratic level: a coal owner and a retired admiral were placed in charge and that was that.
Having gone so far, the British worker cannot be content to let it rest there. In 1945, nationalization per se, a moderate housing program, a spectacular health program were in themselves sufficient goals. They are, however, sufficient only to whet his socialist appetite. Reformist or revolutionist, he can see that without his intervention in the direction of the nationalized industry, nationalization is an inadequate accomplishment. Hence the increasing demand for workers’ control of the nationalized industries (not to speak of the universal demand for a check on price rises, and for better wages). By itself nationalization undermines the capitalist social structure. Where it goes from there is decisive for the working class. It cannot go towards socialism unless the dynamism of the proletariat propels it forward. And that dynamism cannot flourish where it is stifled, restricted, regimented by the Labor bureaucracy.
The problems facing British labor are truly immense. Even with the best and most democratic nationalization program, it would be a long time before productive efficiency would be developed to a level surpassing need. Nor can socialist productivity be imagined on an insular basis, without the collaboration of the people of Europe at the very least. Austerity is perhaps indicated in the nature of the situation. Nevertheless, it is an austerity that can be borne as a trifle if with it there is the promise of greater achievement – by burdening the rich, by increasing the welfare of the poor, by further nationalization, by democratization, by leading the peoples of Western Europe towards independent union, by opening a vista that will inspire the greatest sacrifices and the greatest inventiveness.
So we read the election returns, and there seems to us no other way in which they can be properly read. The vote mandated advance, not retreat. There is no legitimate course open for the Labor Party but to advance.
 

ooks You Should Know ... (February 1948)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
Books You Should Know ...
(February 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 5, 2 February 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Christ Stopped at Eboli
Carlo Levi
Progressive Book Club. $2.00 for members.
Though it hardly justifies the lavish praise bestowed on it by critics who inspire the suspicion that they were animated in great measure by the weak, futile political conclusions of the book, Carlo Levi’s account of a year spent in a remote village in Southern Italy is nevertheless exceptionally interesting. Doctor and painter, Carlo Levi was exiled to Eboli by the Mussolini dictatorship because of his opposition to the Ethiopian War. He found a village so poverty-stricken, so desolate, so removed from even the miserable civilization of oppressed peasant Italy that, according to peasant folklore, Christ stopped BEFORE entering it.
Written with moving simplicity and a genuine love for the peasants who eke out a bare existence cultivating non-arable land and raising starved goats, Levi’s book is a captivating description of a section of Italy (and its people) where magic and primitive incantation maintain an edge over official and organized religion. At the same time it reduces with superb literary precision, the cruelty and stupidity of fascism to its basest common denominator. The book is definitely worth reading and the Progressive Book Club is to be commended for adding it to its list. (Merely parenthetically – so much has been made of Carlo Levi’s anti-fascism in the tremendous publicity attending the book, that we are led to inquire as a matter of sincere interest: what was the nature of this anti-fascist record apart from opposition to the Ethiopian War?)
 

 Garrett: GPU Invents New Lies Against Trotsky (19 April 1948)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Stalin’s Agents in France Plant Forged Document
GPU Invents New Lies Against Trotsky
(19 April 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 16, 19 April 1948, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

A crude forgery purporting to be a “testament” in which Leon Trotsky turned his back on the proletarian revolution and the ideas he had championed in a life dedicated to socialist struggle, was recently planted by his assassins in March 21 issue of the Paris weekly, France Dimanche, one of the numerous newspaper channels used by the Stalinists in France.
Eight years have passed since the great revolutionary leader was struck down at his work-desk by a GPU agent who completed his part of a plot directed from New York, as disclosed a year ago in the revelations of ex-Daily Worker editor, Louis Budenz. But the murderer, Stalin, is still tormented by the vitality of his victims ideas.
There is reason to believe that the “rediscovery” of the “testament” was planned to coincide with the publication in France of Trotsky’s biography of Stalin, and was also arranged to buttress a full dress campaign to justify the infamous Moscow Trials.
 
More Forgeries Possible
There is as well reason to believe that additional forgeries will soon see the light of day. While the Nuremberg Court was in session, a petition, signed by scores of internationally prominent men and women – labor leaders, writers, scientists,etc. (Max Shachtman, Workers Party National Chairman was among the signers) – was presented to the Court asking that the Nazi defendants, notably Rudolph Hess, be interrogated with respect to accusations made in the Moscow Trials linking Stalin’s victims with a Hitler conspiracy. Natalia Trotsky asked the Court for permission to be represented in person or by counsel in questioning the defendants about charges made against Trotsky and other revolutionists, charges which were proved to be palpable frame-ups by the Commission of Inquiry, chaired by the noted philosopher, John Dewey.
The petition was unanswered. It is certain that the Russian prosecutor would not permit any such interrogation. Had the accusations in the Moscow Trials had so much as a grain of truth in them, the Russian prosecutor would certainly have seized upon the opportunity to justify the Moscow Trials before world opinion which holds these trials to have been monstrous frame-ups. However, what Stalin did not dare attempt in open court, he may now attempt where there cannot be examination of the evidence. The Russians have announced that they are publishing a counterpart to the U.S. documents on Nazi-Russian relations. It is possible that in these Russian published documents, forgeries designed to justify Stalin’s murder of revolutionists, will be included. Labor Action warns its readers of this in advance. The forgery published in Paris may be a trial balloon for greater frauds to come!
Also, so anxious is Stalin’s murder machine to justify the Moscow Trials after its failure to do so at Nuremberg, and so anxious are his agents to offset the effects of Trotsky’s book on Stalin in the volatile French situation, that they have launched a sweeping campaign to put over the Stalinist fabrication concocted by Kahn and Sayers, and published in this country as The Great Conspiracy.
 
Publishers Discard Book
The Great Conspiracy fell flat here. Nowhere outside of Stalinist circles was it given a moment’s attention.
In an act almost unparalleled in publishing history, THE PUBLISHERS, LITTLE BROWN, WASHED THEIR HANDS OF THE BOOK COMPLETELY, REASSIGNING IT TO THE AUTHORS ON APRIL 29,1946, LESS THAN TWO MONTHS AFTER ITS PUBLICATION. Various court challenges of the book were threatened. The publishers had to admit that they had not checked the facts and threw the book back at the authors, since when it has been peddled exclusively by Stalinists (with Wallace’s endorsement!).
Publication of the forgery is, apparently. connected with publication of the French edition of the Kahn-Sayers book. The Stalinists are going to great lengths to put its filth over. There are reports that a room at the Sorbonne (France’s big university) has been taken to either study the book or “investigate” the Moscow Trials, with the obvious intention of lending the name of the Sorbonne to the scurrilous findings of Stalinist “students.” The forgery would thus appear to serve as an attempt to provide a “logical” basis for the Moscow slanders, on the theory presumably that the man who in 1940 discarded his ideas in writing might have done so in practice earlier.
The forgery itself is so “clever” as to be self-defeating. It “cleverly” simulates Trotsky’s style by the simple device of lifting from PUBLISHED writings of Trotsky, and twisting a phrase or adding a sentence.
The very manner of its “discovery” explodes the fake. According to France Dimanche, “toward the end of July 1940 a Soviet agent succeeded in securing a copy of the testament which Trotsky had entrusted to one of his intimate friends and the document was transmitted to Moscow.” But France Dimanche also reports that, “This document, so extraordinary in every respect, has remained secret for eight years. It was believed to have been destroyed.” In other words, Moscow had the document in 1940, but “it was believed to have been destroyed.” Now, why in the name of any kind of intelligence would Moscow, which a month later was to send a murderer to the home of the great revolutionist, “destroy” this evidence against him?
(The date they chose to give the document is interesting. Trotsky was killed in August. The “testament” was supposedly written on “May 20, 1940 at the time when Hitler was winning the battle of France.” The only ones who knew that a “testament” would be needed that year were the GPU agents who planned the assassination which was finally committed by Jacque Van den Dreshd-Mornard-Jacson on August 20, 1940.)
Further, the document presumably came to light because Trotsky entrusted three copies to Victor Serge, and one of Serge’s friends “has just brought it to Europe.” The forgery gets more confusing: (1) Serge did not arrive in Mexico until thirteen months after Trotsky died. How could the document have been entrusted to him? (2) Trotsky had all manner of political collaborators, of which Serge was not one. Why did he not give this important “testament” to one of those who, at least,would have been able to transmit the document to the movement Trotsky built? (3) The document is sent to Moscow in 1940. It is “believed” destroyed. It is “just brought to Europe.” One thing is certain: it was never destroyed for the good reason that it was just written! That is why it “just arrived.”
 
Obvious Distortions
The “testament” is hardly worth quoting at length. The gist of it is:
“I am a veteran of the revolution who in the last hours of his life finds himself compelled to revise all the ideas and conceptions which he had formerly held. I firmly believed in the regeneration of mankind through the proletarian revolution. I begin to doubt that the class on which I placed all my hopes is capable of attempting the colossal task which history wants to assign to it.”
There is a certain caution here, aimed at making the “testament” authentic. The Stalinist forgers are using restraint. Their next “discoveries” will be less so. Here they do not have Trotsky engaging in acts of conspiracy with Hitler (as they charged in the Moscow Trials), but merely reflecting on the impossibility of proletarian revolution, on the correct vision of “certain elements in the left wing of the Socialist movement.”
The biggest part of the revelation purports to show that Trotsky had changed his mind on defending Russia. As anyone who has the slightest knowledge at all knows, Trotsky was then engaged in a fierce polemic with those of us who founded the Workers Party because WE felt that it was wrong for revolutionists to defend Russia in the imperialist war. Trotsky was in our view wrong, but the fact remains that whether or not he would have changed his mind had he lived, Trotsky polemized against our view while he lived.
The forgers have also taken a section of a document (In Defense of Marxism) which Trotsky wrote AGAINST a view then being developed by the Workers Party that Russia was a new kind of exploitive state, bureaucratic collectivism, and changed it to read: “This [the victory of the Stalinist bureaucracy] will be the epoch of a new exploitive class, born from the Bonapartist bureaucracy of Stalin.” And the forgers have added a sentence completely foreign to Trotsky (and the Workers Party!) that the “bureaucratic degeneration of the Soviet Union brings with it proof of the congenital incapacity of the proletariat to become a ruling class.”
 
What Worries Stalin
Everything Trotsky wrote up to the day he died stands in contradiction to that forgery. Trotsky never lost his socialist faith in the ability of the working class to lead humanity, and, constitutionally, he could not lose that confidence in the working class. Hence the forgeries. For Trotsky also was confident that the working class would in time destroy the Stalinist bureaucracy. It is a thought that Stalin cannot tolerate!
It is not enough to have killed Trotsky. The Kremlin butcher must kill as well any idea that the workers whom he has placed in bondage, and whom he seeks to place in bondage, can lift themselves to freedom. What worries Stalin and his agents is not that Trotsky lost his faith in the working class, but that he did NOT; and that there are others who have not lost and will not lose that confidence until of Stalinism there remains only a fearful memory.
There will be new and grosser forgeries. We must take that for granted. The answer lies in fighting ceaselessly against the bestial totalitarianism of Stalinism!
 

 Garrett: Henry Wallace - And His Place in Stalin's Strategy (March 1948)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Henry Wallace – And His Place in Stalin’s Strategy
(March 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 11, 15 March 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

There is little reason to doubt that the most important single political event in the United States during these past few months has been the development of the Henry A. Wallace-Stalinist Third Party movement. It is an importance which is not alone to be measured by the size of the vote Henry Wallace polls in November; and certainly not by its effects on the Truman campaign. It derives its importance, rather, from a multiplicity of factors, included in which are: its damaging effects upon the development of a genuine labor party; its place in Stalinist strategy.
The Wallace-Stalinist Third Party, under its various state names – American Labor Party, Progressive Party, etc. – owes its existence entirely to the demands of this strategy. Whoever fails to understand this, understands nothing – but, nothing! – about this Third Party. Traditionally the Third Party, at least as understood in recent years, is a third party of capitalism, that is to say, a party seeking to patch the rotten and fear-inspiring foundations of capitalism by liberal concessions to the people. However, to discuss this particular movement in terms of “traditional” Third Partyism, and to debate its inadequacies, its incompetence and its illusions in those terms it to discuss and debate something which does not exist at all, or exists at best as a tiny fraction of the reality.
In actual fact the Wallace Party is a combination of a few (very few!) New Dealers and Stalinists, with the latter acting as creative force and veto apparatus. The organizational impetus comes from the Stalinists. The mass support, such as it now is, comes from the Stalinists. The program reflects completely the exigencies of the Stalinist line at this moment in this country. To be sure, Wallace and the few New Dealers who came along with him (the greater number having run back to Truman at the very moment that their brash talk about a new party threatened to become concrete) represent a segment of U.S. capitalism who wish to salvage what they can of capitalism, by dividing the world between Russia and the U.S. whereas the Stalinists are exclusively loyal to the bureaucratic-collectivist totalitarianism of Russia. But that is only an apparent conflict, and an inconsequential one for the present. They can “uphold” capitalism either Wallace – 1948 style or Roosevelt – 1942 style (no-strike pledges, etc.), so long as their major objective of upholding the Russian tyranny is served.
Thus, ground down to its essence, the program of the Wallace-Stalinist Party is not at all a domestic program for “reforming” capitalism or “improving” the lot of the “common man,” but an international program for the subjugation of the peoples of the world to the imperialisms of Russia and the United States. Therein is the real reason for its invention; therein is the clue to the Wallace candidacy.
 
“The Man and the Myth”
If the movement derives its energy from the Stalinists, the relation of Wallace to it is nonetheless important. Wallace serves as banner-bearer of the Party; he is the front. The Party is dependent on him to the extent that it would be difficult for the Stalinists to find another candidate of equal national reputation. Hence, it is necessary to know something about the man, his history and his program which coincides so neatly with the Stalinist program. And for that we heartily recommend a book which recently appeared, Henry Wallace: – The Man and the Myth, by Dwight Macdonald. (Vanguard, 187 pp., $2.50.)
Macdonald’s book is not the final word to be written on Wallace; it has serious shortcomings on the side of political and theoretical interpretation, but it is the best and most detailed examination of Wallace yet composed. (For those who have not read it yet, we also recommend Jack Ranger’s excellent study of Wallace in LA, Oct. 13, 1947.)
Willy-nilly the Stalinists are trying to sell the Third Party as the next best thing to a Labor Party, if not actually one; and trying to sell Wallace as the great champion of the people, hence a man fitted to head what is the next best thing to a Labor Party. Though the Party at its inception has only Stalinists behind it, hundreds of thousands of workers (possibly millions) will fall for this misleading trash – Which can only serve the purpose of discrediting the Labor Party, apart from the service this Third, Party does Russian imperialism. Therefore, we believe that no worker should fail to acquaint himself with Macdonald’s book, the facts and fancies of the Wallace myth.
Macdonald dissects the Wallace myth with a scalpel of the finest journalistic calibre, and finds that “Wallace has made a career of supplying to liberals a commodity they crave: rhetoric which accomplishes in fantasy what cannot be accomplished in reality.” Macdonald lists five fictions: “That Wallace is a man of integrity – That Wallace has great moral courage – That he is a dreamer, a visionary whose spirit moves in realms far above petty political considerations – That Wallace is rigid, even somewhat doctrinaire in his ideology – That Wallace has fought the good fight against privilege and injustice – and then cites the facts which disprove the myth. Thus, with respect to the last fiction:
“One of the most striking things about Wallace’s career is how much talking he has done about fighting for the Common Man, and how little acting ...
“(a) During the filibuster of Southern Senators against the Poll Tax Bill in 1942, Wallace, as Vice-President, presided over the Senate. Certain liberal Senators, including the late George W. Norris, urged Wallace to dramatize the issue by not leaving the chair, sleeping there if necessary. This might have had some practical value as well: Parliamentary opportunities might have occurred to end the filibuster. Wallace, however, refused to co-operate, turning the chair over to any handy Senator whenever he got tired.
“(b) One of Wallace’s habitual strategies when confronted with a conflict is simply to be somewhere else. This was his tactic in the 1935 purge in the Department of Agriculture and in the controversy with Baruch about the atomic bomb. During the nation-wide effort to get a reprieve for Odell Waller, the Negro sharecropper who killed his white landlord in a fight and who was executed for what would normally have been a manslaughter case, a delegation of Negro and White liberals called on Wallace to ask him to intervene with Roosevelt. They were shown into the office of Wallace’s lieutenant, Harold Young, who received them with his feet on the desk and a cigar in his mouth. Without removing either, he informed them, in a Southern drawl, that the Common Man’s Friend was not in, and that, anyway, nothing could be done about their request. As they were filing out, they caught sight of Wallace leaving his office. Embarrassed, the tribune of the people put on speed. But the delegation included Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, a woman of considerable determination. Although she walks with difficulty, using a cane, she hobbled after him, calling out loudly, “Oh, Mr. Wallace, I want to talk to you!” At which Wallace walked even faster, saying over his shoulder, “There’s nothing I can do in the matter, Mrs. Bethune.” Stories differ as to whether the pursuit was successful or not, but in any case the delegation got no help or sympathy from Wallace. He was, officially and spiritually, Elsewhere.” (pp. 21–23.)
Later in the book, Macdonald examines Wallace’s record in backing the big farmer against the poor farmer in the Agricultral Adjustment Act days (AAA). Particularly interesting are those pages of Wallace’s history which deal with the sharecroppers. In 1934 a committee, headed by Norman Thomas, prepared a report charging that the plight of the sharecroppers was becoming worse under AAA.
“Wallace’s reactions,” writes Macdonald, “were those of a Secretary of Agriculture rather than a Champion of the Common Man. He issued a counter-statement accusing Thomas of exaggerating, for political purposes, the plight of the share-croppers; and he denied that AAA was affecting them adversely. When Mitchell (leader of the Southern ant Farmer’s union) and Thomas tried, repeatedly, to get an appointment to see Wallace about the sharecroppers, the Secretary was somehow always busy or out of town.”
In addition, Macdonald documents the conflict over whether Section 7 of the AAA should be interpreted for or against the eviction of recalcitrant sharecroppers, a conflict which was resolved by purging from the department the liberals who tried to pull a “fast one” by interpreting the Act as it was written.
There is much else in the book that completes the Wallace portrait: Wallace as mystic; Wallace as spokesman for the Common Man, but unable to, speak with or understand “common men”; Wallace as scientist (the one field – agricultural experimentation – where he has done some good); Wallace as editor of the New Republic; Wallace as sucker for applause (something which the Stalinists can provide in ample quantity). We pick at random. All of these contribute to an understanding of Wallace, and hence of his connections with the Third Party. (Macdonald’s cutting investigation of “Wallace,” the empty, pontifical generalizations of the “Wallesian” liberals makes especially interesting reading. A neat job that helps to deflate the windbags).
 
Slavemaster Agreement
With all of this, however, the main thing in the Wallace movement remains its tie with Stalinism, organizationally and programmatically. (It is here that Macdonald is weakest, revealing his political limitations in grappling with the complexities of Stalinism and Stalinoids. Our readers will find Comrade Hal Draper’s article on the “neo-Stalinist man” in the January 1948, New International, very illuminating).
The Wallace movement has many attractions for the people of the United States, above all for those workers who are thoroughly fed up with the endlessly hopeless choice between Democrats and Republicans. Wallace’s ace in the hole is that he appears to offer a program of peace and security, based upon harmony between the big imperialist rivals. He seems to offer an end to the cold war which is driving towards eruption into “hot” war of battling armies. The Stalinists know that this “peace” program is a chimera. They hope to stymie, disrupt and blackmail the war policies of U.S. imperialism, notably the Marshall Plan as an instrument of that policy. And it fits their plans to have Wallace prattle about “peace.”
Wallace’s “peace” program is nothing less than agreement between slavemasters to jointly operate the world, each ruling in his own sphere. Whether or not the Stalinists hope for a world under the single slave domination of Stalin (as U.S. imperialism looks toward a world exclusively under its domination), it nevertheless serves their purpose to promote acquiescence in the enslavement of the east-Europeam peoples, and others, right here and now. That is Wallace’s great value to them. Let him, they reason, do so to save capitalism as he thinks he needs to be saved; no matter.
Such a “peace” – even were it more than a temporary truce pending final contest, which it cannot be in an imperialist world – would be a peace based upon slavery, the slavery of the peoples of the world. Such a “peace” cannot be tolerated, even as an idea. It is inimical in every conceivable way to the working class and to the people of this country as of other countries. Every worker must be made to understand this, above all the worker who may yield to the lure of the pro-capitalist Wallace-Stalinist Party as a sign of his well-founded opposition to the two big capitalist parties. No worker must remain uninformed of this. We dare not permit the legitimate and healthy disgust which labor feels for the two big parties to be subverted into the reactionary channels of Stalinist strategy. And we dare not allow it to be beguiled by such types as Wallace. Whether Wallace sticks with “his” party, or switches (there is ample evidence in Macdonald’s book to permit us to expect anything of the man), his kind has nothing to offer but disaster. Henry Wallace – The Man and the Myth is sufficient of a dossier on this score. The answer to the captalist system, its political parties, its crises and its wars lies not in Stalinist reaction, or the scheming of their front men but in their very opposite: independent working class organization, socialist program.
 

Emanuel Garrett: An Exchange of Views on How We Handled UAW Party Statement (March 1948)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

B.A.L. & Emanuel Garrett
An Exchange of Views
on How We Handled
UAW Party Statement
(March 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 13, 29 March 1948, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


The Criticism:
Dear Editor:
Permit me a comment on Ken Hillyer’s report of the recent UAW Executive Board conference, as well as on your headline for that report in Labor Action of March 15, 1948.
It seems to me that both report and headline are typical of a kind of sectarian journalism, perhaps also the reflection of a kind of sectarian politics, that LA has in most instances happily discarded over the years.
Here was a case where the largest, most important and, despite all the qualifications that can and should be made, the most progressive union in the CIO apparently came out for a Labor Party after the presidential elections. (I say “apparently” because the report is not too clear as to the kind of party the UAW advocates, perhaps because the UAW isn’t too clear either.) Now this is big news, important news. Labor Action has been advocating a Labor Party for years.
Of course, there’s a joker in the deck: the UAW wants a Labor Party AFTER the elections. Well, that deserves sharp criticism, the kind Hillyer made.
But the essential matter is one of perspective. Do you emphasize the step forward the UAW Board’s resolution involves, the possibilities it opens to the militants in the UAW for work on this question – or do you emphasize the obvious weaknesses? In my opinion, it is the FIRST, the step forward and the opportunity made available, that should be emphasized. As it is, the headline doesn’t even report the important news – that the UAW Board came out for a Labor Party after the presidential elections – and one doesn’t learn this in Hillyer’s article till the end of his third paragraph!
The criticism in this article and its headline is made before the report of the stand which is to be criticized.
I submit that that is bad journalism. But more important, it is bad politics. I am in favor, of course, of making all the necessary criticisms of those aspects of the UAW Board’s resolution that are so obviously cowardly. But I think a more fruitful approach would have been to say, in effect: “the UAW Board’s resolution is the first such step taken by any major union in this country and, despite its weaknesses and cowardice which we shall discuss below, we hail it. What is more, we especially emphasize that here is a golden opportunity for the genuine militants in the UAW, a lead they can follow – perhaps, if necessary, even against those who formulated the resolution.”
Politics, as you know, is not merely a matter of what one says, but often as important of how and in what order one says it. In this instance, I think, the manner of saying and the order in which things were said seems quite out of kilter. Am I wrong? What do LA readers in the UAW think?
B.A.L.


The Reply:
We disagree radically with our correspondent; politically AND journalistically. Under other circumstances, and in another union situation perhaps, Comrade B.A.L. might have been justified. Not so here. The reasons, we think, are amply indicated in B.A.L.’s letter – when he writes that the UAW “apparently” came out for a Labor Party and that there is a “joker in the deck.” Were we convinced that the UAW statement marked a determined stand by .the UAW leadership to proceed to the formation of a Labor Party, we would have hailed it, and not in modest headlines. That news would have been important enough to have called for the largest type available to Labor Action, used in the largest possible spread. But we submit that ours was the more proper approach in the context of the situation. For, when there is a joker in the deck it rates a lot of attention.
There is a tremendous sentiment in the UAW for a Labor Party, more so than in most unions. One of the principal leaders of the union, Emil Mazey, only recently published an article in the union paper which called clearly and explicitly for a Labor Party. We shall not attempt to estimate how much of Mazey’s popularity rests on this stand (remember: he beat the strongest candidate of the Addes-Stalinist forces in the election for secretary-treasurer), but we believe a good deal of it rests on his advocacy of a Labor Party. Mazey’s article, as our friends in the UAW have everywhere testified, met with a terrific response.
Further, the Wallace appeal is great in the union; yes, even in this union which repudiated the Stalinists so firmly. Some UAW leaders have tried to blind themselves to this reality, but it has undoubtedly been forced on their attention. UAW militants are thoroughly fed up with Democratic and Republican politics.
Offered nothing better, they may take the dismal path of Wallace-Stalinist politics.
 
Why the Statement?
Thus, it is to meet this sentiment, without actually forming a Labor Party, that the statement of the UAW seems to have been devised. On the surface, it would appear that the UAW is calling for a new party, and that is the impression that the UAW leadership wishes to convey. In fact, however, it is AVOIDING action right here and now by promising something in the future. It is Reuther’s way of meeting the Wallace threat, without meeting it in the one way that would be thoroughly effective.
We are not quibbling about the nature of the party that the UAW says it would like to build – in the future. We have our ideas, and have defined them. But we do not propose to legislate to the labor movement. We do not insist that it be done our way or not at all. When a Labor Party is formed we will discharge our own responsibility in advocating program, etc. But we do insist that a Labor Party be formed; and we consider it our duty to expose those moves which appear to be what they are not.
There is much in the UAW statement that is commendable. There is also much in it that is self-negating. The very idea of waiting until after November is such a negation. For what will be altered AFTER November – except the opportunity (which comes only once every four years) to put a national Labor Party actively in the field. The UAW statement is, we charge, a disguised way of calling for support of the Democratic Party today, while promising something better for tomorrow. That won’t do – and it is our business to say so, and say so prominently.
 
What Will Change?
The whole game that Reuther and Murray and other CIO leaders are playing is here revealed. Murray, it is true, will not go as far as Reuther in even speaking of anything like a Labor Party. But they are all of them engaged in the pretense that they haven’t made up their minds about whom to support – while they are building the machinery to support the Democratic Party, and while they are hoping that they won’t have to support Truman.
The UAW leadership argues that we have to elect “progressive” Congressmen now, and can’t tinker with Labor Party politics until after the “progressives” – or reactionaries – have been elected. We shan’t repeat our objection to the rotten reasoning of behind “friend of labor” politics. All we ask is: how will this be different after November? Will the UAW policy elect only “progressives”? And if all the “progressives” are elected, WHAT THEN? If we remember rightly, Reuther did something like this before 1944. Maybe he is sincere in his promise. Maybe he really intends to do something after 1948. We will assume that is so. The urgency, however, is great NOW. So why not NOW?
We refuse to be parties to a fraud. If the UAW leadership is going to build a Labor Party, the way to do it is to start building. If they do, we will hail it THEN. But we would like to see it FIRST. Until we do, we will continue to harp on the subject, continue to report what we see. In the meantime, we feel that the best way to assure the UAW’s initiative in the building of a Labor Party is to do what we can toward persuading the ranks of the union that they must DEMAND of Reuther and the UAW leadership unequivocal action for a Labor Party before and after November, 1948.
Emanuel Garrett
 

 Geltman: Reuther Calls for a New Party! (23 August 1948)       Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page  Emanuel Geltman UAW Head Makes Political Commitment to Members Reuther Calls for a New Party! (23 August 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 34, 23 August 1948, pp. 1 & 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.  In a signed column in the August issue of the United Automobile Worker, official publication of the United Automobile Workers Union, CIO, Walter Reuther, union president, this week pledged his “complete support (and) full energy” in fulfilling and implementing a resolution adopted by the UAW executive board months ago directed toward “the formation, after the 1948 elections, of a genuine progressive political party.” Appearing as part of a 4-page supplement on political action and the work of the extra session, Reuther’s statement makes “a commitment to every one of our members that political action by, with and for all who feel as we do, shall have first call upon my time and energy as president of this International Union.” Though the statement leaves much to be desired, and contains within it an orientation that stands in contradiction to its objectives, it is of the highest importance for American labor. The commitment, if fulfilled, will mark an enormous step forward for the American people. There is every reason to believe that Reuther will live up to his commitment. And it is certain that the auto workers, who many times have stood in the vanguard of their class, will demand its fulfillment. Reuther apparently does not have a labor party in mind, but rather a vague combination which will unite liberal elements in the two big capitalist parties with the strength of the labor movement. On the face of it this would seem a futile effort to blend unmixable elements which can achieve little. However, in architecting a break with the Democratic and Republican Parties, the dynamics of the development will themselves resolve the confusion and misdirection in the Reuther position. The decisive base of support for such a new party exists only in the labor movement, which is increasingly discontented with the party-system as it now stands – offering a choice only between two agencies of capitalism – and which is groping continually toward independent expression. Based upon the unions, as it must be if powered by the UAW, the test of its direction toward a third party of capitalism or toward a militant labor party will tend to resolve itself in the pressures that the component elements will be able to supply from the beginning. Regardless of what confusion attends its birth, regardless, of what Reuther himself may intend, a new party can be a beginning toward cementing a political force through which the masses of American people will shape their own future. Much will depend on the intelligent intervention of those who have long worked in the labor movement for a labor party which can express and exert the class strength of American labor in the political arena. It is they who must seize upon Reuther’s statement with the greatest excitement and interest, and strive to encourage the further initiative of the auto workers. In this sense, the mere commitment to a break with the old parties, and the promise to create a new party outweighs the crying deficiencies with which the statement is larded. However, these deficiencies must be noted. They cast a cloud on the intent of the statement, and actually serve to impede the very thing for which the statement speaks. The full text of the statement has not yet arrived in the mail, and we are compelled to write on the basis of excerpts that have appeared in the press. The excerpts make it clear that emphasis for the present is to lie in the direction of electing “good” congressmen now. Thus, Reuther says: “The first step in implementing the resolution is the hard plugging and campaigning that is needed to elect as many good congressmen and senators as possible in the 1948 elections. That will give us a base from which to work. The next step is to proceed immediately with the organization of forces that will work with us to achieve in America a new political alignment.” Restated, this means campaigning tor various “palatable” Democratic and Republican congressmen. As such it stands in the way of embarking on a new political path. As such it contradicts the creation of an independent political force. For it repeats the endlessly deceptive choice between lesser and greater evils. Commenting on the UAW executive board proposals we have a number of times written that, although it may be impossible at this date to launch a national labor party for the 1948 elections, much can be done now to ensure its eventual creation. A new and genuinely progressive political force cannot be imaged after the handful of liberal faces in the Democratic and Republican parties, even if one or another of these, for whatever reason, should elect in a showdown to stick with labor. The direction of independent action must be clearly stated now, and acted upon to the extent possible. Anything else is not only evasion, it amounts also to undermining the new creation at its very beginning by inserting into its foundation shoddy material. We can concede that a national formation is impossible before November of this year. But no one can concede that local actions are impossible. In the past months we have offered our opinion that auto workers ought to ask the UAW executive board for an earnest of its intentions in the shape of local candidates and other activities designed to culminate eventually in a new, independent party. Reuther’s personal commitment is a step forward, but the context in which he frames his immediate advice cannot be considered that. Why cannot the auto workers union, in Michigan, let us say, put forward candidates for the various municipal and Congressional offices? It does not require the machinery of a national party. In Detroit, certainly, there are no obstacles. Such a demonstration, an independent ticket promoted by the UAW, would have a thousand times the effectiveness of promises and commitments. It could and would be duplicated, we are sure. But even by itself it would be sufficient of an inspiration to guarantee the successful launching of a national independent labor party in 1949. Beyond that there is much else that could have been done, that can and must still be done. It may be that in a few days we will have details as to how Reuther proposes to effectuate his proposals. In the meantime we suggest that committees formed now, that conferences called now, are essential if anything is to be done later.  His Concepts Secondary to Party Given the overall importance of the commitment, we are little concerned for the moment with the gibberish Reuther introduced into his statement. When Reuther inveighs against monopoly and writes that “the government we elect must be for something. For example, for an economy that is both free and enterprising,” he is proposing something that is ... nothing, the rotten, bankrupt nothing of capitalist enterprise. Monopoly is the heart of capitalist production, the product of “free and enterprising” economy. Such fiddle-faddle merely proves that the one-time socialist Reuther has pedalled backward in his understanding along with his progress in other directions. The addition of “government expansion and even operation of necessary productive capacity when private enterprise refuses to expand,” does nothing to improve his formulations. But, we repeat, we are little concerned tor the moment with Reuther’s theoretical conceptions. We are deeply concerned with the creation of a party which the working class can seek to make its own, programmatically and in every way. We have worked consistently and energetically for the creation of a labor party. And so we pledge ourselves to work in the new party when it is formed for a program that alone meets the needs of the working class people. We are utterly convinced that the new party must necessarily gravitate toward a labor party, a class political instrument. We are equally convinced that in it there will be an increasingly receptive audience for the ideas of socialism, and that out of this audience will come the movement which will seek to establish a socialist society. That, as reported, the timing of Reuther’s statement is intended as a blow at the Wallace movement is all to the good. The only effective way to head off the Wallaceite creation of the Stalinist totalitarians is to present the working class with the clear alternative of an independent political party. Other aspects of the timing do not appear in the same favorable light. We have already commented briefly here (and at great length on other occasions) on the proposal to support “good” Democrats and Republicans. And the timing is obviously calculated to buttress the campaigns of these “good” capitalist candidates. In addition, there are conflicting rumors as to the importance of the timing with respect to the national candidates.  Can Mold New Developments One view holds that the timing was intended to lay the ground for support of Truman (who is scheduled to open his campaign in Detroit on the invitation of CIO and AFL unions). If there is any truth in this report, the auto workers ought in our opinion to do everything they can to show that they will not permit that disgraceful bit of politicking. Whether direct or indirect, support of Truman cannot be tolerated. It would be a swindle of huge proportions, an insult, an act of conspiracy against labor. There is, however, another view which holds that Reuther’s statement is intended as a means of ducking a statement of position on the national election. Whichever of the two it is will soon be clear. We wish merely to note that the second is in our opinion not very much better than the first. Evasion may have its advantages over outright support of an injunctionist. But there is no excuse for evasion. We are not insisting that Reuther adopt our policy, which Is to support the three socialist candidates in the field – or one of the three if he should prefer (though there is nothing to prevent a union leader from endorsing a socialist candidate except his own backwardness). But we do think that the auto workers have a right to insist that, at the very least, he refuse to have anything to do with the candidacy of either capitalist party, with Truman or Dewey – to aggressively, avowedly abstain, and to do so with a denunciation of both capitalist candidates. No union leader has a right to support a strikebreaker and an injunctionist. And, breaking it down to the local level, no union leader has the right to support any candidate who is allied with a strikebreaker and an injunctionist. In conclusion, the Reuther statement must be seized upon by the labor movement, especially by the workers in the union which he represents, with the greatest eagerness. To step forward toward the creation of a political force which can be shaped into a labor party is to advance American labor immeasurable strides. The political disorganization of labor does not conform to its immense economic might. To fuse the political potential of labor with its demonstrated economic power is to take the first long step in the rebuilding of society along lines of human sanity. In so far as Reuther advances that objective with whatever limitations of his own, he perforins a service in his own way. Intervening today, we can help mold the new developments that are taking shape, bend them toward meeting the requirements of labor and of the people.   
 Garret: Government Uses Infamous Smith Gag Act to Indict Top 12 Stalinist Leaders (2 August 1948)       Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page  Emanuel Garrett Government Uses Infamous Smith Gag Actto Indict Top 12 Stalinist Leaders (2 August 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 31, 2 August 1948, pp. 1 & 2.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.  In a move calculated to serve a three-fold purpose in its timing, a federal grand jury last week handed down indictments against twelve top Stalinist leaders on charges of conspiring to overthrow the United States government as defined in the provisions of the infamous Smith Act. Though Assistant United States Attorney John F.X. McGohey denied direct administration pressure, he refused comment when asked if the indictments had been requested by Attorney General Clark. The circumstances of the indictments, and the subsequent arrests, cast a sharp light on administration responsibility. There is no indication that the grand jury, which has been hearing evidence in the case for over a year, had anything more to go on last week than a year ago. Everything about them suggests that the indictments were timed:  To slap at the American Stalinists, to the extent of 	illegalizing their party in effect, by way of demonstrating U.S. 	firmness in its cold war engagements with Russia.  To outmaneuver the Republican election campaign by way of 	demonstrating that the Democrats yield to no one in 	“anti-Communism,” that whatever the Republicans might 	hope to achieve with a Mundt Bill, the Democrats can do better with 	other means.  To coincide with the opening of the Wallace-Stalinist 	party convention, by way of seeking to frighten support away from 	that movement In view of the damage it may inflict on the Democratic 	Forty campaign.  Whichever of the three was uppermost in administration calculations, the special shoddiness of the move is revealed throughout. Whether inspired by international policy considerations, or more narrow domestic elevation purposes, the Truman administration is clearly ready to make civil liberties a victim of its objectives. The menace that underlies this move, is underscored by a recent statement of the Civil Liberties Union which notes the deterioration in civil liberties in 1946 and 1947.  Based on Smith Act That the servants of a totalitarian master are involved in the case, namely the leaders of the Communist Party, does not in any way mitigate the blow delivered at civil liberties by the indictments. The more so as it makes use of a despicable instrument, the Smith Gag Act, which has already once been used against genuine socialists (as distinct from Stalinists!) in the famous case of the Minneapolis teamsters union officials and the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party, and is certain to be used again against others in the labor movement – socialists, anarchists, militant liberals – if the precedent is upheld anew. The terms of the indictment are so worded as to reveal an unmistakable threat to the socialist movement. Were the Stalinists leaders being charged with acts of espionage on behalf of their Kremlin master, their indictment would not at all be the concern of the labor movement. Espionage is the business of imperialist governments, a business in which every imperialist government – American as well as Russian – engages. Similarly the apprehension of spies. Spies operate according to the rules of their own “trade,” and face punishment, if caught, according to the same rules. Like every Communist Party in the world, the United States CP acts under the ultimate direction of Stalin’s dictatorship and his secret police, the GPU. The GPU works through the Communist Party, and outside the Communist Party. Thus, it is an ARENA for GPU activity, as distinct from a simple agency of espionage. It is a political party. Its principal purpose is to promote the political needs of Stalinism, primarily through winning support among the working class. It is this which makes it particularly inimical to labor because It subverts the needs of the working class to those of the Kremlin despots. (The leaders of the CP in the U.S. take their orders from Moscow, from the GPU. That goes without saying. But to think that the GPU would assign such a one as William Z. Foster, national chairman of the CP, to some such thing as stealing atom bomb designs is to credit the GPU with lots less of acumen than it deserves – and to credit the accusers with much more intelligence than they possess. The GPU has many agents at its disposal, and it distributes its tasks. Foster’s job is political – to curry favor with American imperialists or to build opposition to them according to the dictates of Russian foreign policy.) That the working class must deal with Stalinism in its own way, by driving its influence out of the labor movement, and that it cannot permit the capitalist government to perform this job for it, are facts again demonstrated by the indictments. The indictments do not charge specific acts of espionage. They constitute a political indictment resting exclusively on the Smith Gag Act (passed under Roosevelt in 1940 – Wallaceites, note!) which virtually makes reading of the Communist Manifesto a major criminal offense.  Threatens Liberties The Smith Act was first used against the Trotskyist leaders, who were sentenced to terms up to eighteen months in the Minneapolis case. At the time, the nation’s outstanding authorities on civil liberties named the act as a base violation of civil rights, notably of free speech. The defense cited Justice Holmes’ opinion that “imminent danger” had to be proved; that is, that speaking for views, or distributing literature for these views, regardless of what the government might think of these views, were protected by constitutional right so long as concrete acts of violence could not be proved. According to the Smith Gag Act distribution of the classic documents of socialism which argue for the overthrow of capitalism and its replacement by a workers’ world, is a crime carrying penalties up to ten years in prison and $10,000 in fines for each count in an indictment. Thus the tepid Socialist Party, which is accepted as respectable by such pillars of capitalism as the New York Times, could be indicted because its book stores sell the Communist Manifesto. As we note elsewhere in this issue, there is an especial irony in that the Stalinist leaders are indicted under the Smith Act. The Stalinists applauded its use against the Trotskyists. Now, it is quite probable that the very same “evidence” used against the Trotskyists will be used against the Stalinists. There is an important difference in this use. The Trotskyists were unconstitutionally railroaded, but the charges had, at least, this much veracity – they did genuinely speak for the socialist doctrine which they were accused of spreading. The Stalinists may distribute the literature cited, but that is all their connection with Marxist-Leninist doctrine (as named in the grand jury indictments) consists of.  CP Not Marxist There is idiocy in the charge that the Stalinists represent Marxism-Leninism, but much more than that too. The Stalinists are the greatest enemies of Marxism-Leninism in the world. No other force, no other, has done so much damage to Marxism-Leninism as have the Stalinists – precisely because they pretend to speak in its name while outraging with the greatest violence every aspect of Marxist-Leninist thought. Whether the grand jury realized that to be so, or not, is beside the paint. The brain of a McGohey may find some association between Marxism-Leninism and Its opposite, Stalinism. But the text of the indictment is implicit repudiation of that canard against socialist thought. It is as well itself an indictment of the hypocrisy of the administration, proof that it yields nothing in chicanery, duplicity and venality to the Stalinists. The indictment against the twelve CP leaders charges that in 1945 the defendants created the Communist Party, from which time on they are presumably guilty of seeking to overthrow the United States government. The date, 1945, is significant. Before that, for several years, the Communist Party was the Communist Political Association. Perhaps the gentlemen of the grand jury were stupid or merely uninformed. But every child knows, or should know, that the difference between the Communist Political Association and the Communist Party is exactly nil. It is certain that Attorney General Clark knows this. The Communist Party became the Communist Political Association when Stalin ordered it to, and became again the Communist Party when Stalin so ordered. In both cases, the order corresponded to the interests of the Kremlin. What was the difference? From a June day in 1940 to 1945, Russia and the United States were allied in war. The Communist Party was altered then to fit the requirements of supporting that war. Roosevelt knew it. Even Harry S. Truman should knew that. The CP was as much an agent of a foreign power in 1943 as in 1945 when the change in international relations was followed by a change in the orders to the Communist Party. The difference lies in that in serving Stalin before 1945 It also served American imperialism. Thus, If the CP has nothing in common with communism or with Marxism, the administration has nothing in common with decent consistency or honesty. So too it is quite likely that the administration understands very well that the last thing the Communist Party seeks to do today is to overthrow the government. Ultimately, it is the aim of the Communist Party to replace the capitalist system here with an image of the totalitarian system imposed by Stalin on Russia. But it is ridiculous to even imagine that the Communist Party with its feeble forces in this country, and with the international situation what it is, would have any such object as a practical objective for its current policy. That policy is rather designed to embarrass, harass and otherwise bring pressure against the policies of the United States. And that happens not to be a crime. In the process the CP misuses, misleads and deludes the workers whom it influences or tries to influence. That is a crime against the working class. But it is no justification of the infamous Smith Act, and it is no justification of the indictments. We repeat, the working class will have to tend to the CP in its own way – as it has in the National Maritime Union, in the auto workers union and elsewhere – without benefit of the vicious assistance of the administration or its Republican rivals.  Must Consider Issues Much is involved here, there are many angles to consider: the objectives of the administration, for one thing; the nature of Stalinism and its parties as opponents of capitalism AND the working class; and the broad issue of civil rights. To these we will return in subsequent issues of Labor Action. In the meantime we must note the essentials of the case. The Communist Party is a foul instrument working AGAINST the working class INSIDE the working class. Precisely for that reason is it particularly important that we estimate clearly the issues of civil rights, even as they effect the totalitarian bandits of the Communist Party, that are involved. In the final analysis it is the labor movement generally, and the socialist movement in particular, which has most to lose in any assault on civil rights. Especially is this so when the arguments used are such as those in this case. It is, for example, unlikely that the Smith Gag Act would be used against fascists (and even if it were so used, we would be no more for it than we are now); and it is certain that fascists would not be charged with the literature of socialism. That the Stalinists use such literature, though they have no more honest connection with it than a Gerald K. Smith would have, is something we must consider by way of fully understanding the machinations of Stalinism. The Stalinists commit daily outrages against socialism. The Truman administration is out to commit an outrage against civil liberties. We must do what we can to permit neither.   
 Geltman: Vote for a Socialist Anti-War Candidate! (18 October 1948)






Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Geltman
On New York’s East Side: Emanuel Geltman for Congress
Vote for a Socialist Anti-War Candidate!
(18 October 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 42, 18 October 1948, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Few areas in the United States pose the problems of living under the inhumanity of capitalism as clearly as does New York’s East Side which embraces the 19th Congressional District.
There are many books which describe the East Side. There are many articles and surveys – some of them sensible and valuable, others nonsensical and futile – which discuss its problems.
The people of the East Side – the melting pots of a nation, composed of many nationalities – have, for example, wrestled with the problems of housing for decades.
Nobody who was born and has lived on the East Side has to be argued into the need for public housing. Few places need it more. Few communities have demanded it more vigorously.
Nobody who was raised on the East Side could fail to learn about the problems of housing, of EATING, of just plain living.
At every stage of their lives, the people of the East Side – mostly men and women who work for a living – have faced the facts of life under capitalism at their rawest.
Prices, a proper place to live, a decent school for a child – these the people of the East Side know as burning, daily issues of vital importance.
In our campaign, we shall present our answers to all of these great issues: people’s and union committees to force prices down; public housing on a scale that can approach the need without ANY regard for the grasping interests of the real estaters; and so forth.
 
Capitalist War or Socialist Peace?
But there is another problem with which the people of the East Side, as the people everywhere in the world, are concerned. It is a problem which points at the heart of the real issue – the kind of society we want to live in. A society in which we face constant fear, insecurity and hardship – capitalism? Or a society in which we can live with the richness of human beings who are independent, secure, without fear of living – socialism?
It is the problem of WAR.
We can fight for and win the houses we need. But we do not want them destroyed by the brutal idiocy of war.
Two giant powers face each other across the reaches of the world: the United States and Russia. Which shall dominate the world?
We say: NEITHER!
Russia holds Within the grip of its slave system Eastern Europe, vast sections of Asia, part of Germany.
The United States seeks to impose its own imperialist will on the remainder of the world and looks forward to complete domination of the world.
Every issue before the world is weighed by these powers, and the littler powers which side with them, according to how it serves their purposes.
Starvation, Israel’s right to exist as a state, a human being’s desire to free himself from life in a DP camp – these and many, many more issues are manipulated by the big powers.
The person who is starving wants food, not power politics.
Similarly, people who live in the shadow of war hunger for peace, not fearsome power diplomacy.
The course of the big powers leads to war. Today? No. Tomorrow? No – they are not yet ready. But the day after, the year after, two years after, five years? Yes. For that is the ultimate gift with which the slave system of Stalin and the capitalism of the United States can bless the world.
(And, today, capitalism can offer the prospect of continuing employment of jobs, of production, only to the extent that its economy is based on the anticipation of war – of destruction.)
 
Neither Washington nor Moscow
There is another course. It is the course of people who say we will submit to NEITHER WASHINGTON NOR MOSCOW.
It is the course of people who strike fear in the heart of despots and tyrants by saying that they wish to determine their own future.
It is the course of people who block the paths of the warmakers by refusing to be party to their plans.
It is the course of people who seek a sane and ordered world which is based neither on the profit motive of capitalism nor on the incredible dictatorship of Stalinism.
How do the candidates stand on this issue? We all know that there is little difference between Truman and Dewey. They serve imperialism and their differences have little to do with the needs of the people.
Wallace? His party, controlled as it is by the Communist Party, serves the aims of Russian imperialism.
Locally, in the 19th Congressional District, the issue is somewhat confused. The Republican and the Liberal Party candidates merely support American imperialism. The leading candidate, Arthur G. Klein, is the candidate of both the Truman party and the Wallace party. He gets a clean bill of health on his voting record from the supporters of American imperialism. And he gets the endorsement of the advocates of Russian imperialism.
Supporting both may make for re-election ... and confusion. It will not advance the desire for peace one iota.
We, the Workers Party, support neither of the Imperialist blocs. We believe that the people can shape their own destiny. We believe that wars arise out of systems in which there are masters and mastered.
We call for opposition to the imperialist designs of both power camps. Neither Washington nor Moscow!
Impractical? Only if you think that it is practical to lose husband and son and whole family in atomic war.
It is decidedly practical – the ONLY practical alternative to the fear of war. It is practical because it points to where the decision can really be made – the power of the people.
Can it be done? Of course. To do it we must understand that the choice and decision can be ours. We must understand the strength that lies in the labor movement. We must seek to use that strength politically and economically.
For this and many other reasons we attach so much importance to the organization of a Labor Party that can speak and act for the people. Aroused, conscious of what is happening and of how we can intervene – that way we can determine the future.
 
Pile Up Large Socialist Vote
We cannot do it if we wait for someone, some place else, to do it. We must start where we are. We can promote a national Labor Party by working for its creation in the 19th Congressional District.
So we can work for a socialist answer to war (and to the endless insecurity of capitalism!) on our local scale, encouraging the sweep of our ideas into other sections and areas.
A large socialist vote will have tremendous impact. Today a vote of protest, tomorrow it can be a vote of victory.
With it we serve our daily needs. With it we serve our basic, permanent need for a society of comradeship and brotherhood.
There will be three socialist candidates for president of the ballot in the 19th Congressional District – the Socialist Party, the Socialist Workers Party, the Industrial Government (Socialist Labor) Party. Vote for one of these – a vote for any one of them will be a socialist protest vote; regardless of what we think of the individual programs of these parties.
There will be only one socialist candidate for Congress on the ballot in this Congressional district. Vote for him.

Vote against war! Neither Washington nor Moscow!
 
Vote against capitalist insecurity!
 
Vote socialist!
 
Vote for Emanuel Geltman!
 
VOTE FOR THE WORKERS PARTY CANDIDATE!
 

nother Presidential Order (February 1943)






Emanuel Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
Notes of the Month
Another Presidential Order
(February 1943)

From New International, Vol. IX No. 2, February 1943, pp. 35–36.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Roosevelt’s proclamation ordering selected areas of the nation on a forty-eight-hour work week, and the prominence given it, makes little sense unless it is related to the national clamor for higher wages – and, especially, the miners’ demand for a $2.00-a-day wage increase.
Ostensibly, the purpose of the executive order is to increase production – particularly the production of war materials, although all industries are affected. The facts, however, show that the national average for machinery workers – i.e., for war production workers – is forty-nine hours a week. Many of these actually work sixty or more hours a week. In general, there are few war industries or plants of any size or consequence that operate on less than a forty-eight-hour week basis.
Further, there was nothing in law or fact to prevent any industry’s operation on a forty-eight-hour schedule – provided overtime rates were paid for hours worked in excess of forty hours. Thus, where a given industry or plant did operate on a work week under forty-eight hours – and these, for the most part, are in the consumers’ industries – the reasons had absolutely no connection with the absence of an administrative decree. Either materials were lacking, or manpower was excessive in the circumstances of restricted production or the health hazard was such as to make a longer work-week impossible. And the shifting of manpower from the consumers’ industries to war production had already been provided for in other decrees, threats or the simple absence of work.
We have not seen a single editorial or column which claimed that the President’s proclamation would materially raise production. Why, then, the order?
Its real significance can only be understood in the light of the WLB decision, issued on the same day as the work-week order. In this decision the WLB denied a general wage increase to 180,000 employees of the “Big Four” packing companies, and thus reaffirmed its Little Steel formula.
There is every indication that the timing of the forty-eight-hour order and the WLB decision was more than a coincidence. Rather, the one was unmistakably a cover-up for the other. That is to say, Roosevelt issued his order in such a way as to reaffirm the WLB’s Little Steel wage formula with a maximum of camouflage, and at such a time as to intimidate the movement for higher wages. Thus, Economic Stabilizer Byrnes, through whom the executive order was issued, very explicitly stated that “There must be no further increases in wages beyond the Little Steel formula.”
And that is precisely the issue. Labor has damned the Little Steel formula as a repressive, wage-cutting imposition. With prices having risen far beyond the 15 per cent wage increase allowed by the Little Steel formula, and with prices continuing to rise, every section of the labor movement has joined in a unanimous cry for the revision or complete elimination of the WLB formula. Murray, Green, the railroad brotherhoods – they are all vigorously (for them) demanding wage increases commensurate with the rise in the cost of living. Above all, however, the United Mine Workers have announced their position on a new contract: a $2.00-a-day wage increase.
Roosevelt’s order, and the publicity attending it, was, in effect, a statement of policy on the mine workers’ demands. The reputation of the miners’ union among workers in other industries is high. Regardless of what workers in auto or steel may think of Lewis, they respect him and his union as men who get what they are after. It is known that the miners will refuse to work, when the old contract expires on April 1. without a union contract, or an agreement making any pay rises retroactive to the date of expiration of the old contract. It is further known that Lewis intends to ask for and get the $2.00 increase, just as a year ago the anthracite miners forced a $1.00-a-day increase. And where other union leaders, under the impact of irrepressible upsurge in the ranks, merely ask for a revision of the formula upward, Lewis has declared himself against any kind of restrictive formula.
Now, it is plain that should the miners break through the restrictions of the WLB wage policies, there would be no stopping the rest of the labor movement. It would, in effect, be a green light for militant wage demands that could not possibly be halted, especially with the labor movement already in turmoil, and the union leaderships responding to the pressure from below. And, under the momentum of success, this upsurge might quite conceivably go beyond mere wage demands to include broader issues, notably, the right to strike. The sentiment in labor’s ranks for rescinding the no-strike pledge has already assumed organizational expression in the UAW. In the context of the struggle for wage increases, with class lines drawn sharply as labor is pitted against government and employer, on a clear-cut issue of class division, the movement might easily get out of “control.”
That is why the Roosevelt order, and the Byrnes explanation, laid particular stress on the overtime rate provision. Where the capitalist press hailed the order, in general, it wailed in anguish against the punishment of decent, law-abiding employers who would gladly operate their plants on a forty-eight or ninety-six-hour schedule if they didn’t have to cut too deeply into their pay-triotic profit reserves. But, as usual, Roosevelt showed greater perspicacity than his class – even if in this case it may backfire. (Sometime later, with the immediate issue “solved” and the wage movement crushed, it will be much easier to legislate or decree overtime pay out of existence.)
What was Roosevelt trying to do? He was calling attention to a “bulkier pay envelope,” seeking that way to head off the mass demand for higher wage rates. That is, he was trying to confuse and “demobilize” the wage movement, scare the more servile union leaderships, and map his position for the impending battle with the mine workers.
But the fact remains that labor, at least in the mass production industries, is already receiving that “bulkier pay envelope” based on time and a half for all work over forty hours. And the fact equally remains that this “bulkier pay envelope” is demonstrably skinny when it comes to purchasing power. So skinny, that with new price rises anticipated and with taxes digging deeply into the worker’s pay check, a serious cut in the standard of living of the workers is unmistakably threatened. Consequently, whatever Roosevelt may do to head off the movement, his efforts are likely to have been in vain. Already, after a day or two of silence in which tney seemed to have been routed by the executive order and the packing house decision, the labor leaders have returned to the attack on the Little Steel formula.
Whether the executive order proves to be a dud, or succeeds in its purpose of vanquishing the wage movement, rests largely now in the hands of the miners. Roosevelt has hurled his challenge. It is now labor’s turn to reply. And the miners hold the key to the answer!
 

hy the Stalintern Was 'Dissolved' and What Its Next Plans May Be (May 1943)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
Why the Stalintern Was ‘Dissolved’
and What Its Next Plans May Be
(May 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 22, 31 May 1943, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Nobody in his right mind believes that the “dissolution” of the Stalinist International actually means that Stalin is going to dispense with the services of his servants in the various Communist Parties throughout the world. It is true that Stalin has an infinite contempt for them. He always has had. Long before he completely fastened his hold on the International, and converted it into an arm of the Russian Foreign Office, Stalin spoke contemptuously of the International and the Parties in it. However, it is not at all unusual for masters to have an utter contempt for their servants – even where these servants are most indispensable. It is further true that as a COMMUNIST International, the CI was dissolved (more accurately, destroyed) a long time ago.
Stalin needs his servants. For example, he finds it most useful to have parties which will be for or against war in their, respective countries, according to what Russia’s national interests dictate. Further, these parties are useful to him as supplements to the GPU and as destructive instruments inside the working class movement to prevent its development on a socialist path. Socialism is as great a menace to Stalinism as it is to fascism and international capitalism. Thus, the first point to establish in connection with the “dissolution” is that in one form or another the Stalinist parties will continue to operate – and to operate under the orders of the Kremlin.
Why, then, the gesture of formal dissolution? There are many reasons, among which the most important are:
 
One Gesture for Another
1. It is a gesture to the United States and Great Britain designed at helping these countries counteract Hitler’s “anti-Bolshevik” propaganda. Hitler knows that Stalin is as much a Bolshevik as he himself is – which is to say, no Bolshevik at all. However, he finds it a valuable propaganda weapon. Roosevelt and Churchill, therefore, welcome a gesture which enables them to counteract Hitler’s propaganda among those unregenerate and diehard sections of their own capitalist class which are irked by the alliance with Russia.
2. It is a half-promise that in the occupied countries the Stalinists will string along with the Roosevelt-Churchill plans for those countries – for the present, anyway. The occupied countries are a thorny problem for the Allied imperialists. They confront a multitude of problems – conflicts of interest between the would-be rulers (for example, de Gaulle and Giraud), and so forth. Not the least of these problems is the potential influence of the Stalinists who have the only forces that approximate disciplined organization.
3. It is, consequently and in general, a token of good will given to Roosevelt and Churchill in return for similar gestures, and concrete assistance, given Russia. No doubt this dissolution has been under discussion for a long time – not with the Stalinist parties (which, in this country, at least, were yelling up to the day of the announcement that the demands in the capitalist press for the dissolution of the Stalintern were the inspiration of arch-reaction), but with the Allied diplomats.
Under lend-lease, Roosevelt has sent Stalin such offerings of good will as the production of that monstrosity of monstrosities – the movie, Mission to Moscow. He even sent Joseph Davies, who helped the movie producers commit mayhem on his bad-enough book, on a second mission to Moscow – together with a print of the movie. (Stalin on viewing it said it is “wonderful.” It is – for him!) We are not saying that the movie led to the dissolution. Imperialist politics are not that simple. But the sequence of events, which include the production of the movie and the second visit of Mr. Davies, undoubtedly are related to the gesture. Far more importantly, of course, more substantial agreements were no doubt exchanged – possibly boundary agreements, possibly agreements on the locale of the second front (Stalin is dead-set against the Balkans as the place), possibly offers of increased supplies. We don’t know, and won’t know until we see what actually happens, or until the workers of the world open up the secret archives of their government and read, for example, what was in the note Roosevelt sent to Stalin through Davies.
 
Guard Against the Menace!
4. Finally, and of equal importance, the dissolution of the Stalintern is probably part of a scheme to integrate the Stalinist parties into other mass working class movements or parties – socialist or general peoples’ parties – with the aim of directing them into Stalinist channels. In England, the Communist Party has already asked for admission to the Labor Party. In France, the Stalinists have officially affiliated with the de Gaulle movement. It is possible that, at a later date, with France freed of Hitler rule, and with the certain development of a mass socialist party, the Stalinists will seek to fuse with, or enter into, such a party. In this country there is no mass party for them to enter, unless they create such a party through something like the American Labor Party.
Many left socialist leaders and ranks may welcome such a move as a rebirth of the socialist movement. It must consequently be pointed out that this is an incalculable menace. To allow the Stalinists into the socialist movement is to give them an opportunity to behead it. They are the mortal enemies of socialism – not the ranks who may have been misled into believing that the Communist Parties stand for communism, but the Stalinist parties themselves which stand for nothing else but for a particular brand of reaction. Regardless of the “dissolution,” it is as certain as death that Stalinists the world over will continue to be organized and will continue to work under the directives of Moscow through some committee or front organization.
Thus, dissolution or no dissolution, the menace of the Stalinists remains – and it remains the task of socialists and other militants to drive these union wreckers, GPU assassins and Kremlin servants out of the labor movement.
 

 Garrett: Text of Garrett's Speech Hitting Post Office Ban (April 1943)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Text of Garrett’s Speech Hitting Post Office Ban
(April 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 14, 5 April 1943, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

I have the honor to bring to this meeting and to the fight The Militant is carrying on, the fraternal greetings and solidarity of our paper, Labor Action, and our party, the Workers Party. (See page 1.)
FUNDAMENTALLY, we oppose this arbitrary attack on the rights of The Militant because it is an attack on a basic democratic right – the right of free press – for which labor has fought tenaciously throughout its existence as an organized movement.
An attack on this particular right – the right of free press – is an attack on all democratic rights. What does the right of assembly mean if there is no right of free press, if there is no free press which can call people to assemble?
What does the right of free speech mean if you cannot speak through the columns of a paper and reach the ears of people who cannot be reached by voice alone?
What does the right to organize mean if you do not enjoy the right to publish a press which, as any child knows, is indispensable for the creation, maintenance and development of organization?
And finally what does the right to read mean – that right for which men have shed heroes’ blood from the days of feudalism down to the present day – if you are told what you can read and what you may not read?
We oppose the attack on The Militant because it is a labor paper, an integral part of the labor movement, and an attack on any part of the labor movement is an attack on the labor movement and the working class as a whole, and on every section of it.
We oppose the attack on The Militant because it is so obviously being persecuted for its refusal to knuckle under to the imperialist war and the imperialist war machine; for its fight against the vicious anti-labor campaign that reaction has been carrying on and is relentlessly continuing under cover of “patriotism.”?
If this attack is left unanswered, it means that everyone else in the labor movement who, like ourselves, opposes this war as an imperialist war, is subject to the same persecution and gag.
And we have, of course, what might be called our own reason for attacking the persecution of The Militant, for being in complete solidarity with The Militant, what you might call our own private reason. Our paper, Labor Action, has been subjected to the same outrageous Post Office attack as The Militant. Week in, week out, without any official reason being given, Labor Action has been arbitrarily held up in the Post Office and its mailing to subscribers delayed – all this, I repeat, without any reason being given.
As many of you know, at about exactly the same time as the Post Office informed The Militant it was deprived of second-class rights, Labor Action was notified that it would be mailed without delay as before. We are, however, not deceived, or lulled into a false feeling of security, by this apparent duality of policy in the Post Office, and no one else should be. It is obvious that the reactionaries are making The Militant a test case. If they succeed in keeping The Militant out of the mails, if they win their court case, that will be the signal for them to attack all along the line, with Labor Action next on the list.
All these reasons, and many others that might be cited, dictate to us the clear and unambiguous course that must be followed by the entire labor movement and by everyone to whom the term “progressive” is not an empty word.
That course is 100 per cent solidarity with The Militant in its fight. That course is 100 per cent hostility to the reactionary plans and procedure of the Post Office and the Roosevelt Administration and war machine that stand behind it.
If we fail in this, we help by our negligence to pave the road for reaction.
If we join hands firmly on the side of The Militant, if we fight unitedly and aggressively, and if we win our fight, as we can, we shall have helped pave the road for new victories by-the working class and its revolutionary vanguard!
 

he "Daily Worker" and Phelps Dodge (March 1943)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
The Daily Worker and Phelps Dodge
(March 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 13, 29 March 1943, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The March 13 issue of the Daily Worker, Communist Party sheet, reports with handsprings of joy that a meeting of Local 451, Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers Union, condemned Labor Action as “dishonest, treasonous and dangerous.” If the hand that wrote the Daily Worker article did not write the resolution, it is only because the Stalinists have enough forces to assign the same filthy job to two people. (Let us always remember that these same people supported a pact with Hitler up to June 22, 1941.)
The resolution adopted by Local 451 does NOT represent the sentiment of the rank and file – specifically the Phelps Dodge workers. It represents the opinion of a Stalinist clique in the leadership – which, we might add, is in difficulty. It is reported that the election of Reid Robinson, Stalinist president of the international, has been challenged as fraudulent.
Labor Action recently reported a spontaneous walk-out at the Phelps Dodge Refining Corp. (It was, unfortunately, our only report of the situation.) Unable to get any support in their demands from the leadership of Local 451, and embittered against the company, the workers in Phelps Dodge took matters into their own hands. The union leaders stabbed the workers in the back, and forced the men to return to work without a victory.
What was and is the issue? The workers at Phelps Dodge want union security and a $1.00-a-day raise from a company that is coining plenty in war profits. Now that the men are back at work, the WLB has postponed its decision, and the leaders of the union are seeking to squelch resentment by postponing and cancelling meetings.
The Daily Worker charges that we erred in out report that the WLB had granted a $1.00 raise nine months ago and that the company had refused to pay it. We may have erred. Our information came from workers in the plant who assured us that it was common knowledge although the union leaders have made no announcement of the Fact. But suppose we did err? If we did – and in the absence of an honest, and democratic leadership it is difficult to ascertain if we did – but if we did, what of it? We are willing to correct the error, and hereby do. The WLB didn’t grant an increase? All right, it didn’t. The fact remains that that increase is what the workers need and want. The fact remains that conditions in the plant are evidently so bad that workers took to the picket line against the will of union officers and in the face of general intimidation.
As a labor paper with a responsibility to report the truth and support labor’s struggle for better conditions, we reported (along with other papers) the walkout. And, we admit it, we reported it in such a Way as to make it clear that we are in sympathy with the demands of the Phelps Dodge workers – just as we are in sympathy with the mine workers in their demands, and with workers all over the country who seek a better wage.
What sticks in the craw of the Daily Worker and the Stalinist stooges in the union, who call upon the government to suppress us, is that many Phelps Dodge worker are Labor Action readers. And that these workers know that Labor Action is LOYAL to the interests of the working class – and that if “treason” exists, it is the treason of those who, like the Daily Worker, betray the interests of the working class. It is the treason of those who, faced with a situation that loudly calls for the support of the Phelps Dodge workers in their demands on the company, denounce – not the company! – but a paper that tells the working class truth, and will continue to tell it regardless of any spurious resolutions spawned in the Daily Worker office.
 

l Garrett: Los Angeles in a Dither Over Mysterious (Ssh!) 'Air Raid' (March 1942)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Los Angeles in a Dither
Over Mysterious (Ssh!) ‘Air Raid’
(March 1942)

From Labor Action, Vol. 6 No. 10, 9 March 1942, p. 1.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The people of the Los Angeles area last week were subjected either to a monstrous illustration of inefficiency or some plain and fancy chicanery which might have had dire results. You no doubt read about, the big “air raid” in this area last week and the ensuing contradictions that issued from the offices of Secretary of the Navy Knox and Secretary of War Stimson. One or the other is guilty of misrepresentation. Which it is, is no small matter to the people out here.
If Knox stated the facts accurately then the Army is guilty of having menaced the lives of countless people in unbridled anti-aircraft firing.
Shrapnel was spattered into the air, a good deal of it falling on or near houses. A heavy piece of shrapnel is sufficient to pierce the roof of a house, as some of it did. Unexploded shrapnel, of which there was some, is perhaps a greater danger. In effect, therefore, the Army action – assuming the air raid to be a false alarm, as claimed by Knox – was equivalent to exposing a large section of this area to machine gun fire.
On the other hand, if the air raid was legitimate, then the Army has to account for the fact that no planes were brought down, despite the fact that they were allegedly caught in the anti-aircraft light beams. Also it has to explain what the alleged planes were doing. They were presumably not bombers; in any case there was no bombing. Some plausible explanation has to be given for the presence of the planes. That such an explanation is difficult to find was evidenced by the columns upon columns devoted in the newspapers of the next two days to the “air raid.”
After the flurry of the first two days, during which the “air raid” dwarfed all other news, the issue seems to have been dropped – for all anybody can tell, “on suggestion.” Be that as it may, the issue is not yet settled so far as the great mass of people is concerned.
As a postscript, I’d like to add this: much has been made by the jingo brass hats and other reactionaries of the man hours of work lost in strikes. However, more man hours of work were lost in this “air raid,” which may well have been a phoney, than were lost during the North American strike which aroused the, government sufficiently to send the Army with bayonets drawn against the strikers. In virtually every plant in this vicinity, night work came to a halt, the day shifts began an hour or two late in every case and, in the resulting confusion, many workers never did get to work that day.
 

 Garrett: Price Rises Hit Workers’ Pockets (22 July 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Price Rises Hit Workers’ Pockets
UAW Calls National Stoppage to Halt Price Jump
(22 July 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 29, 22 July 1946, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

With mass indignation running high against the intolerable price situation, union and consumer bodies are organizing a series of protest actions. Spearheaded by the nationwide stoppages called for July 16 by the UAW, plans are taking shape in city after city for a wide variety of action.
Local demonstrations and activities are being organized in preparation for a nationwide Buyers Strike. In New York some 70 organizations have announced five mobilization points from which picket lines will issue on July 23. AFL truckers in Minneapolis are planning a mass "work holiday" on July 31.
Connecticut CIO unions are planning a statewide buyers strike. Philadelphia unions are picketing stores, and planning a mass demonstration. Buffalo organizations are mobilizing mass picket lines. The National CIO Executive Board which is scheduled to meet on July 18, will discuss action on the price situation.
These are actions in the right DIRECTION, and Labor Action calls upon its readers to join in the protest, to participate in the buyers strikes. In so doing, however, we call attention to the fact that a buyers strike is limited in effectiveness and value. As we have said before, it can serve as a noteworthy demonstration of mass anger and determination to halt price increases. To actually hold the price line, and to hurl it back to a reasonable level, more, much more, is required.
A systematic campaign uniting union activity with consumer action on a national scale is obviously indicated. Unless the unions, that is, the organizations of labor, are involved on a national scale and agreed upon an aggressive policy of wage and price action, everything else that is done will prove to have little value. Thus, the proposal made by the UAW, through its president, Walter Reuther, that Philip Murray ask the CIO Executive Board to call for a united labor conference of ALL CIO, AFL, Railroad Brotherhood and independent unions, is the kind of proposal dictated by the situation. In the absence of such a national conference, and it is unlikely that the CIO Executive will call such a conference, it will be up to the individual unions to organize the kind of action that is most meaningful.
A buyers strike, we have said, is a valuable demonstration, but a limited one. What then can be done? First of all, the very actions organized around a buyers strike and similar protests can serve to initiate more effective means of price control: namely, committees of workers’ (union) representatives and housewives to control prices in each neighborhood, and linked for effectiveness through national bodies.
 
A Basic Program
But that, too, is insufficient. Labor has it in its power to control prices at the source. For example, the 3-point price control program which the UAW is now championing, and in which the central plank is a buyers strike, can be given real meaning only if it’s linked with the GM Program advanced by the union in the General Motors strike. Elsewhere in this issue, you will find a discussion of this program, and its meaning in the present price situation.
The GM Program, in linking wages, prices and profits, in seeking to give labor a voice in determining all three, gets to the very heart of what labor must do. That is to say, labor must intervene directly, and at the point of production, in halting the price gouge. The same goes for all other problems related to the price and commodity situation, and there are many – such as the problem of shortages.
Let us take the Packinghouse Workers Union (UPWA) as an example of what could be done. The packinghouse workers are demanding: (1) $1.00 an hour minimum; (2) A guaranteed annual wage; (3) A cost of living bonus; (4) Elimination of wage differentials. All these are excellent demands. But they could go a lot further towards helping both the packinghouse workers, and the people of the United States generally.
 
Profiteering in Meat
In their paper, The Packinghouse Worker, they expose the profiteering of the Big Four Packers, not merely in meat, but in butter, eggs and cheese (of which they control about half of all interstate sales). The Packinghouse Worker goes further in exposing the utter callousness of the meat monopolists. Until OPA collapsed entirely, meat was virtually unobtainable – and shortages were as severe a problem as impossible prices. Meat is now beginning to emerge on the market at fancy profit-making prices. But, says The Packinghouse Worker, “cold storage holdings in the United States on May 1 was almost as high as the previous year.” At the very moment when the Big Packers, Armour, Swift and their colleagues, were screaming that meat was unavailable because the workers were on strike or because they had no cattle to slaughter, “total meats in storage amounted to 669,445,000 pounds, approximately 55,000,000 pounds more than on May 1, 1945.”
This bears out the charge made in Labor Action that meat, like wheat, butter, etc., was available, but that it was being kept off the market deliberately by the profiteers in order to boost prices, and also, in this case, to try to whip up a little phoney sentiment against the workers who were making necessary wage demands. It bears out our charge that meat couldn’t get into the black market unless the packers put it there.
And this has every relation to prices! Just as the sudden appearance of butter, which last week was strictly an under-the-counter commodity, has every relation to prices. It means that the profiteers are out to milk the consumer; that they’ll withhold commodities, resort to every stratagem to boost their profits. That is where labor enters.
Suppose, in addition to the four demands the UPWA is making, it added several others in line with the GM Program. Suppose it told Armour and Swift that, in addition to a wage increase, the union wanted the right to examine the books of the company, wanted a voice in determining what profits, prices and wages should be, and that it would not permit an increase in prices. If UPWA did this, it would AT ONE AND THE SAME TIME, be defending the price interests of the great mass of people, and it would be challenging the bankrupt clique of food monopolists who pit their selfish motives against the food needs of a people.
The situation duplicates itself in every industry, in every part of the country. We are not listing the upward movement of prices because anything we print today will be dated, will be too low by tomorrow. Merely as an illustration: Dun & Bradstreet, the Wall Street statistical firm, reports that its daily index of prices for 30 commodities had climbed to 229.6 on July 15 as against 228.9 three days earlier, 219.4 a week earlier, and 178.5 a year earlier.
These commodities represent industries. These industries employ workers. These workers have their unions. These unions could push the price spiral downwards. How? By moving into action along the lines of the GM Program. By organizing labor and consumer action. By coordinating this campaign on a national scale.
Prices are out of hand. But the situation is NOT beyond our control. JOIN IN THE BUYERS STRIKE. JOIN THE PROTEST DEMONSTRATIONS. JOIN THE PICKET LINES. ORGANIZE COMMITTEE’S OF WORKERS AND HOUSEWIVES TO CHECK ON AND CONTROL PRICES. PRESS FOR A NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF OUR UNIONS. GET YOUR UNION INTO ACTION IN LINKING WAGE AND PRICE DEMANDS!
 

 Garrett: CIO Board’s Price Program Is Off the Mark (29 July 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
CIO Board’s Price Program
Is Off the Mark
(29 July 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 30, 29 July 1946, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The CIO Executive Board which met last week advanced a program to meet the price situation. It is so far off the mark, in its essential aspects, that we propose to subject it to detailed criticism in our next issue. We can do no more in this issue than briefly outline this program and our criticism of it.
There is no doubt of the fact that Murray and the CIO Board are aware of the situation. For example, president Murray charged that “essential living costs” have risen approximately 40 per cent in the last two months, 25 per cent since OPA lapsed. And, as the CIO’s Union News Service reports, the Board “uttered a grim warning that inflation and economic chaos endanger the safety and security of 140,000,000 American people.” Unfortunately, its proposals, and those of the CIO’s Cost of Living Committee published several days after the Board report, are lacking in an equal measure of “grimness.”
 
Major Proposal Is Bad
In a statement that includes a number of valuable, though limited, proposals, the Board calls for a labor-management conference as the major plank in its program.
“We call upon the President of the United States,” says the resolution, “to call before him in immediate conference, representatives of American labor and industry to the end that the demand and need for immediate wage increases may be given full and official recognition, and to the end that the crisis created by the drive to cripple and destroy price control may be met quickly through adequate guarantees for a stabilized national economy.”
The last part of this sentence can be interpreted to mean anything, or nothing, and therefore we omit comment on it. It is the first part, especially as it relates to a scandalous “offer” made by Murray in his press conference, that demands critical, and severely critical, attention. We are referring to the labor-management conference.
For the CIO to go out for wage increases, is a necessary step. But it is drained of all consequence, when it is linked with a labor-management conference. Labor has at its disposal the record of the last several years of labor-management conferences. And the record is a clear one. These conferences did not, could not serve labor. In fact, at the very press conference at which Murray reported the Board’s program, reference was made, according to the CIO News, to the “fiasco of last year’s union-management confab.” Fiasco! That’s putting it mildly.
The story of this winter’s strike wave is again being repeated. Readers will recall that while hundreds of workers were either on the picket line, or ready to join a picket line, Murray was waltzing around the White House “in conference with Truman.” The result was that labor’s picket lines gains were stolen from labor in Washington. Here we have it again: Murray, the head of a powerful, many-millioned organization of workers, looking towards Truman, towards “labor-management” agreement at a conference actively attended by the government (management’s government!) instead of looking towards the strength that resides in the ranks of the CIO.
 
A Scandalous Offer
There is a place for labor to confer with management – at the negotiating table, the two sides meeting as the opponents they are, labor versus capital, the strength of one pitted against the strength of the other. Wage increases are necessary; and Murray, the union man, knows how to get them.
Labor-management conferences serve no purpose other than to deceive workers into thinking that something valuable is being done for them. Management, that is the profiteers, the monopolists, are not deceived.
What makes this all the more hair- raising is that at his press conference, Murray spoke of a ... no-strike pledge! It’s incredible, but true. We quote from the CIO News: “Murray said the unions might consider the granting of a no-strike pledge to show their good faith.” Good faith! Good faith, indeed! After the experience of the war years, after the indignation it justly aroused among tens of thousands of union militants, to speak again of a no-strike pledge, in, however “iffy” a sense, shows not “good faith” but criminal idiocy.
And what does he mean by saying that the “unions” might possibly be willing to consider the monstrosity of a no-strike pledge? What unions, and what part of the unions? – the officialdom, or the ranks who had more than a belly-full of the no-strike pledge during the war?
 
Rest of Program
The rest of the program has its good points, and “unclear” points:

An eleventh hour plea to Congress to pass a price control bill free of crippling amendments. OK. But the actions of Congress have demonstrated that labor must organize its own price control action together with consumer representatives.
 
A demand that Truman veto any bill that would be a fraud. OK. But it appears as though Truman is prepared to sign just such a fraud.
 
A call for action to hold those in Congress who fought OPA responsible for their acts in the next election campaign. OK. But not in Murray’s way!

We have gained nothing if we oppose one capitalist politician in order to support another capitalist politician who may have voted for OPA but committed a hundred other crimes against labor. Regardless of their votes on OPA, capitalist politicians are just that – capitalist politicians. Labor needs an Independent Labor Party, and its own candidates running on the ticket of that party. That isn’t in Murray’s program, nor will it be until such a time as the pressure for independent labor political action compels Murray to pay heed, or disregards him if he fails to do so.
 
A plea for buyers strikes and community action “by every available weapon.” OK. But the CIO Board, and the Cost of Living Committee, did not specify what this community action should be, or did so in such a way as to give it only the meekest kind of meaning.

Says the Cost-of-Living Committee report: “Get your union to call on the individual merchants or landlords, and on their organization heads, to make dear to them why the cost of living must be kept down.” Is that action? Hardly! Undoubtedly, small merchants can be made to work together with the unions, for their common interest. In fact, labor must align with it the little merchant. But committees to “make clear” why prices must be kept down is arrant nonsense. Shall a committee explain this to Armour or Swift? Action, not explanations, by popular price control committees is required – the kind of action the UAW is speaking about when it says it will resist evictions.
 
A demand for immediate readjustment of “pensions, social security payments and other fixed sources of incomes.” OK!
 
A warning that workers’ wages and purchasing power must be protected in the period before the termination of contracts and before the development of a stabilized national economy. OK. But how?
 

Five More Points
The Cost of Living Committee further proposes in its Labor’s Consumer Program the following five points:

Don’t buy anything you can do without.
 
The point on explaining to merchants and landlords, discussed above.
 
“Organize shopping committees to check prices and report price gougers to the public.” OK. But the situation doesn’t call for shopping committees, but for price control committees of which the above will be one duty.
 
Prepare for direct buying and selling.
 
“Be ready to use picket lines if you need them, to tell the public what the facts are, and whom not to support.”

OK. But that’s a pretty limited use for picket lines.
 
What Is Missing?
Nowhere in the report of the Board meeting is there reference to the request made by the UAW for a national conference of all unions to discuss action on the price situation. To our way of thinking, that is the kind of step the CIO should have taken, the kind of conference it should call. Unlike the labor-management proposal, it would have meaning in labor’s behalf.
Nowhere in the Board report is there a proposal to link a demand for wage increases with a genuine program to PREVENT price increases. We arc speaking of the kind of program put forward by the GM strikers and which we have called the GM Program. This program remains the basic element in any real campaign to control prices – at their source.
Nowhere is there mention of a plan to organize real POPULAR PRICE CONTROL COMMITTEES. Buyers strikes are an excellent demonstration. But the situation demands systematic, organized activity by those who are most vitally concerned. It is proper to demand a good price control bill of Congress, but we cannot put our reliance there – even should it produce something that more or less resembles price control. OUR RELIANCE MUST NECESSARILY REST ON THOSE INSTRUMENTS THAT REPRESENT US DIRECTLY.
 

 Garrett: CIO Convention Announces Wage Drive (2 December 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
For Wage Increase Without Price Increase!
CIO Convention Announces Wage Drive
(2 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 48, 2 December 1946, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The CIO, which met last week in Atlantic City, passed rather quickly over a statement of policy that we consider of the utmost importance. At its Thursday session, the CIO convention formally opened what has been termed its campaign for a “second round” of wage increases. Doing so, it advanced the idea of campaigning for a wage increase without an increase in prices.
It is not our purpose here to estimate the value of this decision in the scale of the entire CIO convention. We leave that to our comrade, David Coolidge, who attended the convention as a reporter for Labor Action and who will analyze the convention as a whole in our next issue. We here take the campaign outlined by Philip Murray and Walter Reuther at its face value and hail it, for it points to the only real direction of coming to grips with the wage-price issue.
Speaking before the delegates, Walter Reuther, president of the United Automobile Workers and a vice-president of the CIO, held that it was the CIO’s job to “debunk the stupid economic theory that you cannot raise wages unless you get a comparable price increase. The whole history of American industry belies the contention.”
President Murray, speaking on the same issue, continued as follows: “We believe that American business is now extracting enough profit out of its various enterprises to enable them to make substantial wage concessions without necessarily increasing prices.”
 
Toward Raising Labor’s Living Standard
Both Reuther and Murray are absolutely right. For the CIO to make that the pivot of its wage campaign is an encouraging sign. For Murray to join in raising the demand is especially encouraging. As recently as last winter, Murray opposed that concept. Through the manner in which he settled the steel strike, he contributed to the government-industry policy of stealing wage increases won on the picket line by raising prices.
American industry is more than capable of paying higher wages – not merely higher wages to compensate for the rise in the cost of living, but higher wages of a kind that will RAISE THE STANDARD OF LIVING. To go after that is a legitimate, and basic, object of unionism.
Effecting the demand, however, requires something more than merely stating it. Murray, Reuther and the other leaders of the CIO are in a position to realize that demand, for they have behind them the organized strength of millions of workers who will respond with enthusiasm to whatever is demanded by such a campaign. And the demand itself is many-sided, including actions aimed primarily at cancelling the deadly effects of rising prices and other actions aimed at raising the standard of living of the people.
For example, there is already a wide sentiment in the ranks of labor, AFL and CIO, for an escalator clause, that is, a clause that will provide for a boost in wages with every periodic jump of the price graph. Curran of the National Maritime Union stated his objection to the escalator clause on the ground that it would mean “our standard of living will become static.” Only if the labor leaders make it so! The escalator clause is a starting point, one that can overcome the immediate problem of inflationary prices that are in their effect cutting wages, wiping out gain, and depressing living standards.
In our opinion, a nation-wide campaign to write an escalator clause into every union contract cannot only be successful; but, in its success, it will rank among the greatest achievements of the labor movement. Obviously, the escalator clause by itself is insufficient, however great the advance it would mark. The point is that it can be given greater meaning by a parallel campaign for wage- increases without price increases.
 
How Will Campaign Be Conducted?
Hence the value of the CIO campaign as stated, but not outlined, by Murray and Reuther. A little less than a year ago it inspired the General Motors workers in their magnificent strike. Though their demand fired the entire labor movement, they were left to continue the fight alone, and so had to retreat. Embraced by the whole of the CIO, as is now proposed, it can become the rallying cry for such a demonstration of union solidarity and victory as the country has not before seen.
There we come to the heart of the weakness in the Murray and Reuther position. It appears to us as though the campaign was not implemented by any course of action or plan of campaign. Even at the convention, Reuther’s speech can hardly be said to have, been as effective as the arguments he advanced last year on behalf of the General Motors strikers. The figures were clear, the argument unanswerable, the logic demanding action by its very inner drive. And that time it was linked with such a necessary and reasonable demand as Open the Books.
We missed this, the spirit as well as the actual content, in the speeches at the CIO convention. We are. not here dealing with Murray’s fuzzy thinking or reasoning on behalf of the campaign. We accent the campaign as stated by the CIO leaders at its face value. However, to be genuinely meaningful it requires some statement of direction. And that was lacking, except for a declaration that “there is no threat of strike in the offing,” and a feeble protest that the big manufacturers can get away with statements in the public press for which labor leaders would be denounced.
If there is no threat of strike in the offing, just how does President Murray mean to effect his demand? We are not here implying that strikes have to be called immediately. Calling strikes, when, where and how, is the business of the labor leaders and of the rank and file in the unions who judge their own needs. We are not calling strikes in the columns of our paper! But it does seem to us as though the situation calls at least for the “threat” of strikes, unless Murray has some other real surefire way of achieving labor’s demands. Reuther said something about a war chest of $10,000,000 to counteract the well organized and wealthy campaign of the financiers and industrialists. This is hardly a staggering sum for so huge a purpose. If anything, it is modest, for we assume it would be used to unite the strategy of all the CIO unions in an active campaign.
 
Labor Will Appear as Leader of the People
Commenting on the General Motors strike demand last year, we hailed it as a demand of extreme significance, marking a new stage in the development of the American working class, the sense of which would lead labor to further demands and higher achievements. We took it for our own use and, calling it the GM Program, made it the number one demand in our price-wage program.
By it we understand all such other demands as necessarily flow from it in order for it to be effective – such demands as Open the Books. By its very nature, it invades the prerogatives of capitalist enterprise, for it can only mean that labor demands a voice in the determination of wages, prices and profits. It is a sign of tabor’s maturity, its ability to reorganize society and, in our opinion, leads to more advanced struggles against the machinery and sanctity of monopolist private enterprise.
The importance of the CIO’s statement, if carried through to effective agitation and realization, has broad implications. Among other things, it will reverse the trend of the elections, in which many sections of the lower middle class and farm population moved away from labor to the side of big business. Such a campaign as is now contemplated will demonstrate, as did the GM strike, that labor is the leader of the people as a whole. Standing on the simple demand for a wage increase without permitting a corresponding (and usually it is a greater) increase in prices will be proof that labor speaks for the great mass of people. Thus, behind this demand can be rallied the support of all but those handful of social bankrupt – industrialists, meat monopolists, landlords, etc. – whose class rule actively operates against the welfare of the people.
The consequences of the CIO position, if put into practice, can be far-reaching in changing the American scene and in raising the standard of living of the people. We therefore applaud its decision and look forward to its implementation.
 

 Garrett: Hold the Line on Prices! (18 February 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Price Steal Wipes Out Picket-Line Gains
Hold the Line on Prices!
(18 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 7, 18 February 1946, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Steel is holding out for a price increase. General Motors won’t settle until it is guaranteed a price increase. Tugboat owners in New York won’t talk wages without a prior commitment raising prices. Meat packers have already signed with the union, but they are getting a price increase or government subsidy that will more than offset the wage raise. The list could be extended endlessly.
That is the industry-government pattern today: wage increases that don’t come near satisfying the workers’ needs, price increases that wipe out such wage increases as are granted. The pattern holds for industries that were forced to sign some sort of wage agreement through the picket line action of aroused workers. It holds for industries, like steel and GM, that have yet to sign. Steel and GM are merely carrying the ball for big business.
Last week we summed up the situation in the following words: WHAT LABOR IS WINNING ON THE PICKET LINE IS BEING STOLEN FROM LABOR IN WASHINGTON. We repeat it this week, for that is exactly what is happening.
The industrialists were out to smash the price ceilings from the start. They knew that they would have to grant some kind of wage increases because the facts of inadequate wages and stupendous profits were too blatant. They meant, however, to keep these wage increases to the merest token level. And to more than get them back through price boosts.
If the wage increases are now of any size above a gesture it is because of the tremendous wave of strikes that began with the notable action and demands of the GM workers. If the government-industry conspiracy to scuttle price ceilings entirely has been in any way retarded, it is because labor – again, most notably, the GM workers – fought for the price interests of the great mass of people.
The Truman administration is now tinkering with a “new” formula to settle the price-wage dispute. There is nothing new in it, because it is a repetition of the old and outrageous Little Steel formula. The “new” plan calls for government control of wage increases. Combine that with the obvious Little Steel pattern already set in wage awards – in every case they amount to about 18½ cents; combine that with Truman’s “fact-finding” scheme, and you can’t help but see that it all adds up to a rotten WAGE-FIXING formula.
The net result: wages will go up so much and no more; prices will eat away every cent of the wage Increase and possibly a few more; take- home pay will be lower; real wages, a workers’ ability to buy food, clothing, shelter, etc., will go down.
There is something more that needs to be added at this point. It ties in with the whole price conspiracy. Try to buy a suit, stockings, no master what. Almost everything is hard to get. Apartments and houses are almost impossible to find. Queues line up for blocks to get nylons or shifts.
If these articles arc now scarce, it is partly because the manufacturers are holding out against the certainty that they will wangle price increases from THEIR government. Why produce and sell now, When, in a few months, prices and profits will be so much higher. That’s capitalist logic. The other part of the explanation is that capitalism admits its inability to produce for peace as it did for war.
What can we do about this? A lot! And we proved that on the picket lines that covered the nation.
Labor has demonstrated that it speaks best for the interests of the poor farmer, of the great mass of the people, in prices and related matters. Who put the issue squarely before the people? The GM workers in their perfectly legitimate demand for a wage increase without a price increase!
Labor has demonstrated more than that, however. Its picket lines threw a scare into industry. And it need not have given way on its original demands for genuine wage increases, if its leadership had continued to lead picket line action instead of bustling around Truman.
All the signs indicate that steel will get an increase of $5.00 or more per ton. That increase will pass right down the line until it is paid for out of the people’s pockets. More price increases than we can list have already been granted. Real estate profiteers have held back on new building until they can discard rent ceilings, and that point they have virtually won. Naturally, Truman is industry’s man. Congress is industry’s agent. It is the government of the manufacturers, the real estate sharks, the packers.
What are the answers then? There are two, and the two are intimately linked with one another.

First: If steel can’t operate so that it will provide labor with a decent living standard, then let labor operate steel! Just that, and it applies to every industry. If they can’t produce for peace in such a way that labor can eat and live decently, then nationalize the industries, take them out of the hands of these bankrupts whose profit interests conflict with the interests of society as a whole. Nationalize these industries and put them under WORKERS’ CONTROL! Labor will see to it that industry operates for the common good.
 
Second: There is no justifiable reason for leaving our welfare in the hands of a capitalist government. Yes, we can make Truman pay heed to our demands, we can make him listen closely by mass action. That we must do until the government is ours. And we can have our own government, a workers’ government.

We can do neither by playing around with the capitalist politicians of Democratic or Republican hue. We can do neither by dancing every time Truman (before him Roosevelt, after him another representative of capitalism) calls the tune. We can do neither until the leaders of our unions are forced to quit wasting their time in governmental council rooms, until they are made to break sharply with the capitalist politicians and embark on a course of INDEPENDENT POLITICAL ACTION.
We need the same kind of spirit in political action as kept the picket lines strong and powerful, as is still keeping the GM picket line solid. Independent, militant, political action! That we must have. In the concrete, that means an INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY, running LABOR candidates, mobilizing the political strength of labor and uniting that political strength with economic militancy.
 

 Garrett: Promote Your Paper, Support the Sub Drive! (11 February 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Promote Your Paper,
Support the Sub Drive!
(11 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 6, 11 February 1946, p. 1.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Reva Craine, our press manager, has invited me to address the readers of Labor Action through her Press Column on the subscription drive which began on February 1. It is an opportunity I gladly take because it is, to my way of thinking, as important an issue as any in the world, and a good deal more important than most.
Labor Action is not merely the paper of those who actually write its columns, mail it, and so forth. It is, in a far more fundamental sense, YOUR paper. And we feel that the responsibility of circulating it (and writing for it, too) should be shared by us collectively, and “us" includes every reader.
There is a need for Labor Action that cannot be filled by any other paper. In explanation we stand on our record of vigorous, uncompromising intervention on every issue of the class struggle against the bosses. Labor Action was the first, and only, paper to publish a revolutionary socialist manifesto against the war. Labor Action is the only paper in the United States that ponsistently champions the interests of labor – veterans, Negroes, men, women – against ALL the imperialisms of the world.
Those of you who are perhaps familiar only with the last few issues will nevertheless have seen ample demonstration of its unswerving devotion to the cause of the working class. Thousands of you who received Labor Action for the first time on a picket line in Detroit, Reading, Lackawanna, Harrison or any one of a dozen places saw in Labor Action a paper that did more than give unstinting support to the strike actions that have swept the country.
Yes, more! We do not merely “cover” the strikes as a capitalist newspaper would. Each strike struggle is ours. Every picket line has Labor Action marching with it in spirit.
We have campaigned for a democratically coordinated strike strategy council to unify the various strike actions. We have campaigned, as we are in the greatest part of the issue you are now reading, to organize for political action as well as for economic action. In every respect we have shown bias – yes, bias! For we are biased and proud of it. We are biased on the side of labor, we are out to destroy capitalism and to replace it by a system of society in which workers, black or white, of any national origin, rule according to the needs of society as a whole.
To be sure, we have severely criticized the labor leaders while pledging our 100 per cent support to the struggles they lead. That too we understand as our duty. When the policies of a union leader injure the interests of labor either in the immediate or longer sense. We say so. We discuss such policies, analyze them, explain wherein they are wrong, and in opposing them, give our view as to what is right. We do not hide from any issue of the class struggle, but enter into it vigorously as socialists, as unionists, as militant members of the labor movement.
Ours is a paper for veterans, for Negroes, for the oppressed everywhere, That is why we ask you to help us spread it.
We’ll speak of our plans for a larger paper in a few weeks when these plans are worked out. In the meantime, let us put Labor Action into the hands of 5,000 new worker-subscribers by May 1.
The first three day of the drive brought in over 150 new subs. That’s good as a beginning. But only as a beginning. We take it for granted that Workers Party branches will swing into a real sub-getting stride ...
 

 Garrett: Organize Committees to Push Prices Down! (4 November 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Organize Committees to Push Prices Down!
(4 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 44, 4 November 1946, pp. 1 & 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The price picture is well enough known to every one of us. It reduces itself to the simple fact that wages cannot possibly be. stretched to meet the price greed of the profiteers. What to do, then, is the principal question that faces us today.
Now, there are many things we can do. We can, for example, put forward through our unions the basic slogan of last winter’s General Motors strike: Wage Increases WITHOUT Any Price Increases.
As a story from Detroit that appears elsewhere in this issue demonstrates, the slogan is spreading though there is not yet any aggressive union campaign to put it into effect. However, it is the kind of realistic and fundamental approach to the problem that is certain to rise in the big wage struggles that lie ahead because of its incontestable logic.
Further, there is the entire wage campaign that is now shaping up. The auto workers are already on the move; the steel workers and others are certain to take action as their contracts expire. We will, however, have to be on guard against permitting the same steal that was put over on us last year when labor’s picket line wage victories were stolen through price boosts granted in Washington.
 
Many Ways to Fight
More than that, however, with the many lessons of the price situation staring us in the face, we will have to seek ways to give our wage battles real value. The GM Program is one. An escalator clause in every contract is another – and a number of unions have already acted to include that in their programs.
Thus, we say that the first way to tackle the price situation is on the wage front. But the fight against higher prices does not end there. It must be fought in many ways, from the simple economic action of a wage demand to the rounded political action of a Labor Party massing labor’s political strength against the government operated by the servants of the meat monopolists, steel magnates, and so forth.
Here we want to discuss one of these avenues of action – popular price control, committees, composed of housewives and labor representatives. Combined with the economic and political activities of our unions, this type of action can really crack the price swindle. It is, further, something that can be put into operation in a minimum of time.
 
Seattle as an Example
Thus in this issue of Labor Action you will read how a group of housewives in Seattle got together, solicited and received the support of unions, and made their plans to beat down the robbery of inflated prices.
The same thing can be duplicated as easily in every neighborhood, in every community. A few housewives get together and make their plans in cooperation with union representatives.
The Seattle committee is designed particularly to fight the rise in the price of milk. And it is only in the initial stages of its work. However, think of it in your own neighborhood. You organize a price control committee. You visit the small retailer and the big dealer. You check on their prices. You let them know your intentions and demands, and plan your work according, to what test meets the needs of the local situation. Perhaps you organize a buyers’ strike to force the price down on certain commodities. You give publicity to chisellers, picket stores, demand that prices be towered, ferret out crooks and stock hoarders.
Poorly organized, sporadic buyers’ strikes have already had their effect on prices in notable instances. How much more effective will be a planned campaign of popular price control committees. We do not enter into all the details, because they will suggest themselves in every locality.
 
In the Unions, Too
Yet, by themselves these committees cannot do the whole job. But they can go a long way in the necessary direction. Conferences can be called to coordinate the activities of the committees on a city scale, and with the cooperation of our unions, on. a national scale.
And we must raise the question in our unions of establishing price control committees, to cooperate with the neighborhood committees and plan wage-price action directly through the union. These committees can publicize the facts on prices and profits, as the General Motors strike did so splendidly last year. Working within the structure of a general union campaign to Open the Books of the corporations and to force higher wages out of the profiteers without permitting price increases in the products, they produce, giving the neighborhood committees the backing of organized labor’s strength, these committees can rout the price swindlers in industry and government ...
We are faced with a battle between the tiny handful of capitalists and their government apparatus on the one side, and the great mass of people on the other. The capitalists are organized to act. Witness how they callously imposed a meat famine on the country to have their way.
They must be answered with action by the people, particularly with action by labor, which speaks for the interests of the people as a whole, is powerfully organized and can take the lead.
LET US, THEREFORE, ACT TODAY TO ORGANIZE OUR POPULAR PRICE CONTROL COMMITTEES! It CAN be done, and done easily and effectively.
 

 Garrett: Defend the Miners Union! (25 November 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Truman Out to Break UMW Militancy!
Defend the Miners Union!
(25 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 47, 25 November 1946, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

With 100,000 miners jumping the gun on strike action in defiance of a court injunction secured on the application of Attorney General Tom C. Clark, the three-cornered fight between the United Mine Workers of America, the government and the operators moved to a swift showdown this week.
There is no comment by union officials available at the moment of writing, but the long tradition of the mine workers in building their union and resisting all attacks on it, is reason to believe that the UMW will not back down under this bald species of anti-union intimidation. The miners want the operators to sign a contract, grant a wage increase and a change in hours; and it is certain that they will act to get it.
When Attorney General Clark, acting on instructions from Truman and his political advisers, sought the injunction from Judge Alan T. Goldsborough of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia, he reversed an opinion which he, the Attorney General, had stated earlier; namely, that the miners were within their legal rights in terminating the contract.
According to the New York Times, November 18:
“Attorney General Clark, several week ago, held informally that Mr. Lewis had a right, as the union chief insisted, to reopen the Krug-Lewis agreement of May 29 last. Mr. Krug had been insisting that this agreement could not be reopened because it was written for the period of government possession of the mines.”
 
Want to Break Unions
Behind that change of opinion is a calculated attempt by the government to break the power of the miners’ union. Several weeks ago, Lewis, acting for the union, announced that the union considered the contract terminated, and called for the opening of new negotiations to discuss wages, which have been cut by rising prices, and hours, which are now 54 per week. Secretary of the Interior Krug was busy at the time “inspecting projects” in the Midwest. On the assumption that the “projects” would run away if left unattended by his casual visit, Krug refused to return for the reopening of negotiations, but the government did appoint a committee to meet with the miners’ representatives. It is now clear that Krug delayed his return to Washington in order to give the government time to consider the nature of its campaign against the mine workers.
Former Secretary of Interior Ickes recently revealed in the newspaper column he writes that last year he had gone to Truman with a proposal that they smash John L. Lewis – their way of saying: Smash the Mine Workers. Truman at the time did not dare challenge the powerful mine workers, whose militancy is unequalled in the labor movement. Today this head of the Democratic Party is willing to undertake the assault on the mine workers, counting on the support of the Republican majority in Congress.
Though ostensibly directed exclusively against the miners, Truman’s action is in fact a test of how far he and a Congress that will be more reactionary than the reactionary Congress that preceded it, will dare go against labor generally in the battles that are shaping up for this winter.
 
All Labor Menaced
The extent of the government’s scheme is indicated by the rumors that are flying around Washington. Columnist Brew Pearson, for example, has circulated the story that the government will seek to arrest Lewis. It is rather doubtful that the government will do that, for the net result would only be to make the miners that much more determined to stick by their guns. The miners are not known to be the kind who flee in fright every time the government sneezes. Their famous challenge to Roosevelt that he dig coal with bayonets is too well remembered.
But if Truman can get away with this strike-breaking, union-busting action, exceeding the scale of his strike-breaking role in the railroad strike, every union in the country will be menaced. The miners are therefore carrying the ball, as they have many times in the past, for the entire labor movement. It is to be expected that a considerable section of the labor movement will rally to the miners’ defense. Unofficial reports from the CIO convention now in session say that the CIO will back the miners.
The immediate background of the present crisis is the agreement signed last spring by Lewis for the mine workers and Krug for the government, granting the mine workers an 18½-cent hourly boost, now wiped out by inflated prices, a safety code and a welfare fund. With some operators refusing to sign the agreement, the mines remained in government possession – though this did not interfere with the operators’ profits in the slightest degree.
The agreement sighed by Lewis and Krug provided that it would remain in effect “for the period of government possession.” BUT it also provided that clauses in the earlier contract, not changed by the agreement, would also remain in effect. This earlier contract provided for reopening of the contract. Thus, the legal basis of the mine workers’ claim is clear. Krug maintains that the clause is suspended by the “possession” clause.
 
Miners Will Fight
That should be sufficient to dispose of the government’s virtuous legality. It distorts and twists the interpretation of the law to suit its own reactionary ends. That the mine workers are on a solid legal ground is, however, the smallest aspect of the case. That case rests primarily on their needs as workers, and their rights as union men.
Labor fought for its right to have unions and its right to strike. It is not going to yield those rights easily – not even for the fiction that labor can’t strike against the government (who said so? – the government said so, the bosses said so!).
There is consequently every reason to believe that the mine workers, although they may have to stage a momentary retreat and skirmish for a while in the courts, will emerge triumphant in the end. So long as their union fights for their interests, they will fight to defend it – and not all the mouthings of government officials, Congressmen and assorted reactionaries will change that.
 

 Garrett: The Meaning of the Elections (18 November 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
The Meaning of the Elections
Post War Social Dissatisfaction Swings Middle Class Vote
to the Republican Party
(18 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 46, 18 November 1946, pp. 3 & 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE elections held last week have been noted in endless columns of newspaper space as a swing to the right. In the sense that the election marked the finish of the New Deal era, it was that. In the further sense that the Republican victory reflected a heightened expression of the middle class vote and a relative decline in the influence of the labor vote, it was also a swing to the right. However, to equate the elections with a victory for reactionary Republican policies, in so far as they can be differentiated from reactionary Democratic policies, is a simplification that proves nothing but the incontestable fact of the Republican majority.
In attempting an estimate of the electoral swing, it must first be noted that the American people registered a protest vote. It was a registration of disgust. Just that: disgust with Truman’s bungling, disgust with rising prices, disgust with shortages.
Not even the traditionally powerful Democratic machines – the Hague machine in New Jersey, the Kelly machine in Chicago, the Pendergast machine in Missouri – could batter through this wall of disgust. Nor could PAC, despite its pretentious strut, break down the repudiation of the Truman administration.
This disgust was healthy. That it was not offered a channel other than the miasma of Republican reaction, however, is a tragedy. For if ever there were a proof that the time is ripe, the need urgent, the receptivity present for a Labor Party, a really INDEPENDENT Labor Party, it is in these very elections that are so carelessly dismissed as a swing to the right. We have heard of several instances where workers who are strongly for a Labor Party and for militant, aggressive working class politics, voted Republican, for that seemed to them the only avenue of protest.
Where in past elections, dominated by the active presence of Roosevelt, the labor vote went overwhelmingly to the Democratic Party, in this election it was dispersed. It is worth noting that of 318 candidates endorsed by PAC for the House, only 78 won. Without the beguiling hypocrisy of a Roosevelt, the policy of tail-ending the capitalist candidates in a situation that cries for independent labor politics paid off in repudiation. How then shall we evaluate the pompous declarations by PAC leaders after the elections that they have just begun to fight? Fight whom? And with what? With fake and in any case meaningless computations on how the assorted scoundrels who sit in Congress voted on a miscellany of bills? With the expiring New Dealism of Wallace’s vain effort to capture the Democratic Party? With a sanctified Roosevelt as banner bearer? And with the utterly futile choice between “good” capitalist servants and “bad” capitalist servants?
 
ALP in New York
In only one case did the pretense of a Labor Party poll a significant vote. In New York the American Labor Party polled over 400,000 votes. Together with the Liberal Party, which also makes some pretense at resembling a labor party, the two parties polled over half a million votes. Both of them are far from being labor parties in any genuine sense. Both of them backed the Democratic Mead-Lehman ticket, the ALP with a pro-Stalinist slant, the other with an anti-Stalinist slant. Yet, in New York, with its older tradition of political expression among the working class, even these pale imitations of a Labor Party proved how attractive a real Labor Party could be.
What did the ALP and Liberal Party campaign for? For Roosevelt! Inconceivable as it may be, that was the sum and substance of their campaign, as of the PAC campaign nationally. And in New York they were fortunate, in putting over their deception, that banker Lehman, who headed (and ran ahead of) the ticket was a man closely associated with Roosevelt.
It is, of course, a matter of speculation as to what a party that put forward independent labor candidates, spoke the truth about Roosevelt as a representative of capitalist interests and washed its hands clean of Lehman, Mead and Truman, along with Dewey, Bricker and Taft, might have done. It might or might not have bettered the size of the ALP-Liberal vote right off. That, we say, is speculation. But it is not at all a matter of speculation to say that a half million votes polled by such a party would have true national significance, and give the Republican or Democratic politicians pause. As it is, the ALP-Liberal vote remains exclusively a local phenomenon, and one confined principally to New York City.
Above we wrote that the middle class expressed itself in this election. Put baldly, but with a warning to apply caution in its interpretation, the middle class showed that, along with, seeking to rid itself of Truman, it also held labor responsible for shortages and the complications of reconversion. To a certain extent, then, it voted anti-labor. And the responsibility rests squarely on the labor leaders, just as they must bear the responsibility for failing to give the labor vote organized expression.
By and large, during the last few years, considerable sections of the middle class went along with labor, sympathized with its wage demands and approved its unionization. As recently as last winter, important numbers of the middle class backed the wage struggles of the working class, especially in such instances as the General Motors strike, where labor clearly appeared as the leader of the PEOPLE! Since then, however, the labor leaders, failing to appear as the real leaders of the people, championing their interests as being best served by labor, the middle class has yielded to the propaganda that strikes, worker-agitation have put the squeeze on them through shortages and inflated prices.
There is nothing static or permanent about class relations. In succeeding in shifting the weight of lower middle class support to themselves, the monopolists, the big business interests, have won a major victory. That disillusionment will come is beside the point. The squeeze of monopolist enterprise, the inability of the Republican majority to solve any problem, any problem at all, better than the Democratic administration, will provoke shifts of opinion that can be capitalized on by an intelligent approach. But that approach, if it is to correspond with labor’s advantage, has to be a vigorously independent class political, as well as economic, offensive that will entitle labor to appear as spokesman for the farmer, for the professional and other segments of the population. The contradiction in that sentence is more apparent than real. An unambiguous CLASS policy is THE avenue toward uniting behind labor the support of the majority of the people.
What will the Republicans do with their majority? What will be the nature of relations between the Congress and the Administration? With respect to the latter, tons of ink have been consumed in predicting stalemate. The assumption is that there is some fundamental difference in policy between the Republicans and Democrats. It expresses itself concretely in that Truman has been effecting the major demands of the Republicans on prices and other issues. Even in the sphere of foreign politics, Vandenberg, the Republican, is solidly aligned with Byrnes, the Democrat.
There are, it is true, differences of inner-capitalist class policy, but they effect both parties equally well. The Democratic Party is torn as it has never before been. Wallace and Pepper seem actually to be toying with the idea of taking over in 1948 (and so much for the nonsense about third partyism!). In the Republican Party, the old Willkie wing, the Taft wing, the Bricker wing, the Dewey wing, are sparring for control. If in the flush of its majority, the Republican Party appears to be more stable internally, the contest for a presidential nominee will reveal the clash of ambitions. None of this is of any particular concern to us. Whether Dewey gains standing in his party because of his huge vote in New York, or whether Wallace pushes forward in his party in face of its lamentable showing, is a matter of small concern to us at the moment. None of these individuals, neither of the parties they represent, have anything in common with our interests.
But there may be some concrete changes that affect us deeply. With the Republican majority interpreted as a go-sign for extreme reaction, the drive against labor will grow more intense. Roosevelt, and the Democratic machine generally, relied these last years on labor support. Thus, when they knifed labor, they did it gently and with a liberal dosing of syrup. Truman found in the railroad crisis that it is bad business to challenge labor openly. Now, however, the Administration and the Republican majority both will feel emboldened to use the whip of anti-labor legislation. For example, Republican Ball of Minnesota is expected to have an important voice on the Senate Labor Committee. He is notorious for his sponsorship of bills seeking to outlaw strikes and the closed shop.
Labor will consequently have to be on guard, be prepared to defend its positions. Of course, there will not be an even pattern to reactionary plans. Republicans and Democrats, looking ahead to 1948, will not want to alienate the labor vote too catastrophically. Individual Senators and Congressmen may throw caution to the winds, but their parties will try to avoid any obvious crudeness. However, nothing could be more dangerous than to take idle comfort in that. It will have meaning only to the extent that labor is on its toes, making it pointedly clear that it will resist any attempt to strangle its organizations and rights. It is a virtual certainty that anti-labor bills will pour into Congress by the dozen. Relying on lobbying with Republican or Democratic leaders, as AFL and CIO leaders are doing at this very moment, is the high-road to, disaster.
We haven’t attempted to evaluate every aspect of these elections. There is the minor phenomenon of the passing of the old-time city machine. For the collapse of the Kelly, Hague and Pendergast machines, in addition to reflecting the general anger of the people, also marks the dotage of the old-time machine. There are other angles, many of them, that we have not even touched upon. Generally, the people as a whole, and the working class in particular, are beginning to think politically. The vote is no longer in the hands of the wardheeler. But that is by no means enough, nowhere near enough. It can, as in this election, express its backwardness.
To concretize that development in terms of benefit to labor, a Labor Party will be necessary, a Labor Party with real, CLASS, labor objectives and conduct. Thus, the principal conclusion we draw from this election is that, given any kind of impetus by the labor leaders, a Labor Party could have emerged as a powerful and vital force. And the further conclusion we draw is that the initiative for such a party will have to come from the ranks, breaking down the capitalist alignments foisted on labor by its leaders.
 

 Garrett: Landlords Start Drive to Break Rent Controls! (1 November 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Landlords Start Drive to Break Rent Controls!
(11 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 45, 11 November 1946, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

On this page of Labor Action you will read a story from Chicago revealing the plan of a group of Chicago landlords to raise rents. The same story also reports the activity of the Workers Party branch in Chicago which served to compel the landlords to postpone a meeting they had scheduled.
We ask you to turn to this story, for it is one of extreme significance. The scheme of the little group of Chicago landlords is one that will be repeated, and is already being repeated, on a national scale under various guises and with all kinds of devices. If we are not to suffer the final price swindle of uncontrolled rents, it will be necessary that we duplicate the action of the Chicago WP, but on a much grander scale.
Let us not be deceived. Rent controls are presumably still in effect. We have been deluged with assurances during the election campaign that the government will not yield controls on rent. But it is a pretty feeble-minded child who will put his reliance on the government in this matter, any more than in the matter of meat prices.
It is a dead certainty that the landlord section of the capitalist class is going to demand the same favors given the industrial monopolists. After all, the government is equally well the government of landlords and industrialists. All informed opinion agrees that rent controls are the next to go – and in the not too distant future.
Unless we act now, we will shortly be paying double and, yes, in some cases triple, the rent we are paying now. Some of our readers may consider it a simple matter for Labor Action to call for action, the doing of which is something far more difficult. But the pattern of action is not so difficult as it may appear. Of course, it will require something more elaborate and intensive than the action of the Workers Party in Chicago. Yet, that is an indication of what can be done.
Last week in this corner of Labor Action we discussed the necessity of organizing Popular Price Control Committees composed of housewives and union representatives. We cited the formation of one such body in Seattle. We tried to explain how the people in any neighborhood can get together to start the machinery of genuine price control, combining it with wage actions by the unions. Tenants’ committees, as a function of the general Popular Price Control Committee in the given city or neighborhood, or as separate bodies, can be as easily constituted.
Tenants’ committees are not a new thing. During the thirties there were many of them, preventing evictions and otherwise protecting the interests of tenants. There are reports today of tenants’ committees in many localities organized for various special reasons. However, Seattle housewives bucking the milk gouge, and a scattered tenant or price committee here and there cannot do the whole job, though . they can do much of it even on a local scale. It is the kind of thing that must have its counterpart in every community – organized exactly as it was in Seattle: a few housewives getting together, soliciting and getting the support of the local unions.
Nor should we wait until the rent swindle hits us with full force. Rents have been going up despite control! The dodges used by landlords have been elaborately documented in newspapers, without a thing being done except the occasional, very occasional arrest, of some picayune chiseller. There is the dodge of renting at ceiling price, but charging some outlandish sum for a few battered sticks of furniture. There is the dodge of putting a broken-down cot in an apartment, and renting it as a furnished apartment. There is the dodge of demanding a side payment, sized according to what the landlord or renting agent thinks he can extort. And there is the outright steal of compelling the tenant, desperate for an apartment, to agree to more than the ceiling price.
To all of which can be added: poor service, refusal to paint and repair and a million other things with which every tenant in the United States is fully acquainted. Well, not every tenant. The wealthy may find it difficult to find the exact duplex swank apartment to fit their idle selves, but a few dollars more or less for rent or meat or clothes is of little concern to them. We’ve yet to read of one of them spending the night in a park, though the newspapers have reported more than one veteran, among others, doing just that.
Obviously, the problem of rent is intimately linked with the housing problem in general. The housing crisis has not improved materially in the last year, it has in fact grown worse in many instances. Here, however, we wish to concern ourselves only with rents.
It is not something we can delay, lay aside until rent controls, such as they are, actually come off. The meat monopolists had their way. The landlords will have theirs. Now is the time to block them – by organizing NOW, by involving our unions, by getting together in committees that can make it clear to the real estate interests that a boost in rent will not be tolerated. Unorganized buyers’ resistance is beginning to have an effect on prices. Organized action can accomplish infinitely more!
And, specifically in the case of rent, a threat to refuse to pay higher rents, BACKED UP BY SOLID ORGANIZATION, will go a long way toward cutting the ground from under the real estate profiteers. It will do more to impress the government with the urgency of keeping rent controls than a million vain appeals to Congressmen, Senators or Cabinet officials !
 

 Garrett: The Class Nature of the Stalinist Parties (April 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
The Class Nature of the Stalinist Parties
A Resolution Submitted for Discussion
(April 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 4, April 1946, pp. 126–128.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




The document that appears below was presented at the recent
Plenum of the National Committee of the Workers Party by Comrade
Garrett, as a statement of views prepared by way of opening a
discussion in the party on the question of Stalinism. Without
voting on the views presented in the document, the Plenum devoted
a lengthy and fruitful discussion session to it, and decided to
initiate an educational discussion in the party on the question.
It is here presented with the full admission of the writer that
the document is far from complete in its investigation of the
problem, and that all its formulations are by no means definitive.
Its publication in The New International is intended to
initiate the discussion in order that, on the basis of such a
discussion a finished party document may be prepared. – Editors




1. Russia emerged from the Second World War as one of its two
principal victors. To the degree that the relations between Russia
and the rest of the world have undergone a significant change has a
change of equal significance developed in the international role of
Stalinism, hence in the role of the Stalinist parties. Bureaucratic
collectivism has extended its domain and military position, and,
coupling its new strength with the crisis of European capitalism, it
has altered the objectives of the Communist Parties to conform more
specifically to the requirements of bureaucratic collectivism as a
unique and uncertain social system.
Stalinism, as the greatest organized threat to socialist mass
action on an international scale, has its well-spring in the Russian
counter-revolution. The defeat of the revolution outside of Russia in
the early 1920’s, and the consequent isolation of the workers’ state,
produced the reactionary theory of “socialism in one country.”
In the wake of this theory and the outrageous international policies
it dictated, a series of terrible defeats were inflicted upon the
revolutionary socialist movement, culminating in its virtual
destruction. Simultaneously, the defeat of the revolution outside of
Russia, and the impossibility of building socialism in one
country, set into motion that chain of historic circumstances which
produced, through the triumph of the counter-revolution in Russia,
the entirely new and unforeseen class state we have described as
bureaucratic collectivism.
2. During the pre-war years, Russian foreign policy sought to
secure the frontiers of Russia against attack. Thus it cultivated a
reasonably powerful Germany as a mid-continent bulwark against
English, French and American intervention. Thus, too, it reduced the
Communist Parties of the world to border patrols of the Kremlin. The
Stalinist Parties served generally to maintain the status quo
– either by “respectability” or by the threat of
provoking revolutionary actions, according to which best suited the
purposes of the Kremlin in its relations with any given country.
In its new position of continental colossus, and conqueror, Russia
no longer needs an independently strong Germany. And by the same
token it is able to direct the Stalinist Parties towards perspectives
more intimately in accord with the ideology and objectives of
bureaucratic collectivism. We are therefore compelled to amend our
evaluation of international Stalinism in order to bring this
evaluation up to date with the new developments.
As Trotskyists, we have traditionally described the Stalinist
Parties as agents of the Kremlin or as social patriots executing the
role assigned them by the Russian foreign office. However, accepting
the reasoning of comrade Trotsky, we also predicted that under the
momentum of social patriotic policy first dictated by Stalin’s needs
the Stalinist Parties would become indep.endently and permanently
social patriotic, regardless of what subsequent orders came from
Stalin. That is to say, we predicted that the Stalinists in America,
once embarked on the roal of social patriotism, would end their
subservience to Stalin and remain a social patriotic party. Facts,
however, have proved us in error. In reviewing the general
correctness of our evaluation of Stalinism and, in arriving at a new
evaluation of Stalinism, we are obliged to discard what has been
proved wrong, and to add what is new.
Doing that, we arrive at the following evaluation:
The Stalinist Parties are an internationally organized
ANTI-SOCIALIST and ANTI-CAPITALIST force whose aim it is (a) to
defend and extend the power of the Russian ruling class, and (b)
where class relations in the capitalist countries make possible the
development of Stalinism into a mass movement with decisive
influence, to overthrow capitalism and replace it by bureaucratic
collectivism.
3. It is no more possible for bureaucratic collectivism than for
socialism to establish a more or less historically permanent
stability on a national scale. Bureaucratic collectivism therefore
seeks to create for itself international conditions of stability in
economy and politics (as did capitalism in its day, as will the
proletarian dictatorship in its day). At one stage, while the new
ruling class is taking shape, and general international conditions
require it, it is the exclusive duty of the Stalinist Parties to
defend Russia by compromise with the bourgeoisie or by militant
action. With Russia’s new strength as a war victor, and in the
complex of capitalist instability, conditions arise for the extension
of bureaucratic collectivism by defeating both the capitalist class
and the working class. This development manifests itself on different
levels, depending upon the degree of capitalist convulsion and the
relationship of class forces in any given country.
In the Baltics and in parts of the Far East bureaucratic
collectivism has imperialistically spread its rule through military
conquest and outright territorial acquisition. In Yugoslavia, Tito’s
puppet government is establishing bureaucratic collectivism through
liquidation of the native ruling class and suppression of, the
masses. In France, the situation has sufficiently developed to
disclose the objectives of Stalinism, although the issue is far from
having risen to the point of decision. In the United States, where
capitalism enjoys a relatively greater stability, and where the CP is
still far from the mass movement it must become to effectuate its
role, its activities and objectives are necessarily restrained to the
traditional framework of simple service to the Russian ruling class.
The objective condition for the development of Stalinism in the
capitalist countries is the inability of capitalism to reestablish
any kind of organic stability, the bankruptcy of the old ruling class
and the disruption of the socialist movement. In France the social
system has reached a degree of disequilibrium, and the Stalinists a
degree of mass influence, to make it possible for them to consider,
however distant it may at the moment be, the question of power. To
take power, Stalinist reaction must simultaneously engage in the
defeat of the capitalist system, and in the destruction of the
socialist movement. Thus the issue there (omitting for the present
vital international considerations) can only be decided by the
outcome of the class struggle, principally the destruction of the
proletarian movement through actual combat or absorption. And there
is the great obstacle to Stalinist triumph.
In making our analysis of the new phenomenon of bureaucratic
collectivism in Russia we carefully avoided predictions as to the
ultimate stability and duration of this historical monster. For that,
we said (and must again repeat), is an issue that can only be decided
in the actual development of the class struggle. So especially is
this true of its international aspirations as a social system. It
has not yet won a single major class battle outside of Russia. It
has strengthened its power tremendously through annexation or puppet
rule, but it has not yet triumphed as a system of class rule over any
significant proletariat or bourgeoisie – as capitalism triumphed
over feudalism – despite its tremendous forces and reserves.
Stalinism, sweeping to power in France, would change the character of
our epoch. Precisely for that reason, it would find itself embroiled
in actual combat with Britain and America should it take any serious
steps towards exclusive state power and war with American imperialism
is certainly far from Stalin’s, desire, or capacity today. Stalinism
has won a victory in Yugoslavia, but Yugoslavia is far distant in the
scale of historical decision from the class forces that would have to
be defeated in France. And there is no reason to believe that over
there is has entirely crushed the resistance of the workers and
peasants who were deceived by Tito and will yet seek to throw off the yoke.
4. Unlike all other reactionary movements we have known, Stalinism
has a mass base in the working class. This is a point of extreme
significance. Stalinism is able to appear as the champion of the
working class precisely because its object is to destroy capitalism
as well as to enslave the proletariat. It does propose to
nationalize property. However, nationalized property without
political control of the working class is, as we have learned, not
socialism, but bureaucratic collectivism. The nationalized property
belongs to the state, the state belongs to the bureaucrats, and the
proletariat continues to be exploited as a class.
In executing its first duty, defense of the Russian ruling class,
the Stalinist Party may and often does (as it has in the United
States) support bourgeois parties and engage in obvious anti-working
class actions. Similarly, it may instigate and support working class
action, against capitalism (a) as a threat against anti-Russian
policy (for example in the United States today), or (b) to make
headway among the working class so that it can improve its
effectiveness as an agent of Russian Stalinism, and, at a later stage
strike out more boldly on its path towards bureaucratic collectivism.
Stalinism is totalitarian, but it is a peculiar kind of
totalitarianism. It is, at once, anti-socialist and anti-capitalist;
and it attracts the working class. Stalinism understands the meaning
of the class struggle. It understands that it must have the
intervention of the working class to defeat capitalism. Attracting
the working class through its anti-capitalist appeal, it utilizes the
working class for its own reactionary ends. Thus, the Stalinist
parties are not working class parties, but totalitarian parties
with a mass base in the proletariat. They do not advance the cause of
the proletariat in any sense whatsover, not even in the limited sense
in which the reformist parties are compelled to do solely their very
nature and historical function.
While it derives its mass base from the working class, a
symptomatic source of Stalinist recruitment and ideological direction
is the labor bureaucrat, the declassed intellectual and middle class
professional who see no way out of the dilemma of capitalism save
through Stalinist rule. Together, all these form a significant social
grouping in the Stalinist Parties. Certain labor bureaucrats whose
interests clash with sinking capitalism precisely because their
position rests on labor, see the possibility of retaining their
privileged position in the much higher level of Stalinist rule.
Scientists, professors, literati, middle class elements of all kinds
face the impossibility of capitalism, and see in the Stalinist
organization of a planned economy an opportunity to save themselves,
to exercise their skills under conditions of extreme social
privilege. While policy does not emanate from this group (it
generally comes from the Russian bureaucracy), they nevertheless
influence it in the sense that they form a top social layer or
grouping whose interests are most adaptable to bureaucratic collectivism.
The Stalinist game is a completely reactionary game which can only
end in disaster for the proletariat if successful. Should they gain
complete ascendancy in such a country as France, through decisive
influence over the working class and state rule, they would bind the
working class in a bitter totalitarian vise. The class struggle would
continue and eventually triumph, but only after doubly severe, doubly
hard sacrifices had been imposed on the working class. We cannot,
therefore, give any kind of support to Stalinism, either electorally
or otherwise. Because of the peculiar nature of this reactionary
movement we may sometimes have to enter into certain forms of
collaboration with it (as in certain strikes or unions they control).
But we must relentlessly wage warfare, class warfare against
Stalinism, as we wage it against capitalism. Whether this involves
working among the genuinely proletarian elements it has sucked into
its movement, or attacking it from the outside, our obligation
remains the same: to expose the Stalinist parties as anti-working
class, to destroy their, influence.
5. Because bureaucratic collectivism has spread its wings, it by
no means signifies that the issue is thereby settled. Neither
history, nor the, working class have yet yielded. We have said that
it is the historical duty of the working class to defeat
international capitalism, to create its proletarian dictatorships
that will usher in the next stage of world history, socialism. That
is still our view, it is still the key to our entire program.
Capitalism has created the conditions which make it possible for
humanity to advance to a higher social order through proletarian
conquest. Should bureaucratic collectivism triumph universally, it
would have proved that the proletariat was incapable of organizing
for power in this period, that unable to take power from collapsing
capitalism it had to yield for a period of uncertain duration to a
new system of exploitation into which history had been deflected from
its natural course. But that is a long way from being established.
Socialism is still the first point on today’s historical agenda.
A combination of unusual circumstances – the usurpation of power
by a bureaucracy in a country where the proletariat had already
defeated capitalism – gave birth to the monstrosity of bureaucratic
collectivism. Impulses toward bureaucratic collectivism exist in the
capitalist countries, notably among those who would free themselves
of capitalist chaos and still retain a privileged position in
society. But that is all. Stalinism has not yet so completely
fastened itself on the proletariat that it can bend it to its
bureaucratic will. It has one advantage: the absence of an organized
socialist movement of mass proportions. Therein lies the weakness of
the proletariat. Therein is Stalinism’s great opportunity.
The class struggle, however, continues. The socialist movement can
be regenerated. Inside and outside the Stalinist parties are the
proletarians who, once again organized in a revolutionary party,
under the inspiration and activity of a program that speaks their
needs, not only can but will fight the class struggle against
capitalism and against Stalinism. Stalinism is already beset by
opposition in Yugoslavia. Mass resentment must run high in the
countries it has annexed as well as in Russia. There are signs of a
declining influence in France. Vast numbers of French workers are
outside the Stalinist movement and are socialist in consciousness. In
the United States, the Stalinists are nowhere near having decisive
mass influence. A defeat visited upon Stalinism in such a country as
France would have its immediate repercussions elsewhere. The
reconstitution of a mass socialist movement in France, or the United
States, would sound the death knell of Stalinism and capitalism
equally. That is our unrelinquishable need, our greatest obligation:
the building of the revolutionary party.
 

 Garrett: Truman Advises Labor to “Cool Off” (14 January 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
As an Answer to Strikers’ Demands —
Truman Advises Labor to “Cool Off”
(14 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 2, 14 January 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

President Truman has established during his months in office a record of complete consistency. Each of his public addresses is more dramatic in expectation than in performance. Thus, each of his major declarations of policy the day after it is delivered proves to be somewhat less sensational and momentous than the day before. It would be a mistake, however, to reason that because the nation’s press invariably shows itself let down once the President has spoken, that his speeches can be ignored. While less astute and less forceful than his predecessor, he is nevertheless trying to play the same game: to appear as labor’s friend while strengthening the hand of Big Business. And the most recent proof is his January 3 radio appeal.
First note that according to advance publicity the radio appeal, or “fireside chat,” was to be the administration’s programmatic reply to the strike wave. And if you got the impression that it was not, that it was instead a denunciation of “obstructionists” in Congress, you are wrong. Basically, it is exactly that: the Administration’s anti-labor program for breaking – breaking, not solving – the strike wave.
Truman’s proposal was dressed up with all the adroitness at his command. That’s true. It pointed the finger of accusation at those congressmen who stand in the way of various types of social legislation. It slapped General Motors for walking out of a fact-finding hearing. And it appealed to the people of the United States to make their voice heard. Very commendable, all that – and so much eye-wash.
The fact is that the nub of his contribution to the strike situation remains his brazenly anti-labor proposals for a 30 day cooling-off period and fact-finding boards. Virtually every union in the country has denounced Truman’s proposed legislation. Almost every worker, particularly those who are marching on picket lines against the FACT of Big Business refusal to pay a living wage, was aroused to fury by Truman’s outrageous proposal.
Here was Truman confronted by two unassailable facts: universal resentment in labor’s ranks against his bill; and a growing strike wave that again demanded a statement of position from him. His radio address was therefore designed to attract labor support while pursuing his anti-labor program. But it failed, and failed miserably.
What were the headlines everywhere? Truman Flays Congress; Truman Presses for Social Legislation; Truman Asks the People to Speak. Yes, he did all that. The speech denounced those Congressmen (most of them in his OWN party) who stand in the way of a Full Employment Bill, continued price control legislation, a permanent FEPC, federal aid to supplement state unemployment payments and a substantial increase in the minimum legal wage. We repeat, however, the word we used above: all this is so much fakery.
The fact is that Truman has done blessed little to force any measures of genuinely beneficial social legislation through Congress. As an example, take the permanent FEPC. Outside of complaining in his radio appeal about obstructionists, what has Truman done CONCRETELY to force its passage and to give it teeth? Nothing, absolutely nothing! And whatever he may now propose to do in the way of social legislation is negated by the inescapable social FACT that on the greatest issue of the day, labor’s vigorous movement for a decent wage, his stand has been viciously anti-labor.
Oh yes, his attacks on Congress were not entirely without purpose. He prefers running his party and Congress HIS way, and therefore used the occasion to whip the recalcitrants and the extreme reactionaries who gum up the works by pursuing their anti-labor objectives without subtlety of sugar-coating. Do not be misled by that, nor by the enunciation of Truman that followed his speech from Republican party circles. Taft’s (GOP) complaint about a PAC-CIO inspired speech merely indicates that the Republicans prefer their own, less sugar- coated method of crushing labor, and hate in any case to lose an opportunity for a little election campaigning.
In his speech Truman plaintively protested that labor had him all wrong when it resisted his proposition. But, no, labor did not and does not misunderstand his bill. For labor knows the facts; and such men and women as are on the GM picket line and other picket lines certainly know them. The facts are that wages are inadequate for life, that the corporations are bloatedly rich.
Truman knows these facts too. Not so long ago he publicly declared that industry was fully able to pay a wage increase without an increase in prices. Confronted, however, with the reality of labor’s DOING something to get these necessary wage increases, Truman shifted his ground to a head-on assault on labor and its action.
How utterly clever and disgustingly false is his appeal to the “people.” Says Truman:
“... but there are those who, when they decide to make themselves felt, are the most powerful pressure group in the world. I mean the American people – the great mass of our citizens who have no special interests, whose interests are only the interests of the nation as a whole.”
With two changes of text we’ll accept that. Where he speaks of “American people” we’ll make it more specific: American workers and small farmers. And where it speaks of “no special interests” we’ll change to read “who DO have special interests, and whose special interests ARE the interests of the nation as a whole.”
Yes, the power is theirs. It is in the hands of the “people” – that great mass of workers – who in championing their own interests for a decent life promote the welfare of the great mass of society. Proof: the valiant defense of the consumer’s general interest by the GM workers who refuse to permit a price increase.
But here is the revealing giveaway on Truman. He advises the “people” to make their voice heard. That is precisely what the GM strikers are doing. They are making their voice heard in the most effective way possible for labor – on the picket line!
They are indeed the most powerful pressure group in the world. But it is Truman’s object to keep them from exercising that power. And for good reason. That power, properly directed, would oust Truman and his whole capitalist government. Truman may have a little dispute with General Motors Corporation, but it remains true that his government is THEIR government. There are arguments! you know, in the best of families. But it is still a family: the family of capitalism and its governments.
“The voice of the people must be heard.” It must be heard through unions on the economic front, and through an INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY. It must be heard with a purpose: to wrest power from the capitalist bankrupts and put it into the hands of the toilers.
This “most powerful pressure group in the world” cannot permit itself to be tied to the political coat-tails of capitalism, whether worn by Truman, some more palatable “liberal,” or a less palatable reactionary. It needs to make its OWN decisions, organize its OWN force, establish its OWN government and announce over the national networks its OWN program.
 

 Garrett: Political Action Is Labor’s Need! (11 March 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
No. 1 Lesson of the GM Strike
Political Action Is Labor’s Need!
(11 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 10, 11 March 1946, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

For more than a hundred days the General Motors workers have been out on strike. For these more than hundred days they have carried the ball for the entire labor movement.
Theirs was the dramatic challenge to big business which initiated the strike wave. The demands they made upon General Motors, and the spirit with which they pressed them, blazed a trail which pointed to a real victory not only for themselves but for all of labor. Hundreds of thousands of workers have gotten 18½ cents without a day’s loss of work because of the heroic struggle of the GM strikers.
It is not the fault of the ranks, who in over a hundred hard days have proved the worth of their convictions, that wage raises are averaging 18½ cents instead of the 30 cents or more required by labor. Nor is it their fault that these wage gains, in steel, meat packing and other industries, are being eaten away by price increases.
It is the fault of their leadership, of Murray and the others, who showed themselves supine before the pressure of the Truman Administration. If today the auto workers have been compelled to retreat on their demands and propose arbitration, it is not because they were incapable of winning the entire GM strike program. It is not because the steel workers, for example, would not have stuck militantly to the line; nor because the other auto workers in Detroit would have been less determined. Quite the contrary! These workers are no less ready than the GM workers to give battle and they have proved that countless times over.
It is, rather, because Murray, as leader of the CIO and the steel workers, depended on Truman for a settlement and accepted Truman’s price-raising, wage-ixing formulas. It is because R.J. Thomas, too, as president of the UAW, was more concerned with advice ’from the White House than from the picket line.
 
Reuther’s Responsibility
Reuther cannot escape his share of responsibility for the retreat. As leader of the GM workers, he first put forward a program that pierced to the heart of the issue. Speaking for the GM workers, he demanded that GM open its books, related prices, profits and wages, and thereby lifted the quality of the GM strike to new heights in the American labor movement. He demonstrated that labor spoke for the masses of people. Even sections of the capitalist press had to admit grudgingly that his attack on the prerogatives of free enterprise was backed by unassailable fact.
At the time, in commending his activities, we also criticized his shortcomings. We argued that he had taken a significant step forward but that he hadn’t pursued the logic of his own arguments either in terms of specific economic demands or their political implications; that is, toward a WORKERS’ government. It is also necessary, now, to criticize him sharply for looking to the White House for direction, for agreeing to the Truman fact-finding committee recommendation (after the union had assembled more facts than GM or the government could possibly lie their way out of), for not aggressively defending the GM program against the leadership of the Auto Workers International and against Murray, for not openly and actively opposing company security provisions in the Ford settlement. That he could have mobilized wide and decisive support in the auto union for the GM program is demonstrated by the authority he commands despite his retreat, as indicated in the election of a Reuther slate for the UAW convention in Thomas’ own Chrysler Local. In many instances he is acting cringingly where he should be acting aggressively.
The situation today in GM is that the corporation has refused arbitration and rejected the type of membership vote proposed by the union. It appears as though the issue will be decided by the government in one way or another. And that is the point we want to come to.
 
A Vital Lesson
In every issue that confronts us today, not merely in the GM strike, we see the hand of government. More and more it is becoming the practice to debate labor’s disputes with government representatives of industry, rather than with industry itself. Government intervention is generally established practice. It was Truman, the head of the government, who dreamed up the most recent “Big Steal” formula fixing wages far under what labor demanded and needed. It was Truman, the head of the government, who permitted industry’s breakthrough on prices. It was Truman’s “fact-finding" procedure that cut GM demands from 30 cents to 19½ cents. It is Truman, or his appointed agencies, who will probably decide the outcome of the GM strike now!
For several weeks now we have used one phrase in LABOR ACTION to describe these happenings: WHAT LABOR HAS WON ON THE PICKET LINE IS BEING STOLEN FROM LABOR IN WASHINGTON! That is, industry didn’t hand out even the miserly 18-cent wage raises freely or willingly. It had to give them because labor demonstrated its temper on the picket lines. It gave what it did because price boosts more than made up for the wage boost, and because labor’s leadership was prepared to yield the real picket line demands under government pressure.
So, too, the wage increase of the GM strikers will be eaten away, stolen, by price, increases. And if, as is likely, the GM contract will be better than other union contracts, it will only be because government agencies will hesitate to trifle too much with men and women who spent more than a hundred sacrificing days on the picket line.
 
Conclusion Is Clear
What conclusions do we draw? The conclusions, it seems to us, are obvious: The government is an instrument of the capitalist class. It serves their interests. It acts “against” capitalism only to the extent that it protects capitalism from the wrath of workers by small concessions. To depend on this government to settle labor’s case is to depend on the agents of capitalism, the CLASS enemies of labor. Obviqusly that is foolish. Who will depend on his enemy to champion his cause? Thus, our leaders, like Murray, who depend on Truman, are putting our case into the enemy’s hands.
What can we do? Here too the conclusion is obvious: we must strive for our own government, a workers’ government. How? The very first step is to organize an INDEPENDENT Labor Party. We emphasize INDEPENDENT because the Political Action Committee of the CIO, which pretends to the skeleton of a labor party, is not independent. It works cheek by jowl with capitalist politicians and their parties. PAC must be forced by the pressure of labor’s ranks to free itself of its capitalist party ties. And if it refuses, then a Labor Party must be organized without regard to PAC.
Many union leaders, among them Reuther, have spoken in favor of a Labor Party. Certainly many workers, above all the auto workers, have declared themselves for a Labor Party. Nobody can tell us that GM workers wjio demonstrated their class solidarity against all kinds of odds on the picket line will not equally demonstrate their class solidarity in political action.
Or, let us look at it briefly from another point of view. We’ve spoken of one type of government intervention. There is the other and more nakedly ugly type witnessed by the police attacks against workers in Philadelphia, New Jersey, Los Angeles and elsewhere. That is the government at work in its most unadorned aspects. It speaks so clearly for itself that we shall not elaborate on this part of the argument.
Every phase of our life brings us square against the issue of class versus class, working class versus capitalist class. That is socialist talk, we will be told. Right! It is socialist talk. We of LABOR ACTION and the Workers Party are socialists and not municipal socialists who are satisfied with a slight improvement here, a slight improvement there—while the great iniquity of capitalist rule remains. We are revolutionary socialists and it is our object to replace capitalist society by a workers’ society. For it is by socialism alone that we can achieve real security and freedom.
To achieve that, however, we must understand and wage our struggle on a political level, as well as an economic level. That is why we call upon you to join the Workers Party as a party for socialist action. And that is why we also call upon labor to organize the political equivalent of our unions—a Labor Party.
Just as our unions fight for our immediate economic demands, so will a Labor Party, built upon our unions, advance Our interests as a class in the political arena.
This is the lesson of the steel settlement, the GM strike, the police violence against pickets in Philadelphia, and of every battle in which labor is engaged. For that is the way toward INDEPENDENT political action and toward a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT.
 

 Garrett: You Can Help Us Get the 8-Page "Labor Action" (18 March 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
You Can Help Us Get
the 8-Page Labor Action!
(18 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 11, 18 March 1946, p. 1.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We have got to have an EIGHT-PAGE LABOR ACTION! And we shall have it! We have, in fact, already set a date for the appearance of the first regular EIGHT-PAGE LABOR ACTION – June 17!
The Workers Party has inaugurated a drive for a $15,000 expansion fund. This fund will be used to finance new organizational activities and a vigorous publishing program. Part of this fund, by decision of the Workers Party, will be set aside to help us expand LABOR ACTION TO EIGHT PAGES.
Quotas for the fund drive have been allocated to all the branches of the Workers Party. (Turn to page 2 for a list of the quotas.) Workers Party branches will come through on their quotas. Of that we are sure. We ask, however, the help in this drive of every sympathizer, of every reader, of every friend.
Our readers know Labor Action as an uncompromising revolutionary socialist paper. Our readers know it as an indispensable weapon in educating and FIGHTING for socialism. Our readers know it, too, as a paper that does not content itself with abstract articles unrelated to the struggles and vital problems of the working class.
On the contrary, they know it as a paper that enters into every struggle, every picket line, as its own. They know it as a paper that probes to the heart of every political event and interprets it in the light of working policy and interest.
Through the war years we unremittingly challenged the war makers, as we challenge and expose them today. We fought the no-strike pledge, and championed a genuine program to raise the standard of living of the American working class. The dramatic slogan of the GM strikers, “Open the Books,” first appeared in Labor Action years ago. We have campaigned for an Independent Labor Party, for Workers Defense Guards against the menace of fascism, for a program of economic and political demands that mean REAL SECURITY for labor.
Socialism, for us, is a living, breathing necessity that has its reflection in every phase of our lives. That is why we must have the space to discuss in detail every event and issue of significance. We do not have the space now.
Problems that need comment are multiplying, yet we are compelled in each issue to omit much that is important. We are unable, in a four-page paper, to discuss the ramifications of international politics as they affect the working class. The developments in Spain today are of extreme interest, yet we have to delay publication of our analysis of these events because we do not have the space in a four-page paper. Nor have we, for example, had the space to present the facts on Stalinism and its international anti-working class policies and activities.
We are planning something different for the EIGHT PAGER. In addition to the regular four pages as we have them now, we will have a MAGAZINE SECTION. In the magazine section we will publish articles of a more analytical nature than we have found possible in the four pages. We will have special educational material and a variety of features.
On April 1 we are going to publish a sample copy of the EIGHT PAGER! Our readers will then see what we have in mind.
We are confident that the sample EIGHT PAGER will provoke a great response towards making it permanent. There is, however, no need to wait for the SAMPLE EIGHT PAGER. $15,000 will give us the permanent EIGHT PAGER, as well as give the Workers Party an operating fund with which to expand its work. Make your contribution today. Fill in the attached blank. GET BEHIND THE DRIVE FOR AN EIGHT-PAGE LABOR ACTION BY JUNE 17!
 

 Garrett: GM Strike Program Is Central UAW Issue (25 March 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
GM Strike Program Is Central UAW Issue
(25 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 12, 25 March 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Any proper estimate of the 113 day strike of the General Motors workers must begin and end with the GM STRIKE PROGRAM. The strength and real meaning of the battle waged by the workers against the mighty auto corporation lay in the GM program. Its weakness lay in the extent to which the workers were forced to retreat from this program by the connivance of the top CIO and UAW leadership.
We have already devoted many articles in Labor Action to the GM program and we shall come back to it many times because it represents a high point in the development of American labor’s struggle. It is not easily forgotten; and we propose to do our part in seeing to it that it is not forgotten, but that, on the contrary, it is raised again and again, and in MORE advanced form.
The GM program has, of course, a particular significance for the auto workers who will be meeting this week in national convention. It will be THE issue before the convention. We do not as yet know whether the candidates for office will be judged on the basis of their adherence or repudiation of this program. It is, however, our opinion that they OUGHT to be judged on this basis.
 
The Meaning of the Program
Let us first consider this program, then relate it to the strike and the outcome of the strike. The GM program can be divided into three parts, as follows; FOR a 30 per cent wage increase; AGAINST any price increase; OPEN THE BOOKS! And the three can be united in a single demand LINKING wages, prices and profits.
The special significance of this program should be immediately apparent. There is here a difference in QUALITY. The wage question is here raised in a new and revolutionary way. It is not merely a demand for higher wages, important enough in itself. It asks, as well, for a voice in DETERMINING wages and, with wages, prices and profits. Thus it challenges the very bases of capitalist rule, of “free enterprise.”
Consider the implications: the workers tell the boss that they are convinced he is able to pay a wage that will compensate for the rise in prices and provide some minimum of a decent living standard; they have facts and figures to prove it. They are equally convinced that he can make more than enough profit without raising prices and therefore tell him that they will not permit any wage increase to be passed on to the consumer in higher prices. BUT, they go FURTHER! They tell the boss, in this program, that THE WORKERS, through their democratically chosen representatives, will decide HOW MUCH PROFIT the boss shall have, WHAT PRICE he shall charge, WHAT WAGE he shall pay.
That, and that alone, is the meaning of OPEN THE BOOKS! These decisions on wages, prices and profits are traditionally the prerogative of the employer – except in so far as he is backed up against the wall by labor militancy and forced to disgorge a few cents in wages. Thus, by linking the three together and demanding a voice in their determination, the GM workers were, in effect, challenging the system of free enterprise AS A SYSTEM, and elevating the quality of labor’s struggle for economic demands, for security.
 
Toward Workers’ Control
The necessity, of course, does not end there. As socialists, we of Labor Action recognize that there are implications that were not tapped either by the leadership that formulated the demands, or by the workers who held out for 113 days. But these 113 days are proof that the workers understood the importance of the principle for which they were fighting (whether they would have described it in these words or not). They did not voluntarily assume this sacrifice, and be assured those 113 days were a hard sacrifice, for a miserable one cent difference, regardless of how the union leadership later distorted the issue. For, even after they had retreated from their original demands, the spirit with which they began held them to the fight. Surely no one is fool enough to think that they manned their picket lines for the one cent difference between the insulting offer of the corporation and the insulting recommendation of Truman’s “fact-finding” board, 18½ inadequate cents against 19½ inadequate cents.
Victory on the GM program would have inevitably involved the rest of the labor movement in a struggle for the same. And, so compelling is the logic of the GM program, that the necessity of pursuing these demands to their inescapable conclusions would have risen in the concrete circumstances of struggle: toward nationalization of industry under workers’ control – yes toward out- and-out socialist measures!
The industrialists have revealed themselves as incapable of operating industry for the benefit of society. They have revealed that their interest in profit stands in CONTRADICTION to the interest of the great mass of society for low prices, decent wages at guaranteed jobs – or, in other words, for SECURITY. Therefore, an invasion of the rights of “free enterprise” must inevitably raise, as the next step, the necessity of wresting industry from the hands of the industrialists, of nationalizing industry and placing it under workers’ control. The political reflection of this is a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT, as the political reflection of “free enterprise” is capitalist government.
 
Responsibility of Leadership
The GM strikers had to retreat, but their program is still the essential pivot of a UAW program. The retreat was not the fault of the strikers. Not by any means! Had the top CIO leadership not worked against them but with them, the GM strikers could have written their program into the contract.
What happened, though? Murray gave away the battle (for which the steel workers were as prepared to stand fast as the GM workers) by taking direction from the White House instead of from the union ranks. He permitted Truman to get away with the “Big Steal” fraud which set the pattern of 18½ cent wage increases for which labor will pay through higher prices. Thomas and the auto union leadership settled with Ford and Chrysler for far less than the GM strikers were asking; and agreed to the infamous company security proposals to boot! Reuther, who began the strike brilliantly (although he never drew the full conclusions of his own stand) and captivated the imagination of every worker by the dramatic presentation of the strikers’ case, fizzled under the pressure of the top leadership. After an inspiring beginning which rallied virtually everybody except the monopolists behind the strikers because there was no mistaking as to who was defending the price interests of consumer, poor farmer and white collar worker, Reuther pathetically collapsed into acceptance of Truman’s “fact-finding” recommendations.
Add to all this the fact that the union bureaucracies for the most part deliberately withheld aid from the GM strikers. Where union treasuries should have been taxed heavily to help the GM strikers, most unions gave nothing or little. There were in this dismal pattern only a few exceptions – notably, the AFL’s International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union, which contributed substantially. Add also the strike-breaking blow delivered by the Stalinist leadership of the UE with their scab settlement.
 
Contributed a New Concept
The course of the strike, down to its settlement for 18½ cents, is known to every worker. The GM strikers evidently held out as long as they could. Though they had to retreat from their original demands, they wrote an important page in labor’s history and contributed much to the labor movement. We say that 18½ cents is inadequate and that it is being stolen from labor in price increases. Yet the fact remains that the bosses would not have granted this miserly 18½ cents and would have boosted prices anyway, if the GM workers hadn’t taken to the picket line and been followed there by other workers.
More than that, the GM strikers have contributed a new and progressive concept to labor – not at all new to socialists, but new to the American union movement. And this concept is sure to come, must come, before the UAW convention as a vital issue. Whatever authority Reuther commands in the UAW now, and his prestige is considerable, is traceable back to the GM program. It is a testimony to the attractiveness and basic correctness of this program that, despite his vacillations and hesitations, Reuther has drawn wide support BECAUSE of his association with this program.
The GM workers have done much for the labor movement. Their delegates can do more now by pressing for the GM program at the UAW convention. There is more than one indication that the great majority of UAW workers are ready to adopt this program as their own. It is certainly the indicated basis for judging the qualifications of officials running for office. For, we repeat, the MAIN issue before the UAW convention is the GM program!
 

ourth International Notes (2 September 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
Fourth International Notes
(2 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 35, 2 September 1946, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Protests Mount on Demaziere Attack
We have received new information from France relating to the brutal attack on Albert Demaziere, Central Committee member of the (Trotskyist) Parti Communiste Internationaliste by a gang of Stalinist hoodlums at a meeting in Nice on July 12. The incident has aroused the indignation of workers all over France. Letters are pouring into PCI headquarters from revolutionary, socialist and trade union workers. The following, from a militant in St. Nazaire, is an example:
“Dear comrades,
“The CGT (French trade union federation) union local of the Bastien workshops learns with indignation of the unjustifiable attack at Nice upon Comrade Demaziere, who in 1942 was condemned to hard labor for life by the special court of Vichy. Our local energetically protests against these obvious acts of the Stalinists gangsters of the PCF (Communist Party of France) in the interest of the bosses.



 


For the local
RIVALLAND.”
 




French Party Holds Plenum
The Central Committee of the French Trotskyist Party, PCI, met in full session recently in preparation for the coming national convention of the organization. Various resolutions came before the Plenum, and will come before the convention. Labor Action hopes to be able to report on these discussions. The CC reaffirmed its previous decision on the referendum in France. Readers will recall that the Minority of the French Party succeeded in carrying a majority this spring on the question of how to vote in the referendum on the proposed constitution.
As against the Majority group and the International Executive Committee of the Fourth International, the Minority advocated a “yes” vote on the grounds that sharp class lines which could be further developed had been drawn over the issue, particularly over the unicameral legislature – the working class on one side, the capitalist on the other – though the constitution itself was a document upholding capitalism and French imperialism.
 

Postal Strikers Oppose Stalinist Leadership
Comrade Arpin sends us the following report on the postal strike which has since ended.
“The French workers, tired of getting only promises of a wage raise to meet the high cost of even the most essential foods, are beginning to take the road of action. The workers of the Postal, Telephone and Telegraphic services went out on strike on July 30. The Stalinist leadership of the national Postal Federation wanted the strike limited to a symbolic ten hours. In a large part of France, however, the strike continues.
“Begun without adequate preparation by leaders whose only thought was to put a brake on the movement, with the order to ’warn the public in advance,’ with leaflets that never arrived, the strike has passed up a marvelous opportunity: the Peace Conference, an excellent, chance to force the three-party government to give in to the demands in short order. But the Stalinist leadership specifically exempted the conference from the strike order.
“Led by the sections Nord, Bordeaux and Marseilles, the entire south, west and several other regions of France are still striking at this writing (August 1) despite telegrams from the center denouncing ‘irresponsible elements’ and demanding an end to the strike. Some parts of Paris have resumed the strike, as has Corsica.
“The telegrams also claimed that the union’s delegation to the Ministry of the PTT had already succeeded in getting a 40 per cent increase. But the local federation of Nord sent its own delegation to the PTT. These militants in turn informed PTT workers all over the country by telegraph that the Stalinist claims were untrue, that the Ministry had merely announced a 25 per cent raise for the lowest categories.
“Given the approximately 80 per cent rise in prices in a year, this is clearly insufficient, especially for the PTT workers who receive less than most other government employees. Thus even the leadership has been forced to demand reclassification as well as an increase in family allotments and payment for overtime.
“The Corsican Federation has telegraphically demanded the continuation of the strike, and additionally demanded a temporary 25 per cent raise after reclassification, plus a 7,000 franc monthly minimum maintained and protected by the sliding scale.”
Comrade Arpin adds:
“To give you an idea of the situation. My neighbor, a PTT worker, skilled and with long seniority, and with a family of several children gets the maximum of 7,000 francs a month. His July grocery and bakery bills alone total 6,600 francs. Is there any wonder at his disgust with the capitalist and Stalinist fakers who counsel ‘patience’?”
 

talian Revolutionists Contact CP Ranks (30 September 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
International Socialist Notes
Italian Revolutionists Contact CP Ranks
(30 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 39, 30 September 1946, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Despite efforts by the Italian Stalinist Party to block, with slander and the threat of physical repression, the activities of the Italian Fourth Internationalists, the Italian comrades report that they are making some headway among the rank and file of the CP in Naples. One of the leading members of the Fourth Internationalist Party in Italy has lately been speaking before Communist Party locals. The head of the Stalinist Neapolitan Federation has tried to stop the activities of our comrade, but the rank and file of the CP locals involved have refused to be intimidated. The Federation has not yet dared to send one of its spokesmen to contradict our comrade.
This comrade writes:
“Discontent increases daily, and a sharper light is being focused on the class struggle as the workers see themselves abandoned by the parties that presumably speak for them ... It is not hard to notice that the masses arc beginning to understand us better, though people still need more confidence in us to see that the CP betrays them. There is the dirtiest nationalism which springs from the question of Trieste. The reaction is drawing considerable comfort from the nationalist position of the Italian CP on Trieste. Among many rank and file CPers here in Naples we have made a forceful impression with our internationalist position on this same question.”
As background material our comrade supplies the following: The situation is very critical. The new government, though a republic, is little different from those that preceded it. Parliament often resembles a boxing arena, in which the deputies spend more time denouncing each other and fighting (literally) than in doing anything to relieve the misery of the people. Unemployment is mounting. Ex-soldiers are increasingly discontented. Some of these are being utilized by extremely reactionary elements. The enrichment of a few parallels the mass poverty. In Resina, a city of 36,000, there are 800 millionaires, their money made largely through the black market and entirely through living off the poor.
To belong to the Christian-Democratic Party is almost a license to do anything one wants to; the Demo-Christian mayor is more a bishop than an administrator. He is more concerned with religious masses and feasts than with keeping the streets clean or supplying food. There is general confusion in the collaboration of Socialists, Stalinists and avowed reactionaries.
From another source we learn that the Fourth Internationalists, hitherto limited to work in the South of Italy, are making efforts to establish their party in the North. The Bordighists, Left-Communists (not to be confused in any way with the Stalinists), have considerable influence in the industrial North. A friend who recently visited in this area reports a great receptivity to revolutionary literature. Revolutionary literature, he informs us, is badly needed and eagerly sought. It is not at all uncommon for a demonstration of thousands of workers to take place with hardly more than a few minutes’ preparation or call. We hope shortly to be able to publish a full account of the Situation in Northern Italy.
 

 Garrett: American Labor Shows Its Power in New Strike Wave (23 September 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
American Labor Shows Its Power
in New Strike Wave
(23 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 38, 23 September 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE big strikes in maritime and New York trucking illustrate the tremendous confidence that American labor has in its own strength. It is a confidence mixed, as yet, with uncertainty of principle and confusion of direction. It is, further, a confidence that will be demonstrated again and again this winter as strike actions sweep the country on a scale equal to, or greater than, the strike actions of last winter
This element of confidence and of mood is extremely important. The strikes are not rear-guard actions, fought in desperation. They are, rather, offensive in quality, fought to improve labor’s standard of living. A general dissatisfaction with things as they are is coupled with a marked self-reliance in labor’s ability to achieve it's ends through economic action.
Thus, at the very moment that the teamsters were tying up New York, and the sailors were crippling every port in the country, there were indications of strikes to come in every major industry. The packinghouse workers are already preparing for their strikes; steel workers are talking of strike in February when the contract expires; auto workers have been pressing for months for a reopening of wage negotiations.
 
The Press Is Seriously Disturbed
It is interesting to observe the reaction in the capitalist press. Reactionary and liberal alike are seriously disturbed. Each in his own way is assailed by the patent, disruption of “social harmony” and the restiveness of labor; each in his own way is trying to fit a solution into the hopeless muddle of capitalist rule. Here is obviously a social system gone completely to pot – peace clearly impossible, class tensions sharpening, political and economic problems mounting. Everywhere is instability. American wealth and productivity have not dulled the sharpness of class relations. They have instead contributed to labor’s vigor and determination.
There is not a section of the American population that is mot stirring in some way. If the picket line is the sharpest, line of division, there are also, for example, consumer lines which reflect a dissatisfaction common to the great majority of people. Thus, there is an atmosphere of unrest, of questioning, of searching – what comes next? What to do?
 
Urgency of the GM Strike Program
Wages and prices are the immediate orbit around which the major domestic issues revolve. And for sound reasons! In a sense, the strike actions are no more than a defense of a given wage standard against the inroads of rising prices. That is, of course, what is basically involved; and even by itself is sufficiently an indication of labor’s mood. But it would be a mistake to see no more than that in the situation. There is also the confidence of which we have already spoken. There is the feeling, which upsets the profiteers no end, that the people are entitled to a HIGH standard of living; there is the feeling that the price squeeze can be broken to guarantee this higher standard of living, and the promise that wage actions will come with relentless frequency.
Nowhere in this latest series of strikes have the deeply significant slogans of last year’s General Motors strike been raised. But it seems to us that they must rise, in one form or another, unless the capitalists can effectively crush the impulse of labor militancy. And that they cannot do, for an all-out assault on labor today would bring with it repercussions from which the capitalist social structure would emerge seriously battered, if emerge at all. The General Motors strikers produced demands that were revolutionary in quality. They challenged the prerogatives of “free and monopolist enterprise,” demanded that the books be opened, demanded a voice in the determination of wages, prices and profits, and insisted upon wage increases WITH NO INCREASES IN PRICES.
Demands of similar content are bound to arise in the strike wave that is gathering force for this winter. It is certain that the trade union leaders will stand in the way of this development. The outcome of this, however, will depend greatly upon how successfully these demands are injected into the situation.
While the GM Program has not been raised in any union today, other slogans that go beyond the traditional union level are being voiced: the demand for nationalization of the meat industry has been raised; the demand for a guaranteed annual wage is growing in popularity. If the clear demand of the General Motors strikers for a Wage Increase Without a Price Increase has not been raised as such, the impossibility of repeated strikes to offset price increases must lead to it.
All of this is not of one pattern. There are many contradictions. The seamen, for example, blasted the War Shipping Board and generally denounced the intervention of the government boards. All of this was absolutely just. But in the attitude of the seamen, especially of their leaders, there was at the same time a serious weakness. It is one thing to oppose the intervention of the government boards; it is quite another thing to steer clear of politics. And that is what the leaders of the AFL seamen pretend to do.
 
Workers Can’t Avoid Political Issues
Politics cannot be avoided; it is far too intricately woven into economics. For labor this politics has to belabor politics; and of that there is no indication in the attitude of the labor leaders. There are labor leaders who disclaim any interest in political action; the rest of them, and they are by far the greater number, hue to the line of engaging, through PAC or some other instrument, in capitalist politics.
There is discernible in this situation a striving for program. The more alert capitalist spokesmen are looking for a program; and considerable numbers, especially in the lower ranks, are looking toward labor. Perhaps not as consciously, labor is looking for a program, and that is what we are concerned with.
Not just any program will do. It has to be a program that meets the needs of the situation, that serves labor and the people. Murray had a program last winter; it was to permit the steel owners a boost in prices in return for a wage increase.
The consequences of that policy are well known. There was another aspect to this program: Murray’s cheek by jowl deliberations with Truman. As a result, Truman and the other agents of capitalist government decided a program for the steel workers! The consequences of this are also well known.
We single out Murray, not because he was alone, but because his was typical of the policy of the union leaders. Almost down to a man, they have approached a solution of labor’s problems in the same way: conferring with government officials, chasing after misleading labor-management conferences, holding back the drive in the ranks for concrete action. The contempt shown by the sailors for the government and its boards was a refreshing difference of approach.
If we are right that the wage-price issue is the principle orbit of class relations today then a program must concern itself with wage-price demands that can give genuine meaning to the struggles that are now shaping up. We have repeatedly stated our view of what this program must be. Here we shall only list its essential points: (1) Popular Price Control Committees in the neighborhoods concretely backed by union representatives; (2) Wage Increases Without Price Increases.
Many other demands enter into such a program – a guaranteed annual wage; escalator clauses providing for a hike in wages with every jump of the price graph. None of it can achieve full meaning unless it is consolidated on a national scale, effected in the joint action of a strategy board representing all of organized labor. And it can be given lasting meaning only if it is combined with a plan for political action. Such a plan must necessarily begin with the formation of a Labor Party.
Popular Price Control Committees have risen here and there. The demand, Wage Increases Without Price Increases, is implicit in the situation itself. But what about the Labor Party?
Response to Labor Party Call
Not a single labor leader of any importance is likely to initiate a move for a Labor Party. Were there such, we think his call would evoke a tremendous, instantaneous response. On a local and small scale the demand has already been heard. Not Murray, Green, Lewis nor Reuther is going to lend his authority to the formation of a Labor Party. The impetus will have to come from below. The strike last winter called attention to the need for political action: the current strike wave has done the same; the next strike wave will do so more pointedly.
For the present we confine ourselves to what is incontestable: labor is ready; its actions are marked by confidence; it will be receptive to a call to complement its economic militancy with political organization. Regardless of the labor leaders, organized direction and certainty can be given to labor’s confidence in its power in a sweeping demand for the organization of a Labor Party. It will not come by itself; it CAN come if the idea is aggressively promoted in the unions, especially in the struggles that lie ahead.
 

nternational Socialist Notes (9 September 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
International Socialist Notes
(9 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 36, 9 September 1946, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We are, with this issue, changing the title of this column from Fourth International Notes to International Socialist Notes. The purpose of this change is to permit us a broader reference to socialist and working class activities among the peoples of the world. As partisans of the Fourth International (Trotskyist) movement, we will of course continue to give primary emphasis to the activities of the Trotskyist organizations internationally. We wish, however, to include in our column reports on socialist activity generally, or activity that is socialist in its objective meaning as reflecting the struggle of the working class against capitalism or Stalinism.
 

For Trotskyist Unity in the U.S.
As reported in last week’s Labor Action, the French Trotskyist Party (PCI) is preparing for its national convention. Various resolutions will come before the convention, including resolutions on the Russian Question. One group in the party is developing a point of view on Russia similar to that of the Workers Party. This same group has introduced a resolution which reads as follows:
“In the U.S. we believe that the fusion (of the Socialist Workers Party) with the Workers Party is an urgent task. To prevent that organization from joining the Fourth International is to deny the possibility of collaboration by comrades having different points of view on Russia. We recall the fact that Trotsky in 1937 was for the maintenance of unity in the French POI (former name of the PCI) between majority and minority on the defense of the USSR. We protest against the decisions of the International Secretariat and the lack of information of the comrades of the International on this question and demand the rapid realization of the unification of the Trotskyists in the U.S., with this sole reservation: that all tendencies accept tlic necessary organizational discipline.” (This the Workers Party takes for granted.)
 

La Verité Publishes Special Strike Issue
The PCI put out a special edition of its newspaper. La Verité, in support of the postal strike reported in this column last week and elsewhere in this issue of Labor Action. The PCI also sent telegrams of support to the strikers. Comrade Arpin writes that:
“A number of Postal, Telegraph and Telephone workers, including former Communist Party men, have written in to La Verité praising the PCI for its stand and many have asked for application blanks in the only party that carries on the struggle for labor’s interests.”
 

 Garrett: Real Labor Party Is a Prime Need! (9 September 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Political Perspectives of American Labor
Real Labor Party Is a Prime Need!
(9 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 36, 9 September 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In a recent issue of the CIO News, there appears a special supplement prepared by the CIO’s Political Action Committee. The greatest part of this supplement consists of a lengthy boxscore of the voting in the late and unlamented 79th Congress. Twelve issues are selected for the Senate, and twelve for the House. How each of the Senators and Congressmen voted on these twelve issues (they are not the same for the House and Senate) is presumably an indication of how labor’s vote should be cast in the election. Why twelve and not thirteen, fifteen or fifty were selected as the test issues is best known to those who compiled the record. There is something suspiciously pat about twelve issues selected for each body, something too carefully designed for convenience. However, we accept it as is and conclude that PAC put in a lot of effort ... proving nothing! Worse than that, it is dangerously misleading.
Consult the record: this senator has so many minuses, that one so many pluses. These are things worth knowing. But, presented in the way PAC does, it is utterly futile. Senator Mead, according to the compilation, is a fine fellow; he voted “right” on all twelve issues. But the fact remains that Mead is a servant of capitalism, a capitalist politician. He is NOT, and cannot be a representative of labor. As a New Deal liberal, he believes it necessary to uphold the capitalist system through “palatable” means. To say that, he is a capitalist politician does not answer all questions. Nor do we intend it to. It makes perfect sense for him; there is no reason why he should not be, for it is the system under which he and others who live by expropriating the labor of others, prosper. Accordingly he voted right for capitalism on the imperialist war, and wrong for labor. The point, however, is this: it does not make sense for labor. The capitalists govern through their representatives in the state machinery which is fashioned after the image of their economic system. If some are more ruthless than others in dealing with labor, it is merely a difference among the rulers as to what method is most suitable in effecting their purpose. By the same logic, labor requires its OWN representatives, its own government. And therein is the fatal weakness in the PAC strategy.
Let us pursue the point for another moment. Mead voted “right” on these twelve issues. How would he have voted, however, were the chips down? Would he have voted for a bill nationalizing industry under workers’ control had there been labor representatives to present such a bill? Quite obviously not. He voted right oh cloture rule for the FEPC and anti-Poll Tax bills, but we do not recall his summoning a genuine campaign to set the Bilbos back on their heels. Mead’s party, the Democratic Party, is also Bilbo’s. And the liberals in the Democratic Party joined with the “liberals” in the Republican Party to make a deal whereby Bilbo ended his filibuster and FEPC went out the window.
Or take another illustration. There are a number of congressmen who, we assume, are believed to have had favorable scores. That is, they didn’t vote according to CIO policy on all of the twelve issues, but on most of them. Some get a plus on, let us say, ten issues, but neither a plus nor a minus on two others because they didn’t vote.
 
This Is Politics, Not Baseball
There’s a Representative Gordon Canfield (N.J., R.) who voted right on the Case Bill, the Patman Housing Bill, the Elliott Rider to the NLRB (CIO opposed this rider which has limited appropriations to the Labor Board), and four OPA amendments. On an amendment to the USES that was opposed by the CIO he didn’t vote. On two issues – the rule for vote on the anti-labor Hobbs Bill and the un-American Committee Appropriation – he voted wrong. Were he a baseball player, he might have retained his big-league standing on percentage points. But we are here dealing with something vastly more important. Is a vote on FEPC worth more than a vote on the Case Bill, and vice versa? A ridiculous question, and a ridiculous way of approaching political action whether in whole as it pertains to the entire set of congressmen, or in part as it pertains to a single one.
What then is the purpose of all this careful listing and combing of records? PAC is preparing to go into the next campaign. No one really knows whether Kroll, the new head of PAC, can get out the labor vote as did Hillman. The interpretation generally given is one confined to the mechanics of machine politics. Read the press, and you find PAC discussed in terms of ability to ring doorbells, coordinate a machine, and so forth. All that is fundamentally inconsequential in this situation. Politics and orientation are the proper basis upon which to judge the merit of ringing doorbells. The successes that PAC had in the past were a demonstration of a growing desire in labor’s ranks to show political independence. Unfortunately, PAC was and is entirely dependent on capitalist politicians. PAC was originally created to get the labor vote for Roosevelt, and it succeeded. PAC’s approach remains the same today – reward our “friends,” defeat our enemies. The very use of the word “friend” indicates the fallacy. So and so is a “friend”; if he knifes us, he will do it gently, administer ether first – as Roosevelt did. What we need, however, are not “friends” but men and women chosen from our ranks who are ONE with us.
In the recent primary elections a number of PAC supported candidates were beaten by machine candidates. Columns of newspaper and magazine space have accordingly been devoted to proving that labor’s efficacy has decreased, the labor vote routed. Nothing could be further from the truth. Nor is it necessary that we prove how here and there a PAC supported candidate polled a big vote, how an outspoken reactionary was driven to cover. For it is really beside the point.
PAC has not appeared before the people as a Labor Party. As a Labor Party, based upon the unions, presenting itself as a class, a working class instrument, it could rally the overwhelming majority of labor. That much it has proved – it has demonstrated that hundreds of thousands of workers seek an avenue of political labor action. And by the same token, it has declined in some cases to the extent that labor has critically judged its choice between two capitalist candidates – one with a Democratic or Republican Party label pure and simple, the . other with a Democratic Party label adorned with the PAC emblem.
 
Is It Too Early for a Labor Party?
We think that the American working class is ready for a Labor Party, given concrete direction. We think that American labor is overcoming its weakness of divorcing economic action from political action; that is to say, more and more workers are beginning to relate the need of political action with their long-established economic militancy. It would be almost impossible for it to be otherwise. Consider this past year. Every economic issue that arose catapulted labor into political thinking. The strikes? Government intervention was immediate. Strike gains? Stolen in Washington through price increases. The railroad situation, the price situation, every issue pointed directly to political action.
And it has risen concretely in union after union. Many locals, Reading steel, Goodrich rubber, and others have declared themselves for a Labor Party. The question has arisen in the auto union, where it was unsatisfactorily resolved by the leadership’s indecision, vacillation and disorientation. Walter Reuther, for example, had an unparalleled opportunity to pose the Labor Party issue at the last UAW convention in a way which would have given an irresistible impulse to the formation of an Independent Labor Party. He had behind him the support of the militant auto workers who wanted to see the spirit of the General Motors strike continued into general and permanent union policy. Reuther, however, skidded around the Labor Party issue, and declared himself for some kind of third party.
There is currently a small vogue for third partyism. And it can serve the single purpose of heading off the development of a genuine Labor Party. We say single purpose, because a third party can accomplish exactly nothing for labor. It cannot challenge the fundamental needs of labor in combatting capitalist rule for the reason that it is not a class organization of labor. It is, in short, another Democratic or Republican Party, more liberal perhaps, more devoted to “clean” government perhaps, but that is all.
 
A New Third Party Plan
A National Educational Committee for a new party has been set-up, with A. Philip Randolph of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, as its temporary chairman, and with the participation of some other union leaders, liberals, Socialist Party members and the like. It held a conference some time ago in Chicago, and decided to postpone concrete action until after the November elections. It is currently operating from New York, and proposes to move soon to Chicago. On our desk is its most recent release. And from this release it is clear that the best the NECNP offers is a delusion. “We need,” says the latter, “our own political party, one that will be truly representative of the interests of the majority of the American people.” Very good. BUT such a party can only be a Labor Party, vigorously pursuing a working class, anti-capitalist policy.
A little brochure that accompanies the letter indicates the dangerous shoals of third partyism. This new third party is going to be “modern.” The atomic bomb is also modern. “We live in an age and world which require ... the substitution of the principles of cooperation for those of exploitation.” Undoubtedly, but how else can it be achieved than by the revolutionary action of the masses of the world? The two old parties have “failed to meet the American challenge.” Pure gibberish, for the two old parties have met the challenge of preserving as best they can the bankrupt, intolerable system of private enterprise, whereas the challenge we need to be concerned with is that of pitting labor’s strength against capital’s rule.
The new party, continues the brochure, must be dedicated to “thorough-going democracy in industry, in government and in human relations.” Noble sentiments, but the only genuine democracy which embraces all three is the destruction of the capitalist rule and its replacement by workers’ rule. It speaks of public ownership, but tip toes around declaring itself under what system of society, and with what class content this public ownership will be effected. In fact, instead of speaking of labor leading those sections of the population whose interests labor alone can serve, it speaks in the very “unmodern” language of ancient progressivism – “grass roots” control. Why not workers’ control? That would mean something. And so on. Much of it sounds fine, and leads exactly nowhere.
The Educational Committee may eventually be converted into a party formally. But we doubt that it will ever amount to anything; certainly not from labor’s view point. It will seek to combine Henry Wallace New Dealism (though Wallace has lately disappointed the third partyites with his inner Democratic Party tinkering) with union leaders and “progressives.” We have seen such parties before, in one degree or another. Whatever role they played in the past, good, bad or indifferent, their time is past. The LaFollettes have disbanded their Progressive Party, and the last of the politically active LaFollettes was beaten in the recent primary. Presumably this new third party will be more progressive than LaFollette’s Progressive Party, but it will serve the people no better. The issues of today are posed first between capital and labor, and must so be decided.
 
For a Labor Party Now
This is not the only third party movement. The Stalinist Party is trying to cook one up for their own interests as agents of Stalinist Russia. Casual elements in the two big parties are flirting (only flirting!) with the idea, but on a solid capitalist basis – no nonsense about public ownership. Veterans are clearly stirred by the palpable degeneracy of the big parties, and are seeking to make a go of “clean” politics, as in Athens, Tenn. While it is a welcome sign, one that offers excellent opportunities, it can be too easily subverted into nothingness. “Clean” government is realizable only to the extent that it is a reflection of a clean society. As an objective by itself it cannot transcend the limits of ferreting out graft and corruption, leaving intact the major corruption of a society based upon human indignity and exploitation, hurtling from a war just ended to another and more devastating one.
How then shall we sum up the situation? – taking PAC, third party moves, the veterans demonstrations into consideration. We think it adds up to a developing realization among the people of this country that we must overcome our political backwardness, that the big questions of social life inquire our own political intervention, that they cannot be left to the representatives of monopoly and privilege. There is still unclarity as to what shape this political intervention should take. Direction and guidance are missing. When the leaders of the railroad brotherhoods denounced Truman, when Murray denounced Truman, it was possible to feel the eagerness to hear more, to concretize the sharp words into the reality of organization. That direction did not come from Murray nor from PAC. PAC under Kroll is the same as PAC under Hillman, an adjunct of the Democratic Party, with an occasional flyer into Republican affairs.
The situation demands a Labor Party, a party embracing the trade unions, founded on a political platform that challenges capitalist bankruptcy in the name of the working class. Were Murray or Reuther or other union leaders to issue the call, the response would be unquestionably clear. Inasmuch as they will not give that leadership, we must promote the formation of a Labor Party through our own activity and agitation in our unions. An Independent Labor Party is today an indispensable need. That is why the Workers Party and Labor Action inscribe the formation of a Labor Party .high on their program. We must enter the political scene under our own banner, and with our own program. The responsibility of revolutionary socialists is clear.
 

ourth International Notes (19 August 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
Fourth International Notes
(19 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 33, 19 August 1946, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Irish Trotskyists Reorganize Group
The Irish Trotskyists have resumed open activity, with headquarters in Dublin. The movement is beginning to attract small numbers to itself, though progress is slow. Our comrade writes of the difficulties of the movement in Ireland as follows:
“When you consider that even the reformist Labor Party is debilitated and without a basis in the country side; that trade union consciousness is only beginning to manifest itself on a national scale, surely then you can appreciate our organizational weakness.”
 

Underground Conference Denounces Franco Terror
We publish below a resolution on the Franco terror in Spain adopted at an underground conference of the Spanish socialist organization, POUM (Party of Marxian Unification.) The POUM is not part of The Fourth Internationalist (Trotskyist) movement, but embraces in its ranks many worker revolutionists. Though the POUM has, in our opinion, committed many errors, and failed, in the words of one of its best known militants who recently wrote to us, to “develop in Spain a completely accurate line ... (it) is a party with strong influence among the Spanish working class.” Our correspondent adds that “with all its defects and centrist character” it is violently hated by the Stalinists, as well as by the Franco dictatorship, because of its influence and its independence of the counter-revolutionary Stalinist machine. “With reference to the POUM,” reports this same comrade, “a year and a half ago a split occurred. One part of its militants, the smaller part, abandoned the Party to move closer to the social-democracy.” We expect further information on the POUM, and will report on its activities from time to time in addition to our reports on the activities of the Trotskyist organizations throughout the world. We also plan a critical article on the history and policies of the POUM.
The resolution of the underground conference, sent to us by the directing committee of the POUM with the request that we make it known to the workers of the United States, follows:
“Once again under the Franco terror, the POUM has reunited its cadres somewhere in Spain to examine the political situation, the living conditions of the Spanish working class and the possibilities of strengthening the struggle against the Franco regime.
“Many delegates from sections in Catalonia, Madrid and from the Center, from Valencia and from the East have discussed and adopted resolutions on the political situation, trade union work, the tasks of underground organization and the international situation.
“The Conference of the POUM, reaffirmed the determination of the Party to struggle to the end for the overthrow of the Franco regime, and denounced the maneuvers of international capitalism which is trying to replace the Franco government by a reactionary military dictatorship.
“It established a program of demands. It declared that it is necessary to consolidate the unity of action of the CNT-UGT (anarchist and socialist trade unions) to reinforce the work of the Alliance of Democratic Forces in view of the fight for bread, for democratic liberties and for the Republic.
“It made an urgent appeal to the political and material solidarity of the revolutionary socialist organizations in all the countries.”
 

 Garrett: Price Control Action Is Still Major Need! (12 August 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Price Control Action Is Still Major Need!
(12 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 32, 12 August 1946, pp. 1 & 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We could be mistaken, but we think there is a deliberate attempt to play down the price situation. Reports that we receive from various parts of the country, and a careful check of the daily press, indicate a kind of silent attempt to produce an atmosphere of apathy in face of the nation-wide price gouge.
For several weeks the daily press played the price situation up big. It reported in great detail the death and “revivification” of OPA. It told the story of rising prices and gave columns of attention to the buyers’ protests. Not so this last week. Less and less space is being given to the most vital news issue before the American people: prices. The object, whether by organized design or instinctive reaction on behalf of the manufacturers, real estate lobbies and business men’s associations: keep it quiet, discourage action, try to make the people accept the situation.
The Workers Party and Labor Action, however, do not propose to let the issue die. It is for us the number one issue before the American working class. If the price steal demanded action a week or two ago, it demands it more strongly today. Comb through the papers and you will find, hidden somewhere on an inside page, a casual item about prices going up. But that, of course, isn’t necessary. Everyone of us is a buyer. We know how the dollar has shrunk in purchasing power because what was 10 cents before is now 20 cents or more. It may be a dying issue for the press, but for every housewife in the country, except for that useless handful who wallow in luxury, it is a daily issue of the gravest importance.
 
What to Do
OPA is not going to hold prices down. We therefore must depend upon ourselves. And in this situation it is labor that must give the lead. Buyers’ strikes have already demonstrated their effectiveness: where butter, for example, has piled up in the ice boxes of the grocers, prices have come down a little. But buyers’ strikes have also demonstrated their limited usefulness. Something more is required, and we say that this something more is: POPULAR PRICE CONTROL COMMITTEES, organized on a community basis, composed of labor representatives and housewives, tied together through union headquarters and other channels on a city-wide and nationwide scale.
CIO News this week reports that labor has suffered a 15 per cent wage cut since a year ago March. The CIO News quotes the U.S. Department of Labor publication, The Labor Market:
”Settlement of most labor-management disputes in manufacturing left the average factory worker who had three dependents with about 11 per cent less ‘real’ wages – purchasing power – in March 1946 than he had a year before.”
The CIO calculates another 4 per cent wage cut as of today, making 15 per cent in all. Add to that the drop in take-home pay which the CIO reports as 8.9 per cent in one year (from an average of $47.12 in April 1946 to $42.92 in April 1946). For hundreds of thousands of wage earners the drop and cut have been even greater. Obviously then, wage increases are required, and it is to the shame of such labor leaders as Philip Murray and Walter Reuther that they have dropped their projected campaign for a boost in pay. It is therefore up to us to raise the question in our unions, to place the matter of wages on the union agenda.
But no one line of action is sufficient. Especially in this price situation must we take action such as will make LOWER prices. It is disgraceful that, powerfully organized as labor is, after the many battles it has waged, we must now seek to MAINTAIN our living standards when we should be engaged in RAISING them.
Popular price control is both feasible and meaningful. Committees representing labor and the consumer, organized to talk turkey to the business man, checking on prices, planning action on whatever scale is demanded – these are prime requisites today.
How shall we organize them? The buyers’ strike proved one thing above all others: the people are ready to respond to any sensible campaign. Take any working class community: the housewives get together, select their representatives. At the same time, the unions representing the workers living in the community, delegate men to work with the housewives’ committees and put the power of the unions behind the action they undertake.
These committees will check on prices; they’ll tell the little dealer who says he is powerless what to tell the big dealer who is behind the robbery; they’ll watch for such dodges as the advice, reported in Union Voice, a New York labor newspaper, of a nationally-known firm to managers of its fountains and restaurant concessions: don’t raise prices, but cut a quart of ice cream to make seven sandwiches instead of five, add cole slaw to a 25-cent roast beef sandwich and sell it for 30 cents. That kind of dodge is practiced in many more places than restaurants.
Repeated on a national scale, and we have a weapon of organized consumer action that will bring results. Combined with other types of action aimed at controlling prices at the source, and we can lick the price gouge. So – let’s take it up in the union, let’s discuss it in our neighborhoods. Let us organize POPULAR PRICE CONTROL COMMITTEES.
Above all, let us not be deluded into accepting the self-defeating pessimism that nothing can be done. Let us not gradually sink into accepting, with a helpless sigh, rising prices. LET’S DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT!
 

 Garrett: Murray, Reuther Pull Back on Pay Raise (5 August 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Murray, Reuther Pull Back on Pay Raise
(5 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 31, 5 August 1946, pp. 1 & 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

It is necessary that we be plain-spoken: we have been pushed back in the fight against rising prices! We have been pushed back by Congress; we have been pushed back by Truman; we have been pushed back by Philip Murray and Walter Reuther. We expected this from Congress; we expected this from Truman; we have a right to expect the contrary from Murray and Reuther.
When Truman signed the new OPA bill handed him by Congress he perpetrated a fraud. The new OPA bill is not a price control bill; in many essential respects it is a DECONTROL bill. In fact, its principal provision is for a decontrol board that can lift ceilings. Says the New York Times on its editorial page on Sunday, July 26; “the decontrol board may be a powerful factor and ... the extent to which price controls are continued or gradually eliminated may depend to a considerable extent on the views of its members.”
The new bill extends the life of OPA until June 30, 1947, restores rent ceilings at the level of June 30, exempts from control meat, poultry, grains, dairy products and other key commodities until August 20, creates the three man decontrol board to lift prices AT WILL, establishes 1940 prices (plus “increased costs”) as a basis for new price ceilings. There it is – a price control measure in which only rent appears likely to be controlled – and that not too certainty if the decontrol board decides otherwise.
Already, increases have been granted on any number of commodities. The new bill had hardly been signed when increases were permitted of 8 per cent on one third of shoe output, and of six to eight cents a ton on coal. Since then there have been added increases, the latest being an 11 per cent rise in the price of shirts, shorts and pajamas with OPA officials admitting that these were only “forerunners of substantially greater increases the OPA would be required to authorize.” (New York Times, July 30)
So great a fraud is the bill, that not even those most gifted in deception dare pretend that it constitutes any kind of price control measure. The capitalist press speaks freely of it as fake. OPA officials content themselves with saying that they will do their best which, according to past performances, means that they will regularly allow price boosts.
And this, in our opinion, represents a setback for labor in a double sense. In the first place, it is a setback because rising prices will cut more deeply into income and living standards. In the second place, because labor’s
leaders are retreating although labor is capable of holding prices in line and hurling them back. It is for that reason that we say Murray and Reuther have pushed us back. Having announced that they would seek higher wages to offset the price jump, they have now dropped that plan for some gibberish about “stabilizing the dollar.”
 
The New Salient
The price demonstrations and buyers senses proved that labor and consumer action could retard the upward swing of prices. A buyers strike is certainly not the most effective kind of action, yet it has been already proved that even this limited form of action can bring results, as we reported last week in an article by David Coolidge. Popular price control committees, united Labor Action, a campaign on wages – these are the measures by which we can defend our interests against those of the profiteers.
Less than two weeks have elapsed since the CIO Executive Board announced its price program. This program was presumably built around the central idea that wage increases had to be granted. We did not like the way in which the CIO Board proposed to get these wage increases, and criticized it sharply in last week’s Labor Action and in a long editorial that appears on page 4 of this issue. Now, however, Murray has dropped the scheme altogether. According to newspaper reports, the UAW leaders feel that a new wage demand would set an inflationary spiral into motion. Read that again, because it is truly unbelievable – especially so, coming as it does from the men in the UAW who proved beyond any argument that General Motors could grant wage increases without increasing prices.
One UAW leader is reported to have said that “We want to be sure that there are still one hundred cents to the dollar.” And this is presumably going to be the basic policy proposed to the International Executive Board of the UAW when it meets on August 5. A laudable scheme, but how does Reuther or Murray propose to make that generality meaningful in terms of pay envelopes big enough to count in buying things. So far, we know only that the campaign to raise wages has been dropped, and that the UAW will evidently continue to advocate buyers strikes.
We are therefore driven to the conclusion that Reuther is backing further and further away from the GM program which he was instrumental in developing for the General Motors. The GM Program had contained a basic element of labor’s struggle against inflated prices and for a decent standard of living: WAGE INCREASES WITHOUT PRICE INCREASES.
 
Situation Demands Action
The fight on prices cannot be waged from a single direction. It demands a variety of action in which labor and consumers cooperate on different levels of activity. One of these levels is the demand for higher wages to meet the increased cost of goods. Another is popular action organized by committees composed of labor’s representatives and housewives to hold prices in check in the neighborhoods. Another is independent political action, a Labor Party, which will combine political action with economic action to wage our battle on prices as on other issues. Of this there is virtually none in Murray’s and Reuther’s program – none at all in Murray’s, and a little bit in Reuther’s as it pertains to popular price control action.
The situation grows more severe every day. The CIO Executive Board, a body representing millions of organized, militant workers waited weeks to meet. When it met, it devised a program consisting of a few weak, but unobjectionable points, and a central point on wage increases that was very badly stated – and then dropped. Two more weeks have passed and we’ve heard of no important proposals from the men who are delegated by our unions to represent us. Reuther was mandated by his union to ask the CIO Board to call a conference of all the unions, AFL, Brotherhoods and. independent. We doubt that it even came before the Board. In any case, we know that nothing was done about it, and that Reuther is doing little to promote the idea. Time is passing; prices are rising; what are Murray and Reuther waiting for?
We have the right to speak to Murray and Reuther this way. They are men who represent labor. We expect chicanery, double dealing, fraud from Truman and Congress. From the heads of our unions, especially of the CIO unions, we have the right to demand a consistent militancy in the leadership of the masses.
We have the right to demand of our leaders the same kind of aggressiveness and firmness as the capitalist get from their representatives. For example, the meat packers last week warned Truman and Congress that if meat controls were restored there would again be a meat shortage. There’s a lot could be written about that in exposing the operations of this decrepit, bankrupt system of private enterprise: fabricated shortages to keep prices and profits high. For the moment we deal with it from another angle: how the representatives of the packing industry speak in defense of their anti-social interests. Why can’t Murray and Reuther who have millions upon millions behind them, not only in labor’s ranks but outside them, speak in the same tone? Why do they not warn Truman and Congress (yes, and the meat packers, the auto and clothing manufacturers): “DOWN prices, or we strike!” What is wrong with that kind of language for a labor leader? Isn’t that the way labor leaders ought to speak?
We have been pushed back, but not routed. The strength is still with us, and will remain with us. Prices are out of control, but they can be brought into control by action of the people: by a unified union campaign to offset price increases with wage increases; by popular price control committees; by organizing an Independent Labor Party and engaging in vigorous political class action which will win the support of the great mass of people.
 

 Garrett: CIO Price Program Lacks Bold Wage Plan (26 August 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
CIO Price Program Lacks Bold Wage Plan
(26 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 34, 26 August 1946, pp. 1 & 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“We cannot accept a situation in which wages are frozen while the cost of living soars.” So reads the major resolution adopted at the emergency CIO conference, called by President Philip Murray in Washington last week.
It is a plain statement of fact that requires plenty of implementation, and little argumentation. The key question today, therefore, is how will this be implemented? That is, how will it be given practical reality in REJECTING “a situation in which wages are frozen”?
AFL and independent union leaders have used much the same language. Testifying at Decontrol Board hearings, Boris Shiskin, AFL economist, said: “The American worker will not sit idly by, watching the buying power of his weekly wage earnings dwindle before his eyes.” A.E. Lyons of the Railroad Labor Executives Association added: “If the government falls to control food prices, it is doubtful if anyone will be able to prevent wildcat strikes in protest.”
Again, this is nothing less than the absolute truth. Labor is fighting mad; it is determined that something be done. Here too, then, the key question remains: What are the union leaders planning? Will labor be forced to take the difficult road of wildcat strikes because its leaders do nothing beyond directing their economists to issue statements?
In the Auto Workers Union, the Executive Board approved a six-point wage-price program presented by Walter Reuther, president of the UAW-CIO, authorizing the Chrysler Local, and other locals that have renegotiation clauses in their contracts, to reopen the wage agreements. “If the Price Decontrol Board, the Office of Price Administration and the Secretary of Agriculture have not taken vigorous steps to restore effective price control on food, clothing and other basic necessities,” reads the UAW statement, “we shall demand adjustments in our wage structure to compensate for increases in the cost of living.”
This action of the UAW Board came as a result of mounting pressure for wage-price action in the union, especially in the two large Ford and Chrysler locals. Reuther, like Murray, is clearly unwilling to undertake a general wage offensive. “But we are compelled to take these preliminary steps. We have got to get ourselves in a position to act if the government fails us.” How far these preliminary steps will go beyond serving a 60-day notice on Chrysler remains to be seen.
“IF the government fails us!”
Therein is the fatal flaw in the logic of the CIO, AFL and Brotherhoods spokesmen. It means, in effect, that energies that would more profitably be expended elsewhere, will be wasted eyeing the government. Murray, for example, is still chasing after the utterly useless and dangerous chimera of a labor-management conference. He has, up to now, been getting the cold shoulder from Truman and management; but even should it convene, there isn’t a thing labor could get from such a conference except disillusionment and disorientation.
“IF the government fails us!” What HAS it done? What CAN it do but “fail” us? It won’t fail the profiteers, for it is THEIR government. It will act in our favor only if we compel it to by the pressure of action, and the promise of more action.
“IF the government fails us!” Prices have gone up and up. Last week alone, prices on household commodities were raised three per cent. Coffee went up ten to thirteen cents a pound – “even higher than the best the industry was led to expect,” according to the Journal of Commerce. A neat little bonus for the coffee profiteers!
We go to press too early to comment on the expected decision of the Decontrol Board. Much is being made of the prediction that the Decontrol Board will most likely restore some ceilings. But it is equally predicted that these ceilings, while lower than current prices, will be higher than June 30 ceilings.
 
Four-Point Program
There is nothing uncertain about the facts. They prove that wage increases and a price roll-back are vital needs. Speaking at the CIO emergency conference, Murray presented the following facts: Despite the 18½ cent an hour increase won early in the year, real earnings of the average steel worker have dropped $11.04 a week, or about 20 per cent, in the year since May 1945. “About $5.62 of that amount is represented by a loss in actual cash, due to a shorter work week, and the balance comes from an estimated 12 per cent increase in the cost of living.” (CIO News) According to a statement presented at the same conference, gross weekly earnings for auto workers dropped by 15 per cent since April 1945.
To meet this situation, the CIO therefore drafted a four-point program:

Consumer resistance. An excellent idea that has already proved that it can bring results UP TO A POINT. Consumer action as well as labor protest is credited with the contemplated action of the Decontrol Board in re-establishing ceilings on a few commodities. But tills consumer action has to be ORGANIZED, with union initiative, in a way that has not yet been attempted, and concretized in the form of POPULAR PRICE CONTROL COMMITTEES capable of acting.
 
Enforcement of OPA laws. Again a necessary idea, but one that is exceedingly limited in its application. OPA laws are only a flimsy pretense at price control. We are for enforcing such controls as OPA has imposed, but they are inadequate, and, as Murray himself has said, price roll-backs are required in the situation. Further, the resolution of the CIO conference says:

“The cold and unsympathetic treatment which labor received at the Wage Stabilization Board contrasts sharply with the enthusiastic price rises which were initiated by the OPA. It soon became apparent, when the ink of the wage-price regulations (of February 15, 1946) was scarcely dry, that the policy was to be extraordinarily liberal with respect to prices.”
We will return to this statement in a moment, for it contains a pointed lesson. For the moment we cite it merely to demonstrate that enforcing the elastic laws of the OPA is only a small, and a tiny part of the job, especially given the present OPA setup with its heavy emphasis on decontrol.

Continued payment of government food subsidies. NOT a very good idea, except in so far as it is payment made to poor farmers, sharecroppers and such. Experience has demonstrated, however, that the poor farmer benefits least from subsidies, that those who profit the most are the big food combines which simply net that much more of a profit.
 
A progressive tax policy to siphon off the super-profits of the rich. Certainly a good idea that could be concretized, for example, in a demand to limit profits to five per cent of invested capital.
 

Program Is Inadequate
There’s the program. Given Murray’s own statement on the urgency of the price situation, the squeeze “between rising prices and shrinking earnings,” it is not enough to fill the bill. The CIO’s program got considerable publicity, and with the true perspicacity of the capitalist press, they almost uniformly featured the idea that Murray intended to discourage strikes – at least until after the November elections, for sure.
Now, WE are in no position to know when and if strikes ought to be called. A strike is an action that is not to be entered into light-mindedly and without detailed knowledge. Union leaders like Murray ARE in a position to know what action can be taken, and when. But, though they are in a position to know, there is no indication that they are availing themselves of their knowledge. The point we are making is one of orientation, of direction, of spirit, of method.
Murray spoke about the necessity for wage increases, but when he got down to brass tacks ... he offered little of a program for getting these wage increases. If, as he said, “we cannot accept a situation in which wages are frozen,” what are we to,do to rectify this situation? It appears that the closest the CIO conference came to actually tackling the situation in the shops was to attack speedup. That is undoubtedly an important campaign and one that has a close bearing on wages as well as on general working conditions. But it is by no means the sum of a campaign on wages and prices.
The fact is that Murray bears a good deal of the responsibility for the situation. Refer back to the quotation above about the “cold and unsympathetic treatment received by labor.” It was apparent that labor was being gypped long before the ink was dry on the February 15 settlement. At that time, Murray did NOT take the elementary stand of resisting price increases; he approved a price increase in steel which was bound to have the effect of erasing any wage gains. At the very moment that Murray was conferring in the White House, steel workers were prepared to man picket lines in militant, struggle. At the same moment, auto workers were walking picket lines in a strike that had begun with the demand for WAGE INCREASES and PRICE INCREASES.
 
UAW Price Policy
We have to get back to those fundamentals. That is why we take Murray to task so severely. Truman? We expect nothing from him other than to do what the profiteers who put him where he is, want him to do. Truman is not our representative. Murray is! And, it seems, unless the situation and the demand of the rank and file compel him to act differently, that he will again by-pass the needs of the workers in fruitless appeals to the White House.
Going back to fundamentals takes us back to the situation in the UAW. Elsewhere in this issue you will find a report from Detroit. Reuther is under severe pressure in the union. The auto workers want wage increases. The UAW Board accordingly yielded to the pressure and reversed a decision it had made some weeks ago not to raise the wage question, which was itself a reversal of a previous declaration that the union would go out for wage increases generally. Hard to follow? The shifts in policy most certainly are.
This kind of vacillation does no good. The auto magnates take heart; they count on division in the union, and uncertainty of program. Even in the latest statement there is hesitancy: negotiations will be reopened where permissible, but there will not be a general wage offensive, etc. Either there is a wage offensive, or there isn’t. And a wage offensive is precisely what is Indicated – plus popular consumer action.
Quite properly, the UAW statement reiterates its opinion that “our task is to increase real wages by insisting that wage increases be paid out of the higher profits of industry made possible by the economies of full production and improved technology and not passed on to the consumer in higher prices.”
By itself that would deserve to be featured. But one gets the impression from the accounts of the Board’s deliberations in the daily press and in the union paper, that it lacks concreteness and meaning in terms of contemplated action. When the GM strikers hit the pavement last winter, no one was in doubt as to what they meant: Wage Increases Without Price Increases. The current UAW Board statement sounds like a pale repetition of a well established fact, something that is not intended to go beyond the printed page.
Reuther is obviously in a quandary. In the union he is under attack from the Thomas forces whom he displaced at the last convention. The Stalinists are making hay. United States relations with Russia being what they are, the Stalinists are playing the role of aggressive champions of labor militancy. It serves their general political purposes, and their particular union purpose of knifing Reuther, who is independent of them. However, we repeat the point we made last week: the dishonest intentions of the Stalinists can only be combatted by a militant union policy. The major issue today is the wage-price issue; and an aggressively bold wage policy will rout the Stalinists in the auto unions as it will promote the essential welfare of the auto workers.
No issue is of greater immediate importance today than wages-prices. Every week that goes by without a vigorous assault on the inflated price structure confronts us with so much more of a wage cut, so much more of a fight. We are waiting for our unions to give leadership, in action, for that is their function, in this situation, the Workers Party and Labor Action offer their program:

The GM Program – IMMEDIATE WAGE INCREASES WITHOUT PRICE INCREASES!
 
Popular Price Control Committees.
 
For a rising scale of wages, an escalator clause in every union contract.
 
For a guaranteed annual wage at a level to provide a decent standard of living for every working class family in the country.

 

nternational Socialist Notes (21 October 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
International Socialist Notes
(21 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 42, 21 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Russian Discussion in British Party
A group of comrades in the RCP, British section of the Fourth Internationalist movement, presented a resolution on the Russian question which calls for a revision of the Fourth International’s policy to the recently held Congress of the RCP. Their resolution, drafted at the last moment, with thirteen minutes allotted to its presentation at the convention and without the advantage of previous debate, was defeated by a vote of 31 to 1.
However, a group is forming on the basis of opposing the workers’ state position of the official leadership. Many of these comrades tend to the position developed by the Workers Party—namely, that Russia is a bureaucratic collectivist society.
Two comrades in North Ireland have drafted a document putting forward their view of Russia as bureaucratic collectivist. While it does not agree in every detail with the Workers’ Party position, its basic line reflects the WP position. This document is being published in a WP Bulletin. Interested readers can secure a copy by sending 25 cents to the WP national office.
 

French Government Blocks PCI Campaign
We are informed that the Parti Communiste Internationaliste (French Fourth Internationalists) was prevented from participating in the campaign over the constitutional referendum held on Sunday, October 13. By a previous governmental ruling, only those parties that had presented lists in at least two localities could participate.
However, the government changed the ruling to make a minimum of ten departments necessary. The PCI had presented ELEVEN lists in NINE departments. But, and note this, a special ruling was drafted allowing the Union Gaulliste, WHICH HAD NO LISTS AT ALL, to participate in the campaign.
The PCI, however, continued to carry on its campaign against the constitution, labeling it a reactionary, imperialist document. With the ballots allowing only for a No and Yes vote, the PCI campaigned under the slogan of “Neither YES with the MRP nor NO with de Gaulle” and called upon workers to cast a blank ballot and to write in “For a Workers and Peasants’ Government.”
 

Greek Stalinists Accept Debate with Fourth Int’l
Comrade Richard sends us from France the unprecedented news that “the Communist Party of Greece, in its official organ, Rizospastis, carried an article signed by its national secretary, Zachariades, asserting its willingness to bold joint discussion meetings with the International Communists, DEKE, Greek section of the Fourth International. This astounding development, which follows a series of turbulent crises in the ranks and leadership of the Greek CP, carries with it the proposal that expenses be jointly shared.” The CP turned down a proposal made by the DEKE that the discussion be printed in the party’s press, and that the Archiomarxists also be invited to participate.
This development, on which we anxiously await further information, is extremely important. It clearly indicates wide dissension in the Greek CP from which the revolutionists are certain to profit. The Stalinist parties, internationally, have not only never debated a Trotskyist before, but have in fact answered such proposals with hooliganism.
It is all the more surprising because the DEKE is known to have a majority that shares the WP position against the defense of Stalinist Russia.
 

nternational Socialist Notes (14 October 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
International Socialist Notes
(14 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 41, 14 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Greek Revolutionists Appeal Against Terror
A plea has been addressed to the workers of the world by the Central Committee of the Internationalist Communist Party of Greece (Trotskyists) for aid against the terrible terror loosed by the Greek government on, the people of Greece. Their plea provokes a burning indignation.
“Our country,” they write, “has been transformed into a horrible hell ... Those houses that were spared by the war ... are today being burned by the hordes of the monarchist government. Extraordinary courts-martial are functioning without pause. Every day death sentences are pronounced and the firing squads execute by the dozens the most heroic sons of the laboring people. Dragnets, raids and patrols by the police keep the working class quarters in unceasing anguish and terror. The Slavo-Macedonians are literally exterminated by fire and sword. All through the country mass arrests are being carried out.
“In unhealthy prisons, workers and poor peasants ... are piled together in an unbreathable atmosphere ... Those who are arrested, if they are not assassinated outright, are submitted to a torture which makes one shudder.
“The trade unions are practically dissolved, their offices forcibly occupied by police and provocateurs. Labor printshops are daily attacked by the savages. The labor newspapers are hit by the unbridled repressions of the state and fascist gangs.”
They conclude their plea with the words:
“Workers brothers, in the name of international class solidarity, in the name of socialism, take up the defense of the workers of our country.
“Show that working-class solidarity is not an empty word.
“Show that the working class is all powerful.
“Long live the world working class!
“Long live worldwide working-class solidarity!”
This is a plea that cannot go unheeded. It is necessary that we rouse a storm of protest. The Workers Party is planning a campaign in behalf of our terrorized Greek brothers, and further details on this will appear soon in Labor Action. We ask you to consider this in your clubs and organizations – picket the Greek and British consulates where possible, cable protests, demand an end to the terror.
 

ILP Again Wins Maxton’s Seat
James Carmichael, running for the Independent Labor Party, has won the Bridgeton seat in Parliament vacated by the death of ILP Leader James Maxton. Carmichael had strong opposition in a five-cornered fight. The vote is of considerable significance. Although the ILP is extremely confused in its socialist politics, although its political line may be described as muddle-headed centrism, embracing a variety of opinions and attitudes, it does seek to appear before the English working class as an internationalist socialist organization. Its Bridgeton vote, predominantly working class, was therefore a clear vote for socialist politics.
 

Correction
The name of the newly-elected general secretary of the French Internationalist Communist Party (Fourth International) unfortunately appeared garbled in last week’s issue. The name of the new secretary is Yvon Craipeau. A Workers Party bulletin will shortly appear reporting the French party convention in greater detail. Interested readers can obtain a copy by sending 25 cents to the Workers Party office.
 

 Garrett: Break the Meat Trust! (7 October 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Break the Meat Trust!
Nationalize Meat Industry Under Workers’ Control!
(7 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 40, 7 October 1946, pp. 1 & 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The packinghouse workers in the most recent issue of their union paper call it: “By Order of Congress – SCORCHED EARTH IN MEAT INDUSTRY”
And it is exactly that, The packing monopolists have deliberately created a meat famine, aided and abetted by Congress. There is virtually no meat available, except what can" be bought on the black market. And in this situation 40,000 PACKINGHOUSE WORKERS ARE IDLE.
It is a case of profits versus the people. It is a case of an industry that reveals the operations of capitalist “free enterprise” in its crassest form. It is a case of callous robbery.
 
There Is Plenty of Meat!
In a speech at Albuquerque, N.M., Secretary of Agriculture Anderson referred to “short supply” in meat. But he carefully added that the supply of “range cattle” was adequate, and in some cases more than adequate.
Said Anderson: “That to a nation that already has 80,000,000 cattle – 52,000,000 of them beef cattle – may have serious imputations.”
The implications are indeed serious. And Anderson, who played the packers’ and rangers’ game by granting a rise in the price of meat, will never draw them. The real implication is so plain that it cries for a statement:
Nationalize Meat Industry!
Meat is plentiful on the range. Anderson admits it. The New York retailers who marketed and slaughtered their own cattle proved it too.
Why then do the packers, in collusion with big rangers with whom they operate check by jowl, refuse to bring meat to market?
The answer: their only allegiance is to their own wealth, their profits, and not at all to the people who must have meat. They are socially a bankrupt lot. It is time that this vital industry was wrested from their grasping hands.
Therefore, we say, as has UPWA, the packinghouse workers union: nationalize the meat industry. And we add —
Under Workers’ Control!
By itself nationalization will not meet our ends. We have gained little if the management and control of this industry is shifted from the hands of the monopolists to their servants in the governmental apparatus.
Can Anderson control the meat industry in our behalf? He stated the case against himself when he permitted this unscrupulous gang an unwarranted increase in prices. Or Truman? All these men are part and parcel of the capitalist system; they live by it, they uphold it. They CANNOT serve the people.
But the packinghouse workers CAN. They are not interested in profits. Their interests are identical with those of the great mass of people – including the poor farmers who are equally gouged by the packers and big rangers.
The packinghouse workers have the know-how. It is they who slaughter the animals, prepare the meat for market. They have no need or use for the gang of brigands whose sole contact with meat is the profit they draw from it.
And the packinghouse workers are alive to the problem. Read the current issue of their paper, and you will see that it speaks, in defending the welfare of the packinghouse worker, for the welfare of the people as a whole.
 
Expose Huge Profits of Trusts
The packinghouse workers use the phrase: profits versus the people. They detail the enormous profits of the meat trust – including its Latin American subsidiaries. Frequent mention is made of Argentine beef, for example. But this beef is largely controlled by Swift, Armour and Wilson. And, as the Packinghouse Worker says, there is gold in beef!
In 1945 Swift made $5,250,000 on Latin American operations, and $25,600,000 in operations outside Latin America. Armour that year made a total profit of $30,000,000; Wilson, a profit of $12,900,000.
How much they have gouged from the consumers for 1946 remains to be seen. But Lyle Cooper, UPWA research director, offers the following evidence:
Between September 1, 1945 and August 31, 1946 the packer paid the farmer an increase of 43 per cent per hundred pounds of hogs ($14.75 to $21.13); THE PACKER CHARGED THE RETAILER AN 87 PER CENT INCREASE (24.21 CENTS PER POUND TO 45.28); the retailer charged the consumer a 76 per cent increase (29.35 cents per pound to 51.65).
These are facts. The facts explode the lies of the meat trust. And they show that the end sufferer is the consumer, with a squeeze on the retailer in passing!
 
Requisition the Meat!
The meat is available. It is there on the hoof. More than that, we say it is there in the warehouses too!
You remember that in July and August cattle were rushed to market even where they were not ready. Meat output during these months was 2,644,000,000 pounds – 308,000,000 pounds more than during the same two months last year.
Where is this meat? The army is not taking as much as it was in 1945. Perhaps there was increased consumption, although the fantastically high prices during those months made it impossible for the poor consumer to “indulge” himself. The Packinghouse Worker says: “It’s a safe bet that hotels, restaurants, clubs, etc., and a lot of wealthy people hoarded at least that 308 million pounds.”
We suspect there is also plenty of meat in warehouses. Months ago while the packers were howling about a meat shortage, the packinghouse workers revealed that there were millions of pounds in cold storage, awaiting a rise in prices.
Governor Tobin of Massachusetts and Mayor O’Dwyer evidently share the same suspicion. One day’s raid in Boston revealed 8,000,000 pounds of stored meat!
It is a rare phenomenon when capitalist spokesmen such as they feel compelled to speak out. They are impelled by the severity of the situation and the widespread demand for action. They want a check on warehouses, but they are not the ones to make this check. It needs to be made on a scale that disregards the “sanctity” of “free enterprise” – and not only in Boston and New York, but in Chicago, Philadelphia, Los Angeles and everywhere. It is a job for
Consumer-Labor Committees
We have many times spoken of the necessity of organizing price control committees composed of housewives and labor representatives.
These game committees are urgently needed today to check on meat supplies. Housewives’ committees, ACTING WITH COMMITTEES OF PACKINGHOUSE WORKERS, TRUCK DRIVERS AND SO FORTH, can ferret out the meat, and take ACTION.
They can mobilize thousands and tens of thousands in front of warehouses where meat is stored and kept from market They can force the placing of meat on the market at a low price within the means of every consumer.
 
Break the Black Market!
Labor and consumer action, concretized in price control committees and committee of packinghouse workers designated to examine the books of the corporations, can break the black market.
It is strange that when meat is unobtainable on the open market, it is plentiful on the black market. In a highly centralized industry such as meat, it is impossible for anything more than a lone carcass to get on the black market. The meat industry is controlled by Swift, Armour, Wilson and Cudahy. These four also control the American Institute of Meat Packers.
These packers claim that on two days in September 77 per cent of cattle received in Chicago went to eastern packing plants. But these eastern packing plants are owned by the same four.
Now, asks Lewis J. Clark, UPWA secretary-treasurer:
“If 77 per cent of the cattle received on the aforementioned dates were shipped to eastern markets, and presumably to the black marketeers, as charged, who received them? Where were they unloaded? ... Who bought them in Chicago and from whom did he purchase them?”
The packers cannot answer without admitting their responsibility for the black market!
 
Back the Union Demands
The packinghouse workers are engaged in a struggle for higher wages. Theirs is an extremely legitimate demand – to which we think must be coupled the demand that this wage increase be granted WITHOUT any price increase. The profits of the corporations are more than sufficient to provide for this increase. And just as the General Motors workers proved this to be a fundamental demand for the auto industry in their strike last winter, so is it a fundamental demand for the meat industry – with the additional argument that meat prices affect us more intimately than auto prices.
The packinghouse workers want a guaranteed annual wage. It is an essential demand that we must join them in achieving. The action of the packers in locking out 40,000 workers from employment is an added argument for the demand. To be truly effective, we think, it ought to be coupled with an escalator clause providing for an increase in wages with every jump in the price graph.
These are two of the immediate demands, along with such demands as retroactive pay for time lost in unemployment, that are raised by the union. They are only initial steps, however. A more far reaching policy is required.
That the union realizes this is evidenced by its seven-point program on the meat crisis which begins with a plank calling for making the meat industry a public utility.
We have, in effect, already commented on the weakness of this formulation. It is a demand for nationalization without the equal demand, for workers’ control. Without workers’ control it cannot be of fundamental benefit to the packinghouse workers specifically, and the people generally.
We are glad to see the packinghouse workers raising the demand for nationalization; we look forward to their making it genuinely meaningful:for labor and the people by calling for nationalization under the control of committees of packinghouse workers.
Organize a Labor Party!
The union includes in its seven-point program the necessity of political action. It rightly calls attention, to the dismal record of Congress.
Political action may appear to be far removed from meat on the table. But the union is absolutely right in linking the two. They are inseparable. The packing meat monopolists conspire with their agents in government.
The union is wrong, however, when it argues that PAC as it is now set up is a vehicle for this political action. It is not. It could become one, but only on the condition that PAC WAS TURNED INTO A LABOR PARTY.
Rewarding our “friends” and punishing our enemies is a political line with a long record of disaster. These so-called “friends” are equally servants of capitalism, and as such preserve the basic interests of capitalism regardless of what concessions they deem it wise to toss labor along the way.
We require a party that will speak labor’s interests, that will contest for governmental power in the name of labor and on behalf of the people, a party that will inscribe in its program:

NATIONALIZE THE MEAT INDUSTRY UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL!
GIVE 100 PER CENT SUPPORT TO THE DEMANDS OF THE PACKINGHOUSE WORKERS!
ORGANIZE LABOR AND CONSUMER COMMITTEES TO CONTROL PRICES AND CHECK ON SUPPLIES!
DEMAND THAT THE BOOKS OF THE CORPORATIONS BE OPENED TO INSPECTION BY COMMITTEES OF WORKERS!

 

nternational Socialist Notes (7 October 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

E.G.
International Socialist Notes
(7 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 40, 7 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Seek Two Million Francs for Campaign
The Parti Communiste Internationaliste (French Fourth Internationalists) is energetically preparing to participate in the elections scheduled for October. Having polled close to 50,000 votes in the last elections in June, despite Stalinist calumny and innumerable obstacles, the comrades of the PCI are out to better that vote by presenting candidates in the greatest possible number of districts.
The French election law is specifically designed to make it almost impossible for minority parties, without great financial resources, to appear on the ballot. However, the PCI does not propose to be daunted by the legal difficulties any more than it was in June. Inasmuch as the law requires that each party put forward a minimum of twenty lists, with an average of five candidates to a list, and further requires that 20,000 francs be posted for each candidate, the PCI is conducting a campaign to raise 2,000,000 francs. It has appealed to workers everywhere to assist the PCI in putting its revolutionary candidates in the field. These will be the only candidates running on a revolutionary socialist program.
A substantial vote for the PCI will be a victory for revolutionary militants in every country. We join our comrades in the hope that they will raise the money needed, and look with confidence toward a vigorous campaign that will advance the cause of international socialism. We are in receipt of a communication from the PCI on this matter, and shall publish further details next week.
 

PCI Convention Records Growth
The PCI, which met two weeks ago, recorded, first, a growth in party membership from 50 to 75 per cent in all sections of the country, and, second, the formation of many new groups. The former “minority” group, led by Comrade Albert Demazière, won a majority for its political resolutions. The main political resolution that was carried noted that the masses of the French working class had not yet abandoned their bourgeois-democratic illusions, and consequently stressed the importance of putting forward democratic demands, especially in the circumstance of the capitalist drive for a strong state The resolution, reiterating the party’s stand for an SP-CP-CGT (Socialist Party-Communist Party-Trade Union Federation) government, demanded that the three-party coalition be broken. It further established the necessity of linking each demand made with the transitional program of the Fourth International and advancing the slogan of workers’ control. Albert Demazière was designated political secretary of the party and Yvon Craipianas, general secretary.
The Russian question (the nature of the Russian state) was raised at the convention, and various points of view presented. While most of the comrades still hold to the traditional policy of the Fourth International that Russia is a degenerated workers’ state, two small groups took issue with this view. One of these groups has developed a point of view similar to that of the Workers Party, namely, that Russia is a bureaucratic-collectivist state; the other holds that Russia is not a workers’ state, but leaves its exact character as yet undecided. Vote on this question was postponed on the ground that further discussion is necessary, and a six-month discussion period opened.
As we receive the texts of the resolutions and of the various positions advanced at this convention on all questions, they will be reported in Labor Action.
 

 Garrett: Meat – Truman’s Price-Lifting Way? – Or Labor’s Way? (21 October 1946)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Meat: Truman’s Price-Lifting Way? – Or Labor’s Way?
(21 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 42, 21 October 1946, pp. 1 & 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

There will be meat. But when, how much and at what prices will be decided by the greed of the packing monopolists.
So President Truman informed the people of the United States in his radio address announcing the lifting of price controls on meat.
His decision will not solve the crisis. At best it will alleviate the crisis for those who can afford to pay scandalously inflated prices. Meat in proper quantity at a price they can afford to pay will remain unavailable to the great majority of people.
These are conclusions we draw after carefully examining Truman’s statement. Beyond that, the President’s statement proves the charges we have made week in and week out in Labor Action:

There has always been plenty of meat available, there are millions of cattle and hogs on farms and in feed lots. Meat has been kept off the market by the packing interests with the connivance of government officials.
 
The government, starting with President Truman and going through the Cabinet, the Congress and so on down the line, is the servant of capitalism – in this specific instance, the servant of the meat profiteers.
 
Uncontrolled meat prices will be accompanied by robber rises in other foods, and in clothing, drugs and miscellaneous goods.

Let us go over Truman’s feeble apology for lifting controls: He presented himself as the helpless champion of the people, surrounded by a gang of thieves and scoundrels. Responsibility for the crisis, said Truman, rests “on the reckless group of selfish men” determined to make political gain out of the situation.
And that much of what he said is true, with this addition: “the reckless group of selfish men” embrace the totality of capitalist rulers, every one of whom thinks “in terms of millions of dollars instead of millions of people.”
Faced with the wide clamor for action on the meat crisis and with the November elections only weeks away, Truman tried to make his decision palatable by palming responsibility off on the obstructionism of his political opponents. To be sure, the Republicans were making hay of his predicament.
But, confronted with the necessity of doing something, anything, to put some meat on the table before election time, bis solution proved to be exactly the same as that advocated by Dewey and Taft.
Was it not his man Anderson who gave the meat industry an unwarranted boost in prices some months ago? Has not OPA, the old one and the new “zombie” OPA, proved to be anything but a price control body? Have not prices risen steadily? Has not labor’s standard of living been depressed? And all this under Truman! Did not Truman propose violent action against the railroad strikers who demanded wage raises to meet the intolerable price situation created by Truman and the “selfish men who put millions of dollars “before millions of people” – the upholders of capitalist monopolist “free enterprise”?
 
Proposals “Weighed And Considered”
The measure of Truman and his colleagues and his capitalist political opponents can be taken from his address. He had, said the President, considered various proposals. These were “carefully weighed and considered” and rejected.

A price control holiday. Truman rejected this, and it is easy to see why. The people would not stand for it; it is too patent a fraud. During the two-month holiday on meat prices, prices zoomed to a dizzy level, underfed cattle were rushed to market, and a deliberately calculated meat famine followed.
 
A further increase in livestock prices. Even Truman knew the answer to this one. Livestock would be held back for still higher prices, as has been the case. Besides, and Truman didn’t say this, there is no reason to grant the big cattle ranger any increase. And so far as the small producer is concerned, what he wants and needs is industrial products at LOW PRICES.
 
Seizing the packing plants. “This offered no solution,” said Truman because packing plants without livestock mean nothing. As we’ve seen in other industries seized by the government, the government merely puts a few men in to operate the industry in behalf of the owners.

Truman said nothing about warehouses. Why not seize them? It has been proved that millions upon millions of pounds of meat are stored away – not enough to feed the entire population, but enough to ease the situation. They could have been seized and turned over under the control of warehouse workers for distribution. This could be done, but not by Truman for that would mean invading the sanctity of private property. And Truman will not do that unless COMPELLED to by the action of the people.
 
Seize the cattle for slaughter. This, says Truman, “would indeed be a drastic remedy” and he left it at that. Yes, it most certainly would be a drastic remedy. But drastic situations require drastic remedies. When drastic measures were needed to prosecute the imperialist war, they were taken. Whatever had to be requisitioned was requisitioned.

Obviously Truman was not prepared to do that. It would be against the interests of private property, of “free enterprise,” of monopoly. And, before everything else, Truman is an upholder of the system of private property as is the entire governmental system.
Combined with seizing the packing plants and the warehouses and putting them under the control of the workers, this could have put meat on the tables of the great mass of people. This is the kind of drastic action demanded by the situation. It is equally the kind of drastic remedy that Truman will never take, but that labor, with its power and its interest in the welfare of ALL the people, can take.

Import dressed meat from other countries. Truman said this would not do very much good. We add that it hasn’t been demonstrated as necessary. Two weeks ago Secretary of Agriculture Anderson announced that there was more than an adequate supply of livestock ‘in this country. There is no need to deprive the people of any other country, such as Mexico, of meat; in tact, there is a dire need of meat in Europe and Asia.
 
Lift controls on meat. And that is what Truman did. For Truman, for the packing monopolists, it was truly the “only remedy left.” For labor, for the people, the only real remedy would have been: to nationalize the meat industry under workers’ control:

The People Will Learn!
And note carefully what follows in the Truman address: “The American people will know where the responsibility rests if profiteering on meat raises the price so high that the average American cannot buy it.” We think they will know, too. Truman would like them to conclude from this knowledge that in November they ought to vote for the Democrats. We of the Workers Party and LABOR ACTION shall do our best to help the people reach the conclusion that the whole thievish, selfish set-up needs to be replaced with a government that serves the interests of the people, a Workers’ Government.
It is a dead certainty that prices will rise and rise, unless labor intervenes. What little there was of price control is now definitely dead, except for rent.
”The lifting of controls on meat, however, cannot be treated as an isolated transaction.” So Truman. And he is right. Already “the Price Administrator and the Secretary of Agriculture have been lifting controls on thousands of items on their own initiative.” We know that. And in Truman’s address we heard no reference to these gentlemen as Congressional obstructionists, “selfish few” and the rest of the phrases designed to shift blame elsewhere. (We are reminded of Roosevelt’s denunciation of the “economic royalists” while he led a war for these same economic royalists.)
 
Truman’s Way
“The action which will be taken tomorrow in freeing meat from control means that their program of lifting controls will have to be accelerated under existing standards.” And by the same token, labor will have TO ACT to stop the steal.
Truman made some passing references to wage increases. We know what that will be like in Truman’s formula. An inadequate, piddling increase that will be wiped away quickly by rising prices, possibly further depress labor’s living standard and certainly not raise it.
Such is Truman’s way. Rising prices. Frequent shortages.
Those who have permitted themselves to be beguiled by the propaganda that lifting controls will at least provide some meat where there is none, need only consider the milk situation in any one of a number of cities. In New York City, for example, in addition to a price rise that, according to published reports, has already deprived any number of poor children of a proper amount of milk, there is an actual shortage. In Seattle, housewives this week were demonstrating against the impossible rise in the price of milk under decontrol!
Truman’s way is not our way. It cannot be, for his way is the capitalist way – the way of the socially bankrupt masters of industry, whose selfish profit interests conflict with the interests of the people.
Our way is labor’s way. We say labor has to take the situation into its own hands.

Force price control through popular committees that have a real interest in holding the price line;
 
Force wage increases WITHOUT PRICE INCREASES, to offset the price increases already effected and to allow for a RISING standard of living;
 
Insert an escalator clause in every union contract as a further guarantee against the damaging effects of price increases;
 
Demand the nationalization of the food industry UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL;
 
Organize an INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY based on the unions and representing the majority of the people, to unite labor’s economic action with political action, to confront capital with the might of labor’s political weight and to sweep away the dead rot of capitalist political rule by replacing it with a government that will not hesitate to take “drastic action” where such is needed – A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT!

 

 Garrett: Giacomo Matteotti (13 June 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Giacomo Matteotti
(1885–Murdered, June 10, 1924)
(13 June 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 41, 13 June 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Giacomo Matteotti, son of a well-to-do farmer and expert in criminal law, rose to speak in the Italian Chamber of Deputies on May 30, 1924. Leader of the small, and dwindling, parliamentary opposition, he rose to present an indictment of the fascist regime, to read a list of its crimes, to denounce its electoral frauds.
 
The Fascist Dogs Strike
Mussolini sat in the chair writhing. Several times he interrupted, and growled ominously as Matteotti sent thrusts of irony and wit in reply. Matteotti charged Mussolini with using public funds for the benefit of big business – to refloat a near-bankrupt enterprise, to buy 18,000 shares of Mineral Oil Refinery, etc. Matteotti charged that Mussolini had used armed militiamen in the elections.
The session over, a few of Matteotti’s friends collected, around him to congratulate him on his speech. (There weren’t many of these. A good part of the “socialists” had long since turned tail.) Matteotti told them: “And now my colleagues, you may prepare my funeral oration for the Chamber.”
Mussolini made it clear that he was going to take some kind of action. One of his close henchmen remarked that “if they (the socialists) knew what was going on in Mussolini’s head at such times, they would lay low.” On June 1, Popolo d’ltalia, edited by Mussolini’s brother, referred to the “monstrously provocative” speech made the day before which deserved “something concrete” in reply.
On June 10, Matteotti, leaving his home, was whisked into a waiting car by a band of men. One of these men later reported Matteotti’s last words: “You will not kill the ideal. My children will be proud of their father. The workers will bless my dead body.”
Three months later that body which workers have truly come to revere as the embodiment of unrelenting anti-fascism, was found in a woods near Rome. There were thirty-six stab wounds in the chest. The rasp was still embedded in the body.
By chance, the license number of the kidnap car had been noted by passers-by. A cry went up for the apprehension of the criminals. Testimony piled up pointing the finger of responsibility directly at Mussolini. It was learned that the car had been used by one Dumini, a despicable criminal and hanger-on of the fascisti who had been hired for the job. Pinzi, Under-Secretary for the Home Office, afraid he was to be made the scape-goat for the murder, composed a testament, and sent copies to several people. One of these was sent to a socialist deputy who, however waited months before exposing the facts. Filippelli, arrested as a scapegoat on June 16 by order of Mussolini, drew up a memorandum in which the details of the abduction and murder were listed. Rossi, another Fascist, wrote a letter giving the facts of the case after he was arrested on June 14 as a sop to the enraged populace.
Mussolini himself referred to the murder as a blunder. But he proceeded to use it as an opportunity to consolidate his regime by force of terror.
Mass resentment was at a high pitch both inside and outside Italy. Mussolini ordered a mock trial. All the criminals were known. Dumini laughed at the trial. He testified that, “We were riding along peaceably when suddenly Matteotti developed tuberculosis and died of a hemorrhage.” A verdict was brought in: unintentional homicide, nobody guilty.
 
Failure of Socialist Policy
Matteotti had sacrificed his life heroically. But in doing so he also proved the inadequacy of personal honesty and valor where sound revolutionary politics is lacking. Matteotti had been consistently loyal to his own ideal. Something of an authority on criminal law, he had given up his profession to engage in political work. Elected as a deputy, he opposed Italy’s entrance into the World War. Elected again in 1919, and in 1924, he achieved prominence as an anti-fascist, and as the leader of the parliamentary opposition. Therein lay his great weakness: mere parliamentary opposition. A member of the reformist, moderate wing of the Socialist Party, he could offer only his own integrity in the anti-fascist struggle.
The socialists had facilitated the coming to power of Mussolini. They had not held the factories when these were spontaneously seized by the workers. With the entire nation, except for the bankers and bosses, earnestly anti-fascist, Mussolini nevertheless rode into power over the hesitant, uncertain bodies of the socialists. Most of the socialists promptly sought cover as the castor-oil, murder squads of the fascist banditti took possession of the country.
Some, like Matteotti, continued their opposition with appeals to law, justice and humanity. But it didn’t work. All these were on the side of the socialists. But they lacked the will to go out and rally the masses for revolutionary action to expropriate the factories, establish a workers government.
The masses looked up to Matteotti because be had stood his ground against fascism. His death came near to kindling the fire of revolution. There was however no revolutionary party to guide the flame.
 

. Cannon: Vincent St. John (20 June 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past

James P. Cannon
Vincent St. John
(1873–June 21, 1929)
(20 June 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 43, 20 June 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





The following account of a great fighter’s life is from an article written at the time of St. John’s death by James P. Cannon, National Secretary of the Socialist Workers Party (The Militant, July 1, 1929). [1] Comrade Cannon worked with St. John in the glorious days of Wobbly militancy and activity.



* * *
The death of Vincent St. John at San Francisco marks the passing of another of the great figures of the American revolutionary movement whose deeds helped to make its tradition and whose names will not be forgotten. “The Saint,” as he was known to those who knew and loved him, died at the age of 56 after a long illness complicated by high blood pressure. He will be sincerely mourned by thousands whose lives were influenced by him, particularly by those who belonged to the old guard of the I.W.W. in its bravest days when he was its moving spirit and guiding intelligence.
Vincent St. John, like Haywood and Frank Little, was trained in the hard school of the Western Federation of Miners, that model labor union whose mighty struggles threw their shadow across the world in the latter years of the Nineteenth Century and the first years of the Twentieth. A metal miner by trade, he joined the Western Federation in 1894, and became one of the most militant fighters in its ranks and an influential voice in its councils. Despite his modesty of disposition, his freedom from personal ambition and his lack of the arts of self-aggrandizement, his work spoke loudly and brought him widespread fame. His stirring deeds as a pioneer organizer became legends of the movement and remain such today. Until 1907 he was a member of the executive board of the W.F.M. and in that strategic position became the leader of the left wing in the looming struggle between conservative and revolutionary unionism which centered around the question of affiliation to the I.W.W. which the Western Federation had played a role in founding in 1905.
 
Led “Direct Actionists”
At the second convention of the I.W.W. in 1906 St. John headed the revolutionary syndicalist group which combined with the S.L.P. elements to oust Sherman, a conservative, as President and to establish a new administration in the organization with a revolutionary policy. He became the general organizer under the new administration, breaking with the W.F.M. on the withdrawal of the latter body, and giving his whole allegiance to the I.W.W. He presided at the 1908 convention which saw the split with the S.L.P. and the elimination of the “political clause” from the preamble. St. John was the leader of the proletarian “Direct Action” forces which defeated the “political” wing of De Leon. Thereafter he served as General Secretary of the I.W.W. until 1914, and undoubtedly did more than anyone to shape its course and prepare the ground for its later development under the active leadership of Haywood.
He withdrew from activity on leaving the office of General Secretary and engaged in a mining enterprise, doubtless with the illusory hope of acquiring a fortune to help finance the organization of the workers. Despite his retirement at the period, fear of his abilities, and the prospect of his return to the office vacated by the imprisonment of Haywood, dictated his own arrest and subsequent conviction with the Chicago group of I.W.W. wartime prisoners. He served two and a half years at Leavenworth before commutation brought his release.
From his earlier concepts of revolutionary socialism St. John, in revolt against the parliamentary reformism of the Socialist Party and the sectarian, ultra-legal concepts of the Socialist Labor Party, developed along the line of revolutionary syndicalism, the path taken by many of the best proletarian fighters of the period. In many respects this represented a step forward from parliamentary socialism, but the prejudices and theoretical falsity of the syndicalist or industrialist position were storing up disasters for the future. The philosophy of the I.W.W., which St. John did so much to shape, was too simple for the complex situation brought about by the entry of the United States into the World War. The great sacrifices and heroic deeds of its members were unavailing against this handicap and were greatly discounted by it. The spirit of the I.W.W. died in the war, and not the least of the signs of this tragedy was the loss of faith of practically the entire body of the old guard which had made its history and its glory. St. John was among them. Spiritual death is the real death of revolutionaries.
To the great loss of the workers’ cause, St. John, and with him the great majority of the leading militants of the I.W.W., failed to make the theoretical and tactical adjustments necessitated by the experience of the World War and the Russian Revolution. Their limited industrialist concepts remained unchanged. Communism, especially its American representatives, impressed them unfavorably and they could not swim with the current of the new movement. The enormous errors, presumptuousness and tactlessness of the Communist party leadership are partly responsible for this calamitous state of affairs. American communism should have been a natural growth out of the soil of the pre-war movement represented in part by the I.W.W. The early years of the Party were weakened and hampered by this failure and the I.W.W. movement, alienated from Communism, lost its old time vigor and passed into an inevitable degeneration and decline.
 
A Tradition to Be Valued
But despite the tragedy of the after-war years, the earlier work of the I.W.W. militants – and St. John in the front rank – retains all its validity. They wrote much of the tradition of the American revolutionary movement in letters of fire that will never be extinguished. The modern movement of Communism, which is the heir to their achievements, should value this tradition highly and honor the memory of the men who made it. The memory of Vincent St. John will always be a treasure to the revolutionary workers of America in their aspiring struggle for the workers’ world.
For those who knew the “Saint” as a man and friend, his untimely death brings a deep and poignant grief. He was a most admirable personality – brave and resolute, loyal and honest. He was a gifted and inspiring leader and organizer who gave himself, throughout the years of youth and manhood prime, untiringly and unsparingly to the workers’ cause. And with the highest executive qualities he combined the rare gift of friendship, of warmly human consideration and concern for others, of loyalty in personal relations, which bound men to him in life-long affection. Those who were so bound to him, who knew the warmth of his handclasp, enshrine his memory in their hearts along with the best memories of the great cause for which we live and strive.
Hail and farewell, Soldier, Man and Friend!

Note by ETOL
1. The obituary actually appeared in The Militant, Vol. II No. 12, 1 August 1929, p. 8.
 

 Garrett: Thomas Paine (6 June 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Thomas Paine
(Jan. 27, 1737–June 8, 1809)
(6 June 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 39, 6 June 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Only six people followed Tom Paine to his grave. For years he had been living the life of a social outcast, shunned by all respectable people, feeding on bread and rum.
The Revolution of 1776 was, you see, long past. The set, comfortable merchants, who had earned dollars as well as freedom as a result of the Revolution, no longer had any use for the fiery propagandist of rebellion, the revolutionary journalist whose writings fell like a whip lash across the body of English tyranny. If the truth be known, some had indeed never quite approved of the man.
 
Speaks a Rebel’s Cry
Tom Paine hadn’t come to the American colonies until 1774, a man of thirty-seven years. The son of a small English farmer and corset maker, he hadn’t had much schooling. What learning he had, and it was enough to make him one of the most enlightened men of his day, he had picked up by reading in the hours after work – as corset maker, tax collector, teacher. He came here with an introduction from Benjamin Franklin, himself by no means, a “respectable” man, who had been impressed by the vigor and merit of Paine’s views.
A showdown was fast approaching between English rule and the American need to expand industrially and commercially independent of artificial restraints. The spirit of rebellion was in the air. Paine took hold of that spirit and fanned it into a burning flame, above all in a simple pamphlet, Common Sense, published in January 1776.
“A King is a political superfluity,” he wrote.
Men must be loyal only to a society of their own creation, and not a government forced on them. The colonists must rise. “We have it in our power to begin the world over again.”
Within three months 120,000 copies of this pamphlet were sold, an extraordinary publishing feat for those days.
Paine wasn’t content to be only an agitator. Continuing his role as propagandist of the Revolution, he joined the army and plunged into the fighting. His tracts were required reading in all troop barracks. And in the barracks, the day’s fighting done, he put his pen to the service of the Revolution. “These are times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country. Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered.”
The revolution ended victoriously. In 1787 Paine sailed for England, partly to market a bridge he had invented, more to spread his revolutionary labors. There he hurled a defense of the French Revolution, The Rights of Man, at the smug heads of British conservatism. The British censors howled in bitter agony. They sued him for libel. They threatened him with jail. Chased out of the country, he went to France where the revolutionists greeted him with welcome arms, elected him to the National Convention.
Here however Paine failed to perceive the full depth and needs of the revolution. Friendly with the moderate elements, he found himself at loggerheads with the left, which was pushing the revolution ahead relentlessly, uncompromisingly. For protesting the execution of the King, Paine was for a time kept in prison. Released, he lived several years in France, at odds with the growing reaction.
 
Unmasked Hypocrisy of Religion
Finally, in 1802, and much to the disgust of the American conservatives, Paine returned to America. He had meanwhile written his denunciation and expose of organized religion. Paine’s Age of Reason ripped the hypocrisy and falsehood off the church, and its instrument, “the bible of a thousand and one contradictions.” The hypocrites and conservatives, satisfied with the freedom they (not the masses) had won, bellowed furiously, asked for his hide, spread the vilest slanders against him.
Denied even the privilege of voting in the nation he had helped create by the fire of his arguments, Paine lived a retired and hounded life in New Rochelle and New York City. He who had turned the proceeds of his writings over to the Revolution, was denied a small pittance by the product of the Revolution and condemned to poverty.
Though limited by the understanding and knowledge of his time, Paine had struck a rebel’s blow at social despotism. Not even his adoption, by the Communist Party along with the other and less revolutionary heroes of American history, can dim the glory of this social rebel.
Paine was buried in a corner of his New Rochelle farm – consecrated cemetery ground being denied. Twenty years after, William Cobbett dug up the remains and carried them to England to give them impressive burial. Something happened to the scheme. His bones disappeared. Paine had no nation; he was buried in none.
 

per: William Morris (March 24, 1834-October 3, 1896) (11 July 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men And Women Of Labor
Out Of The Past

Hal Draper
William Morris
(March 24, 1834–October 3, 1896)
(11 July 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 49, 11 July 1939, p. 3. [1]
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


William Morris became a Socialist at the age of 49.
At this time Morris was already famous as one of the outstanding poets of England. He was also widely known as an artist who had revived a dozen different art-crafts – fine printing, tapestries, textile designing, household decoration, etc. He was wealthy and respected.
Yet, at the height of his career, Morris astonished his friends and “the public” by casting his lot with a small obscure political group and throwing his enormous energies, as well as his wealth and reputation, into their work. This group was the pioneer organization of the British Marxists, the Social Democratic Federation, led by H.M. Hyndman.
 
Not a Dabbler in Socialism
Morris joined the S.D.F. in 1883. His artistic friends thought he joined as an artist dabbling in politics as a diversion. But Morris soon showed he was no mere dabbler in Socialism.
He joined the movement as a rank-and-file Jimmy Higgins. For two years – during which his literary work lapsed – he crowded his days with street-corner speaking in Hyde Park and in the proletarian quarters of London. He called it “street-preaching” and he painfully sought to develop himself as a Socialist agitator for the masses of workers. He was a frequent speaker before workers’ groups, and on occasion his reputation gained him entrée to middle class organizations where he lectured the white-collar audiences on the necessity of working-class socialism. He was involved in the Trafalgar Square riot of the late 1880’s.
It was against his own desire that he was drafted onto the leadership of the S.D.F. and became a member of its executive committee, for he himself recognized that his bent lay in the direction of propaganda work among the masses. Moreover, he cheerfully admitted that he knew little of Socialist theory. And this indeed was one of the reasons for his split with Hyndman and the S.D.F.
Morris was second in prominence only to Hyndman in the ranks of the Federation, but he found that he could not work with Hyndman. For that matter, neither could anyone else; for Hyndman brooked no division of his uncontrolled power over the organization. This source of friction was complicated by the existence of an anarchist wing of the Federation, which in 1885 broke away to form the Socialist League.
Morris went along with the Socialist League, and became one of its leaders, in spite of the fact that he disagreed with the anarchists’ ideas. It was not long, therefore, before he found himself in opposition in the Socialist League also, and in 1889 he retired to form a Socialist propaganda group, the Hammersmith Socialist Society. To the end of his days, however, he remained an ardent advocate of the Socialist ideal.
Perhaps no one who has attempted to depict the achievement of that ideal has drawn as attractive a picture of the future Socialist society as has Morris, in his News from Nowhere. Within his limitations, of course. Knowing little of the economic end of the Socialist transformation of society, he emphasized another angle. This was that the new world would be a place where the beauty and pleasure of labor could be developed, where cultural advance and the flowering of the human personality would no longer be hampered by the shackles of capitalism, where art would no longer be something appreciated only by highbrows but where it would become an art for the masses and by the masses.
Morris’s Chants for Socialists, in which he turned his poetic powers to the service of the movement, are also still well worth reading by workers today.
 
“Art for the Masses!”
Why is the name of William Morris, which figures so prominently in the history of English literature, also remembered by the Socialists?
Today, when the “cultural front” and the “intellectual periphery” of the revolutionary movement are terms that are bandied about, it is important to point out that William Morris was, if not the first, one of the first artists to join the Socialist movement BECAUSE he was an artist, not IN SPITE OF that fact.
Morris’s social and political consciousness was first awakened by his realization that capitalism was not only harmful to the masses who lived in poverty, taut also to the development of art and the beauty of life. How could art be healthy when the great mass of human beings had to spend every waking moment thinking of bread and butter, and when only the social parasites could afford to indulge in “patronizing” art? The result was a parasitic art, which was bound to reflect the degeneration of boss-class society.
“Art for the masses!” was the slogan of William Morris. He serves to remind us that the ultimate aim of socialism is not merely to assure bread and security to the worker – that is only the first step – but to make the world a more beautiful place to live in.
After all, is it not a most crushing condemnation of capitalism to realize that after all the ages, the most important problem that still faces mankind is the same as that which faces the lowest animal – how to get the daily mouthful of food ...?

Footnote
1. This column on William Morris is contributed by Hal Draper. Readers who wish to submit columns on Men and Women of Labor are urged to do so.
 

 Garrett: Wendell Phillips (Nov. 29, 1811-Feb. 2, 1884) (4 July 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Wendell Phillips
(Nov. 29, 1811–Feb. 2, 1884)
(4 July 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 47, 4 July 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


In a small mid-western town a mob of respectable people invaded the printshop of Elijah Lovejoy. They dragged him out, did these good northerners, and lynched him. Lovejoy had infuriated them with abolitionist agitation. The year was 1837 – the Civil War was some twenty-odd years off.
Wendell Phillips, well-to-do Harvard man, went to a meeting in Paneuil Hall, Boston, called to discuss the murder of Lovejoy. Social problems hadn’t agitated him much before. True, he had attended one or two abolitionist meetings, but that was the extent of his social protest. In fact, he went that evening to Paneuil Hall not so much out of aroused indignation as out of liberal interest. But Wendell Phillips that night changed the course of his life.
 
A Champion of Truth
The Assistant Attorney General of Massachusetts took the the platform to speak his approval of the lynching. Hardly had the Attorney General sat down when, burning with fury, Phillips jumped on the platform and delivered an impassioned denunciation of the slave system, the murder and those who would condone both. Several unsuccessful attempts were made to stop him. When he finished, the placid Bostonians cheered themselves hoarse. Of a sudden, Phillips had become a leading spokesman of the cause against slavery – along with Lloyd Garrison.
His friends thought him insane. It was alright to show some sympathy for the slaves, to contribute money to the abolitionist movement, even to attend a meeting. But to plunge wholeheartedly into freedom’s cause, to submerge oneself in the fight against chattel slavery, to devote one’s life to an ideal – that was something altogether different.
Phillips, however, did precisely that. A “Knight-Errant of Unfriended Truth” he spent one night in a valley speaking to a few people, the next in a large city addressing a huge crowd. Often he had to leave the meeting-hall under protection. For the respectable people who had lynched Lovejoy and beaten Garrison, would have been glad to do as much to him. At one meeting the town’s “respectables” roared so loud Phillips could not be heard; he nevertheless continued speaking, addressing himself to the newspapermen: “While I speak to these pencils I speak to a million men. We have got the press of the country in our hands; whether they like it or not, they know that our speeches sell their papers.”
Because a lawyer had to swear fidelity to the Constitution, Phillips in 1842 gave up his practice. “My curse be on the Constitution of the United States” ... which defends slavery. He was as caustic with the scriptures which sanctified slavery.
His enemies called him “nigger-friend”. And a friend of the Negro he was; looking beyond formal emancipation to real equality. When, the Civil War over, Garrison and other abolitionists were content to give up the fight, he insisted upon the continued existence of the Anti-Slavery Society until full suffrage rights were granted.
 
With the Labor Movement
His great distinction, however, was that unlike most of the abolitionist leaders he was an active supporter of the labor movement. Standing for the “abolition of chattel slavery and wage slavery”, Phillips attacked the profit system and all forms of social oppression. He supported women’s suffrage when that was far from being a popular cause. He defended the Russian Nihilists, attacked the suppression of the Irish people by the British tyrants, and honored John Brown for his courageous stroke against slavery. And in the fight for liberty and against tyranny, he sought to rouse the working class to action.
As a candidate of the Labor Party, he ran in 1870 for the Massachusetts governorship. His platform said that “Labor is entitled to all it creates.” Attacking corruption and the profit system he stumped the state. In the election he polled 20,000 votes.
Phillips kept on the go. Speaking, writing, agitating. When he was 70, the Phi Beta Kappa association graced him with an invitation to speak. Phillips who had been Phi Beta Kappa in school had never before in all the years of his activity been invited to address the well-fed sons of Harvard or the smug conservatives of Phi Beta Kappa. Now an old man (they thought), and the issue for which he had principally fought largely settled, they considered it safe to hear him. Phillips saw the humor of the situation, but he spoke. He spoke to them about the duties of a “Scholar in a Republic” ... to probe, to criticize, to fight exploitation of man by man, to stand on the side of social justice.
 

 Garrett: William H. Sylvis (Nov. 26, 1828-July 27, 1869) (25 July 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
William H. Sylvis
(Nov. 26, 1828–July 27, 1869)
(25 July 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 53, 25 July 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


The Civil War nearly wrecked the union movement, decimating its membership, suspending its activities. Everywhere, bosses undertook an organized offensive against labor standards
Yet, out of this period of depression in the union movement grew the first great advance towards a national organization of labor. The man who accomplished this was William H. Sylvis, the first great leader of American labor. He, for example, saw the bosses’ game:
“To effectually smother in its infancy any disposition the men might have to fraternize ... they commenced to work on their prejudices, arraigning the representatives of one religion or one nation against those of another ...”
Sylvia had been born in Pennsylvania into a poor wagon-makers family. The Depression of 1837 had scattered his family and he had become an iron moulder, wandering for a time as a journeyman, then settling down in Philadelphia. Local strikes were frequent in the industry. In the course of a strike in 1857, Sylvis was elected shop secretary. After the strike, he was elected recording-secretary of the Iron Moulders union which had been organized in 1855 and which was destined to mirror the trend of the labor movement – from pure and simple trade union action, to political action, to economic action again, etc. Sylvis, almost on the heels of his election, introduced a resolution for a national convention of iron moulders. When the call for the founding convention of the Iron Moulders International Union (Philadelphia 1859) was issued, he was one of the two signers.
With the Civil War fast approaching, Sylvis was active in the anti-war movement which was then very widespread. In February of 1861 be presided at a national convention of workers who were opposed to the war. However, when the war had actually begun, Sylvis, as did most of the labor leaders, supported the war.
The union had virtually gone to pot with the outbreak of war. In 1863 it was reconvened, and Sylvis was elected president. Viewing trade union action as only a half-way measure, useful so long as the wage system lasted but incapable of solving the basic problems of the wage earners, he introduced into the union proposals which looked to the abolition of the profit system. In his 1864 report he, among other things, recommended cooperative foundries and a national trades assembly with an all-embracing program.
Such a body came into being in 1866 as the result of the “Labor Congress” which met in Baltimore as the first meeting of the National Labor Union. Sylvis two years later was elected president, and thus became the spokesman of 600,000 workers, the largest organized labor force in the country up to that time. The N.L.U. program favored the formation of a labor reform party, the 8-hour day, support of the “sewing-women and daughters of toil in this land”.
In the last days of the war and after, the iron industry made gigantic strides, the Iron Moulders union came to active life, winning wage increases for its men, enforcing trade rules, especially with reference to apprentices. To head off union action, the bosses tried to organize, but weren’t very successful. Sylvis, in theory opposed to strike action, nevertheless led some of the great battles of the American working class. In 1867 he led a nine month strike which was ended in defeat, the bosses at that particular time being able to organize their own forces, and the workers drained to exhaustion by the many financial assessments.
However, the union rallied and turned towards cooperation in a big way. “At last after years of earnest effort and patient waiting, and constant preaching, cooperation is taking hold upon the minds of our members, and in many places very little else is talked about.” Cooperative foundries which Sylvis hailed as the “beginning of a new era” were founded. The change effected was for example indicated in the union name which was changed to read, “Iron Moulders International Cooperative and Protective Association.
 
For International Action
Where he was particularly distinguished from the ordinary labor leaders of his day, was his interest in international organization. Very much interested in Marx’s First International, he for a long time carried on a detailed correspondence with the leaders of the International. For example, war between England and the United States was threatening in 1869. [1] The secretary of the International wrote him suggesting joint labor action for peace. In answer, Sylvis wrote:
“Our cause is a common one. It is war between poverty and wealth ... This monied power is fast eating op the substance of the people. We have made war upon it, and we mean to win it. If we can, we will win through the ballot box; if not, then we shall resort to sterner means. A little bloodletting is sometimes necessary in desperate cases.”
At his recommendation, A.C. Cameron was sent by the N.L.U. to the 1869 conference of the First International. And had he lived, it is quite possible the organization would have been affiliated to the International.
As it happened, Sylvis died in the middle of his career. He had led the first major attempt at the national organization of labor, and even aimed at international organization. Not very effective in actual practice (the first truly effective national organization was soon to be created in the Knights of Labor), it nevertheless prodded the awakening labor movement to a great goal.

Footnote by ETOL
1. In the printed version 1860, but this is obviously an error as the First International did not exist in 1860 and there was indeed a war scare in 1869.
 

 Garrett: Jean Paul Marat (May 24, 1743-July 13, 1793) (18 July 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out Of The Past
Jean Paul Marat
(May 24, 1743–July 13, 1793)
(18 July 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 51, 18 July 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


The Bastille, prison-symbol of the old regime, fell on July 14, 1789 under the surge of the aroused Parisian masses. The Great French Revolution had begun. The struggle between the hereditary-privileged and the newly powerful masters of trade which had been brewing for the greater part of the century reached its climax, and the former had to give way. On August 4 feudal privileges were formally abolished.
There were those who were quite content to let things stand as now established. The wealthy merchants, satisfied that the reins of government were being transferred to them through that section of the nobility which had aligned itself with new class power as well as through their own direct representatives, sought merely to consolidate the gains achieved and to stop the revolution cold at that point.
These plans were spiked however by a small group of far-sighted individuals who stood at the head of the masses, notably Jean Paul Marat, champion “of the propertyless whom the rich call canaille (dogs).”
Seeing the Revolution as of benefit only to the rich, Marat jumped into the fray with the sharpness of his pen, the vigor of his ideas, publishing the most important journal of the day, L’Ami du Peuple (The Friend of the People). In it he attacked the proposed limitations on the people’s sovereignty, charged the commercial potentates with using the National Assembly (created by the Revolution) for their own advantage, predicted the treason of the liberal nobles.
Trained as a scientist, a well-established, respected physician with a large practice among the English and French aristocracy, the writer of several important treatises on optics and other scientific subjects, Marat had even before the actual outbreak of the Revolution given up science for revolutionary agitation.
From a writer of philosophical tracts, he gradually became a practical revolutionist, an advocate of class struggle.
Persecuted by Counter Revolution
Directing his blows in a series of great polemics against Necker, representative of the new regime, he articulated the “demands of those who have nothing on those who have everything.” ... For higher wages, for equal rights, for abolition of bread and consumers taxes, for a general supply of cheap bread. Ever vigilant he didn’t hesitate to speak out, call a traitor a traitor, warn the masses that today’s “friend” will be tomorrow’s enemy.
Those he attacked in L’Ami went after him viciously. Marat became the most persecuted man of the Revolution. For two years he lived “illegally’’ in dark cellars, sewers, constantly hunted, working alone with only loyal Simonne Evrard standing by him throughout. His writings were confiscated, his presses destroyed.
As the counter-revolution, grew stronger, Marat demanded the safeguarding of the Revolution by the general arming of the people, by the disarming of the counter-revolutionary leaders – even by dictatorial means if necessary. To crush the spirit of the masses, the National Assembly ordered bloody massacres. European powers, working with royalists in France, declared war against the French. Explaining the meaning of the war and the massacres, Marat called for the overthrow of the King and the completion of the Revolution.
Eventually, in October 1791, a Legislative Assembly elected by privileged suffrage replaced the National Assembly. But, wrote Marat, “The second legislature is not less rotten than the first.” Prices and hunger were mounting. Force, he told the workers, would be necessary for the creation of a Republic. “Do you really believe that you can change the inclinations and habits, the manners and passions of the ruling class by the preaching of moral principles?”
Louis was taken prisoner in 1792. A new Communal Council was elected in Paris. Marat was made a member of its Committee of Public Safety which disposed of the counter-revolutionary ringleaders. His influence in the Paris Commune was decisive.
A National Convention was called. The masses, who worshipped him, elected him a member. To indicate the change that had been effected, he changed the name of his journal to Journal of the French Republic by Marat, Friend of the People. The legend under the masthead of this journal read: “In order that misery may be diminished, the property of the wealthy must be abolished.”
Never silent, never willing to compromise, Marat continued his battle against the weak-willies, the vacillators in the Convention. The latter who held the whip hand in the Convention for a time finally had him brought before the Revolutionary Tribunal on April 24, 1793. But he was acquitted, and the masses carried him home triumphantly through the streets of Paris. A leading spirit of the Jacobin Club (the Bolsheviks of the French Revolution), he organized the defeat of the Girondists (the vacillators), and helped establish Jacobin rule.
The years of persecution had, however, their toll. Marat became too ill to attend the Convention. Daily from his home he sent the Convention a letter of advice and opinion. Afflicted with a serious skin ailment contracted in the dank sewers, he spent the greater part of his day sitting in a bath, the only relief he had. On July 13, Charlotte Corday, an agent of the royalists, asked to see him. She was admitted. Approaching, she pulled a knife and stabbed him through the heart.
Charlotte Corday became the heroine of the counter-revolution when it wrested power from the Jacobins. Marat’s name was besmirched, accused of the vilest crimes, his ideas distorted. By the same token, however, his name was revered by the masses, treasured with all those other martyrs who lived to the cause of emancipation.
 

 Garrett: Bill Haywood (14 February 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Out of the Past
Bill Haywood
(Feb. 4, 1869–May 18, 1928)
(14 February 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 7, 14 February 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Big Bill Haywood described his family background as “so American that if traced back it would probably run to the Puritan bigots or the cavalier pirates. Neither would give me reason for pride.”
Bill’s pride lay rather in that by heritage and life-long activity he was a member of the working class. From the age of nine up, Bill worked – as miner, as cowboy, and above all as labor militant. In 1896, he joined the Western Federation of Miners, becoming a charter member of the Silver City Local. Aggressive, incorruptibly anti-boss, he quickly rose to a position of leadership. The Denver convention of the union in 1901 elected him secretary-treasurer of the union.
 
Wrote Many Pages of Labor’s History
Bill’s towering figure (he was as large in body as he was unyielding in his devotion to the cause of the working-class) is associated with many stirring pages of labor history. Many are the names of labor’s great leaders whose work is linked with his – Eugene V. Debs, Vincent St. John, and others.
The Telluride strike, in which the union challenged the Guggenheim interests and after many months marked by violence against the strikers, under the “protection” of martial-law, won its demands for an eight-hour day and wage increases; the long campaign in Colorado for an eight-hour day in which the courts, the Rockefellers and other mine barons combined to persecute the union-men with floggings, jailings, “deportation or death;” the Lawrence strike which drew into its many months of activity, and finally victory, dozens of the best strike organizers, including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, Joseph Ettor and Arturo Giovanitti – in all these, and others, Bill played his part.
When the Industrial Workers of the World was founded Bill sat in the chair. He continued a member of the I.W.W., even after the Western Federation of Miners, moving away from the militancy on which it was founded, left the I.W.W.
Bill had also joined the Socialist Party. In 1907, while in prison, he was nominated for governor of Colorado by the S.P., and polled 16,000 votes. In 1912, the Socialist Party, which could no more abide revolutionists in its midst then than now, expelled him from its National Executive Board for “advocating violence.”
 
The Bosses Were Always Out to Get Him
Bill was ever a target for the bosses and their police. They were always out to get him. In 1906, the bosses saw their opportunity. An ex-governor of Idaho had been murdered in December 1905. Haywood, Charles H. Moyef, president of the Federation, and G.A. Pettibone were arrested for the crime on the testimony of a paid provocateur, Harry Orchard, who implicated the three.
The trial began in May 1907. Borah was attorney for the prosecution, Darrow for the defense. Unions all over the country contributed to the defense. Meetings protested the arrest, and demanded acquittal. There were witnesses everywhere to prove Orchard a liar. The jury brought in a verdict of “Not guilty!”
During the war, the drive against labor militants was particularly vicious. Union offices were everywhere raided. Workers were jailed. On April 1, 1918, there began the biggest of the anti-labor trials in the United States with Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis presiding. Haywood and 94 other “Wobblies” were charged with sedition. The defendants and their lawyers challenged the entire boss system. Bill, called the six month trial “a protracted propaganda meeting.”
Defense witnesses testified to the horrors to which labor militants had been subjected – the massacre of Frank Little, the lynching and torturing of workers by mobs of business men. The jury, in the hysteria of war-time democracy decided, after being out one hour, the defendants were “Guilty, as charged in the indictment.”
Haywood was sentenced to twenty years, and fined $30,000. On July 28, 1919, Haywood was released from jail, pending his application for a new trial. Bill immediately plunged into the work of the movement – touring the country, raising money for his imprisoned comrades.
In the meantime the split in the Socialist Party between the left and the right was maturing. When it came to a head in September 1919, Bill went with the left and became a member of the Communist Party soon after it was organized.
 
In the Soviet Land of Freedom
His application for a new trial was denied. Haywood decided to leave the country in disguise. “Saluting the old hag with her uplifted torch, I said: ‘Good-by, you’ve had your back turned on me too long. I am now going to the land of freedom!”
The Russian workers greeted him enthusiastically. Bill, arriving in the early years of the Russian Revolution, felt himself a part of the great edifice the workers there were trying to build. In the film, Tsar to Lenin, you can see him standing shoulder to shoulder with Russian workers, smiling, at the second congress of the Communist International. In 1928, disheartened by the Stalinist bureaucratism which he saw growing around him, he died of a paralytic stroke.
A newspaperman tells the story that before Bill left, he met Bill smoking an expensive cigar. How, asked the news reporter, can you, a leader of the proletariat, smoke a rich man’s cigar? “Nothing, answered Bill, is too good for the proletariat.” Big Bill Haywood lived his life in that conviction: Nothing is too good for the proletariat!
 

 Garrett: Johann Most (28 February 1938)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Johann Most
(Feb. 5, 1846–March 17, 1906)
(28 February 1938)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 11, 28 February 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Into the somewhat placid labor movement of the American 80’s came Johann Most – the fiery “propagandist of the deed.” Great struggles were pending, the eight-hour movement was just then getting into full swing, individuals like Parsons and Spies were already spreading the doctrines of militant labor action. Haymarket Square was soon to be the center of the first great anti-labor frame-up in the United States.
 
Jailed in Every Country
When Most arrived in 1882 he had behind him years of activity in the socialist movements of Europe, and a reputation so great that a huge mass meeting was organized in New York City to welcome him.
He also had behind him, this ex-journeyman bookbinder who startled bourgeois German sensibilities by his bitter proclamations, years of jail sentences. These were to be continued in the United States. For though Most agitated for his “propaganda of the deed” primarily in speeches and tracts that were rarely matched in specific deeds, he was regularly imprisoned for the violence of his words.
In Vienna he had been sentenced to five years imprisonment, and released after twelve months on condition that he leave Austria. Back in his native Germany, he engaged in socialist editorial work, and was elected to the Reichstag. But not for long. Bismarck exiled him under the anti-socialist laws. In London, to which he went, he was twice sentenced to jail for articles that appeared in the famous anarchist journal he founded, the Freiheit.
 
Gives Labor Slant to Anarchism
Before he came to this country, the German Social Democratic Party had expelled him for his trenchant denunciations of parliamentary action. Arrived in the United States he almost immediately quarreled with the various anarchist groups then existing – most of them bred in the Thoreau tradition of peaceful retirement from active life. Most brought to American anarchism a labor slant, and with it separated the old school, which enjoyed a certain respectable popularity in the United States for generations, from the new school which sought, however unclearly, to wrest power from the bosses through class struggle. It was thus largely through the influence of Most that the anarchist movement played a dominant role in the labor battles of the 80’s.
Having separated himself from the main body of American anarchists in bitter controversy, Most sought out and united in October 1883 in the organization of the International Working People’s Association (the “Black International”) with Parsons and Spies. The platform of the “Black International” pointed to the inefficacy of ballots as a means of conquering power; it called for the “destruction of the existing class rule by all means, that is by energetic, relentless, revolutionary and international action.”
 
A Brilliant Orator
Most toured the country. The brilliance of his attack on capitalist rule, his wit, his biting sarcasm gave many a fat-growing money-bag sleepless nights. “Extirpate the miserable brood!”, cried Most, “Extirpate the wretches!” Workers, many of them come to the United States as exiles from Bismarck’s tyranny, applauded. Bosses, frightened by the venom and vigor of his words, demanded he be jailed.
And so he was for “inciting to violence” – just before the Haymarket demonstration. Hardly was he released from Blackwell’s Island when he was returned there for a pamphlet on the “scientific art of revolutionary warfare.” Later, after the assassination of McKinley, he was sentenced to a third term on Blackwell’s Island. He claimed that the greatest indignity done him in jail had been the shaving of his beard.
 
Rejects Individual Terror
Towards the end of his life, though he continued to be hounded for his “violence,” Most rejected individual acts of terrorism, except where they would awaken the masses to revolutionary action. So that when Alexander Berkman shot Frick, the steel baron, Most criticized the act as ineffective in advancing the cause of anarchism. With this change in viewpoint, the mainstream of the American anarchist movement, represented by the new figures of Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman which he had up to then nurtured and which had looked upon him as its ideological leader, broke from him.
Persecuted every year of his life, from his childhood spent under the lash of beatings, through his adulthood spent under the whip of capitalist repression, Most died in 1906. Few, if any, of his works are now read, few victories remain as monuments to his pioneer work. Yet, Most with his speeches and burning tracts helped educate the American proletariat into militancy of action, to stir it into a realization that it alone could fight its own cause.
 

 Garrett: August Bebel (7 February 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
August Bebel
(Feb. 22, 1840–Aug. 13, 1913)
(21 February 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 9, 21 February 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


There was a time, and not so long ago, when the name of August Bebel was among the best-known of the international socialist movement. Today, time, the sweep of tremendous events since his death, and above all the degeneration of the party which he helped create and build, have contributed to the shrouding of his one-time prominence in the gallery of socialist giants.
Bebel was the rather unusual leader, especially for the pre-war days – a proletarian who without formal education, but with intensive reading and study added to a brilliant capacity, became one of the first-rank leaders of German socialism, “the father of the Social Democratic Party.”
 
Guided Workers’ First Strides in Organization
He was not a creative theorist, and his main and lasting contributions to socialism lie not in his books and tracts (Women and Socialism, etc.). They lie in the magnificent ability which stirred the German proletariat to organization – in trade unions, and above all in a party which expressed their social hopes.
The first gigantic strides towards mobilizing the workers of Germany to express in political activity the interests of their own class were guided by Bebel. By Bebel who began his adult life as a journeyman, turner, working in Leipzig, and who remained the worker, acutely conscious of the needs of his class; so that, where other, and later, leaders of the German socialist movement sought to dilute the stream of socialism with class-collaboration, he, the “simple” worker, remained steadfast.
While already an active and leading figure in the German working-class movements (the Worker’s Improvement Society, the Congress of Workmen’s Societies, the Association of German Workers, of which he was president), which were then only beginning to feel their way, to spread, Bebel studied the doctrines of socialism, the works of Marx. Sometime about 1865 he met Wilhelm Liebknecht, father of our great martyr, Karl. Well on the road towards socialism he was further influenced by his contact with the elder Liebknecht. Together they founded the German Social Democratic Party in 1869.
As a representative of this party, Bebel served in the Reichstag with few interruptions for the remainder of his life. And it was from the tribune of the Reichstag that some of his most inr spiring speeches were delivered. A forthright representative of the workers he reviled the in-betweeners, the “Swamp” – “the ‘Wise Guys’ who always prick up their ears as if to say ‘which way is the wind blowing now?’”
It was on this tribune that he rose on May 25, 1871 to defend the Paris Commune, the defeat of which was being celebrated by bourgeois Germany:
“Even though Paris may now have been put down, I must tell you that the struggle in Paris is only a small outpost skirmish, that the main affair in Europe is still ahead of us, and that before a few decades have passed the battle cry of the Paris proletariat: ‘War on the palaces, peace to the cottages, death to poverty and idleness!’ will become the battle cry of the entire European proletariat.”
Bismarck who heard the speech, called it the “ray of light” which showed him that socialism was an enemy to be crushed. He eventually saw to it that Bebel was incarcerated for two years for “high treason,” and nine months for “lèse majeste.”
 
Workers Flocked to Hear Him Speak
Bebel’s two outstanding abilities were as organizer and as orator. When Bebel spoke, there was a packed auditorium – of workers come to hear his relentless denunciations of Junker tyranny, his impassioned words. There was even an occasion when, the auditorium packed beyond stuffing, workers lifted the tiles off the roof so that they might hear him. The splendid vigor, the surge of his speeches did more than attract listeners – they were the eloquent instruments for proletarian organization.
The span of his life encompassed the first and feeble beginnings of the world’s workers toward international organization (the First International) and the lusty, self-confident strides into mass organization (the Social Democratic party, the Second International). Under his guidance, the socialist movement grew, workers learned the importance and strength of organization.
Bebel did not live to see the organization he had created yield its life into the hands of German imperialism. He, whose proletarian firmness, whose hatred of German militarism stood out, did not live to deny and condemn the social-patriotic calumny which impudently sought to justify its own vile course by an appeal to his name. The Second International, one might say, died when he did. A whole period in the development of international socialism was at an end.
 

 Garrett: Thomas Muenzer (16 May 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Thomas Muenzer
(1497–Decapitated, May 27, 1525)
(16 May 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 33, 16 May 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Turbulence, ferment, rebellion – thus was the sixteenth century born. New systems, and new ideas grappled with the foundations of old. Capitalism, a lusty infant, spread its arms and crowded the princes and lords who ruled by feudal right of land ownership and serf labor.
The merchant class, the townsmen, grew wealthier, tapped the resources of the known and settled world, spread the tentacles of trade, and challenged the authority of feudal might. In England, where serious upheavals had already taken place, their economic power was clearly established; political power they had yet to seize. In Germany they were first beginning to feel their importance, to grow prosperous.
And as they extended their activities, slowly remolding the basis of social organization, the downtrodden serfs, the newly important artisans, and the newly created plebeians who formed a reservoir of unskilled labor became restive.
The merchants who sought to undermine the traditional authority of feudal lord and church (itself the richest and most powerful of the feudal landowners) were echoed in the mighty thunderbolt that Martin Luther hurled at traditional doctrine, and the established church. Luther took religion out of the hands of a few lords (priests), made it the property of the masses, presented the bible in native German instead of unintelligible Latin. (Religion, the church, completely dominated the thought of the day; social upheaval therefore couched itself in religious terms, sought justification there, etc.)
 
Goes Beyond Protestant Reformation
Thomas Muenzer was among those who avidly took possession of Luther’s views. A bright young theologian, Luther had even helped him secure a pastorate. An eloquent preacher, he attacked the monks bitterly. Luther had however only cracked the shell of society. Muenzer was soon far ahead of him; shell and all had to go. Luther who had inspired him, now repelled him. For Muenzer bad become a man of action and revolution who ranged himself on the side of the oppressed masses against the rulers, the possessors, and the easy living reformers (like Luther “that easy living flesh of Wittenberg”).
His small, swarthy figure became a popular sight among the plebeians and peasants who listened to his harangues against princes and middle-of-the-way reformers. Way ahead of his day which lacked the material prerequisites for the execution of his views, Muenzer preached the community of goods, the “Inner Light,” in effect the right of each man to hold his own views. Some of his ideas, daring for his time, became democratic commonplaces three centuries later.
Several times he settled as preacher in various German cities; as often he was chased out by the fat-bellies and the worried townsfolk who were willing to go so far in social
criticism, but no further. Denounced by Luther, he encouraged the peasants in Thuringia to rise, together with the urban proletarians and the miners, against the moneyed and feudal lords. Driven out of Muhlhausen he travelled with his close co-worker Pfeiffer through southern Germany. Ungodly rulers, he told those he met, must be driven out killed. The usurpers, he told them, say “Thou shalt not steal” and then grab everything But when an artisan “commits the slightest transgression, he has to hang, and Dr. Liar (Luther) says to all to this: Amen.”
 
Peasant War Unfolds
Towards the end of 1524, the peasant masses had definitely begun to move towards revolution. Their aims were incorporated in a document, the Twelve Articles, which called for a plain gospel (i.e., religious services in their own language and within their own comprehension and of their own choosing), and freedom from serfdom. By March 1525 the movement was quite general. By May they had considerable successes. But as is the case with every peasant movement, there was no real solidarity between the various sections. Each section waged its battle in a limited and provincial sphere. At the beginning they were favored by the equal disorganization of the lords; but as the lords organized largely under the leadership of Philip of Hesse, and spurred on by Luther, the peasants were beaten in battle after battle. History was much too young for a victorious popular insurrection; the peasants couldn’t reorganize society, a proletariat was lacking to lead them, the next step in social development was capitalism.
In Muhlhausen, Muenzer and Pfeiffer had spread their propaganda. As preachers they had at first demanded the privilege of sitting in at council meetings. At a propitious moment, when the population was called together to answer a muster roll, Muenzer urged the assembled people to kick out the old government and take the reins into their own hands. This they did. A new government was decreed, to be run by an “Eternal Council.” Community of property was proclaimed.
Philip of Hesse moved on Frankhausen where Muenzer with 8,000 men had made his stand. Philip asked for an armistice, but, as he had done in other cases, violated the armistice before it had elapsed. Muenzer’s troops were defeated. 5,000 of them were slaughtered. Muenzer was taken prisoner.
His captors asked him to explain his deeds. He told them he acted and preached as he had because they, the princes, had sacrificed everything to lust and avarice.
Muenzer was handed over to the executioner. For a day he was tortured horribly by thumbscrew and rack, then thrown into the dungeon.
On May 27, two days after his capture the executioner did his work. Muenzer’s mutilated head was lifted on a pike, and displayed as a warning against revolt. It became instead a symbol of the struggle against oppression, an inspiration to future generations of rebels, the founders of German Marxian socialism.
 

 Garrett: August Spies (2 May 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
August Spies [1]
(Dec. 10, 1855–Hanged, Nov. 11, 1887)
(2 May 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 29, 2 May 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“Barbarians, savages, illiterate, ignorant Anarchists from Central Europe, men who cannot comprehend the spirit of our free American institutions” – of these August Spies, was proud to acknowledge himself one.
To his prosecutors and defamers Spies admitted his “mistake” – he had chosen his place of birth Unwisely. Born in Landeck, Germany (hence, a “foreigner”) he did not emigrate to the United States until after his father’s death, when he was already 17 years old. That disqualified him, said patriots, from advocating human liberty.
The Spies family was not exactly a wealthy one, but it lived in comfortable circumstances. His father, a forester, was able to provide his sons with private tutors, and other luxuries denied the usual working man. Thus it was that Spies had no contact with the proletariat, that is with the misery that is the proletariat’s, until after he had arrived in America.
 
A Worker Among Workers
Settling at first in New York, he learned the furniture business. Within a year he moved to Chicago where, working in a factory he became fully conscious of the shocking conditions under which men lived and worked. Work, he discovered, was a privilege meted out by idlers to those whom it wished to employ when profits were to be gained.
In 1875 a friend invited him to attend a lecture on Socialism given by the Workingmen’s Party of Illinois. Of a sudden he realized that here was the answer to the questions he had been asking. Studying what socialist literature was available, he became a convinced socialist and joined the Socialistic Labor Party in 1877. At the same time he joined the “Lehr and Wehr Verein”, an armed body of 1,500 well-drilled workers organized in reaction to the many vicious assaults on workers by police and militia-men during that year. The patricians, themselves protected by their armed state Services, placed a ban on the bearing of arms, and the Verein was disbanded.
Several times Spies ran for office on the socialist ticket. But like a good many of his comrades at the time who became disillusioned with the uses of the ballot box, the key to which lay in the bosses’ pocket, he turned against political action completely, adhering to the anarchist wing of the workers’ movement. Thus, failing to understand the limited, yet important, value of the ballot box in working class agitation, he gave up that field of action completely after a few sorry experiences and thereby cut himself off from a vital means of propaganda.
The S.L.P. began in 1880 the publication of the Arbeiter Zeitung as a daily. Spies began with the Zeitung as business manager and then became editor, working interminable hours each day, until his arrest on May 5, 1886.
Active in building revolutionary workers’ Clubs in Chicago, a leading agitator for the eight-hour day like his fellow martyr, Albert Parsons, Spies was a popular figure among worker militants. His brilliant oratory endeared him to thousands upon thousands of workers. As a speaker he was known in virtually every industrial city in the country. Travelling around, he joined in many battles of the workers exposing their plight, publicizing their struggles.
Spies was present when on May 3, 1886, the Pinkertons and the police swooped down on the strikers at the McCormick Reaper plant who were “educating” the scabs in their own way. Many strikers fell under the Pinkerton and police gunfire. Spies left for his newspaper office immediately. Here he wrote a proclamation to the workingmen of Chicago. One of the type-setters added the slogan “Revenge!” which Spies later had removed, though it has come to be known as the Revenge Circular. A call for a protest meeting in Haymarket Square was published in his paper.
Spies arrived late at the meeting, as a German speaker he had expected to speak last. The meeting having not yet been opened he called it to order in a smaller location, Parsons, Fielden and others spoke. Detectives ordered the meeting stopped. The speakers refused. A bomb was thrown. Police were injured and eight men were arrested. The great Haymarket Case had begun.
Spies along with others of his comrades was sentenced to be hanged. When sentence was pronounced the court asked him if he had anything to say. He spoke for two hours.
“In addressing this court I speak as the representative of one class to the representatives of another ... My defense is your accusation, the causes of my alleged crime your history.”
While in jail, waiting for sentence to be executed, Spies was visited by a young woman who had come to the trial to see “beasts” and saw instead men who were sacrificing their lives for humanity, she thereafter devoted all her efforts to the freeing of the men. Her friendship with Spies having grown she became his wife so that there would be less obstacles put before her in her work for the Haymarket Martyrs. The bourgeois press seethed with fury and slime. She had married, not a fat, old money-bag, but a fighter in freedom’s cause.
 
A Voice Pierces the Silence
As the day of execution approached and the appeals for pardon were ignored, Spies was prevailed upon, together with two other defendants, to submit a petition for clemency. But he soon repudiated the petition of which he was ashamed in a letter in which he proposed that he be hanged and the others freed. The others were not freed. Two were sent to jail; five to the gallows; one had committed suicide.
The hangman placed the black hood over Spies’ head. In that silent moment before the rope was cut, Spies’ piercing voice shattered the silence: “There will come a time when our silence will be more powerful than the voices, you strangle today.”

Note
1. Written in collaboration with Sam Portnoy.
 

 Garrett: Louise Michel (30 May 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out Of The Past
Louise Michel
(May 29, 1830–Jan. 10, 1905)
(30 May 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 37, 30 May 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Every so often there comes along a person who must inevitably become a revolutionist by the very nature of his being. The pain, the suffering, the hunger of the oppressed are his. Such a person was Louise Michel whose brilliant spirit lit the revolutionary ardor of the French working-class.
Rarely has there been a man or woman more deeply and personally compassionate toward the oppressed and exploited than Louise Michel. A bourgeois paper, writing of her while she was still alive, described her as a “Sister of Mercy without uniform or vow” – under the illusion that comparison with the denizens of the church might be a compliment to her. She was far more than compassionate for she was a fighter too. Against the oppressors, she was savage in her hatred. Force, violence would be needed to oust these monsters of society who rule by might.
The daughter of a serving maid and a landowner’s son, Louise Michel’s life was divided into two sections. “The first,” she wrote, “consisted of dreams and of study; the second only of events.” Outraged by the poverty and the misery of the poor from the very earliest years of girlhood, she sought ways and means of helping them – to find food, to care for the sick, etc. Liberally educated, she qualified as a teacher with excellent grades, but was denied a position in the state school system because she refused to take an oath of allegiance to Napoleon III. When, shortly afterwards, she did become a teacher in a private school, her reputation as a teacher spread quickly. Students sat spellbound as she unearthed the deep meaning of learning for them. This job she eventually lost – the school proprietors found her habit of giving her clothes away to the needy too expensive for them to support.
 
On the Paris Barricades
But all this was a mere prelude to the work which made her a legend among the Paris workers. When the Paris Commune struck its magnificent blow at tyranny, Louise Michel became one of its leading figures. Tirelessly she worked among the masses – leading the Union of Women, organizing the nursing of the wounded Communards, taking her place with the fighters of the 61st Battalion of the National Guard, urging that all goods and property be made communal for the general use of all. When the Communards made their last stand in the cemetery of Montmarte, Louise Michel (the Red Virgin of Montmarte they called her) was there with them – refusing to leave while others were being slaughtered. Arrested, she was allowed to go home to her mother on the promise that she would return. Return she did – though her jailer had hoped she would break her promise. Her comrades were on trial, were being massacred by the hundreds. Given every opportunity to escape punishment, Louise refused treatment different from that given her brothers. (Not even her persecutors could help admiring the courage of this splendid woman.) And when after six months imprisonment she was brought to trial, she spat at the court:
“I do not wish to defend myself ... I belong entirely to the social revolution, and I accept full responsibility for everything I have done. Since it seems that every heart that beats for liberty has the right only to a lump of lead, I demand my share. If you let me live, I shall never cease to shout vengeance on you who have killed my brothers.”
The court sentenced her to life exile in the penal colony of New Caledonia. Hardly had she arrived, when she began to organize classes, and otherwise help the prisoners, often with great hardship to herself. After eight years spent in New Caledonia, she was released in the general amnesty of Communards in 1880.
 
‘Inciting to Murder’
Back in Paris, the bourgeoisie were willing to cater to the “old woman.” But Louise Michel hurled the insult back into their faces. She resumed her activity – establishing refuges for the politically persecuted, raising funds for relief of impoverished or imprisoned workingmen.
In 1883, the Paris workers clamored for action against the deepening horror of their misery. Louise Michel organized the hungry men and women of Paris and led them in a march to demand bread. Again she was arrested – for “inciting to violence and murder” – and sentenced to six years in jail.
But Louise Michel was as great a danger in jail, as out. The “riff-raff” (that’s what the bourgeois hounds called the hungry and homeless) spoke of her with bated breath. They were inspired to action by the very mention of her name. After three years in jail she was freed, though she at first refused to leave the jail until her fellow-prisoners who were no more guilty than she would be freed.
Thereafter, Louise Michel spent the greater part of her time touring France, lecturing. Her ideas were a compound of Marxian socialism and anarchism. “For myself I am not concerned with the differences, for, let me repeat, I side with all those who are attacking the damnable edifice of our old society: I side with all of them, whether their weapons are pick-axes, bombs, or fire.” Like the anarchists she misunderstood the nature of parliamentary activity, and consequently opposed it. Like the Marxists she rejected with contempt the individualism of the anarchists.
Louise Michel was in Marseilles on a lecture tour when, after a life devoted to the cause of human freedom, she died on January 10, 1905.
 

 Garrett: Mother Jones (23 May 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out Of The Past
Mother Jones
(May 1, 1830–Nov. 30, 1930)
(23 May 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 35, 23 May 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“You don’t need a vote to raise hell”, said Mother Jones. And hell she did raise wherever she went; and she went pretty near everywhere in the cause of the working class.
Once, in 1910, she was called before a Congressional investigating committee to account for her part in aiding Mexican revolutionists against the tyrant Diaz. The committee asked her her address. “I live in the United States”, she told them, “but I do not know exactly where. My address is wherever there is a fight against oppression. Sometimes I am in Washington, then in Pennsylvania, Arizona, Texas, Minnesota, Colorado. My address is like my shoes; it travels with me.” Mother Jones was then 80 years old.
She had been born in County Cork, Ireland. Her father, a worker and an advocate of Irish freedom, moved his family to this continent when Mary Harris Jones was six. For a time the family lived in Canada where Mary Harris received her schooling. Out of school, she taught in a Michigan convent for a while; then she opened a dress-making establishment in Chicago. In 1861, she married a member of the Iron Moulders Union. Ten years later her husband, and the four children she had borne, died in a yellow-fever epidemic.
 
Known to Every Worker
Mary Harris Jones, a woman of forty, came into contact with the Knights of Labor. She had never before been a member of a union. But the Knights of Labor inspired her to her life’s work. Thenceforth she sank her personal life completely into the trade union movement. Mary Harris Jones became Mother Jones to every worker in the country as she travelled from strike to strike, most often by invitation of union leaders, sometimes forcing her was in, pitching her picturesque vocabulary, her steady wit and her sense of drama against the bosses.
Essentially, Mother Jones was a revolutionary, though she herself probably never realized it. Theory wasn’t her strong point; frequently she made errors (e.g., supporting the Democratic party in 1916). But in her bitter denunciations of bossdom, her attacks on the state machinery, and in her militant methods of organizing, Mother Jones was a deep going revolutionist who hated capitalist oppression with her every fibre. Did the bosses get out an injunction against her – a piece of paper to be torn up. Did the bosses order her to leave the state – an order to be defied. Did the National Guard patrol a struck mine – a force to be ignored, and fought.
It made little difference to Mother Jones which union was running a strike – A.F.L., or I.W.W. She participated in both. For the most part, she worked among the miners; for many years she was officially employed by the United Mine Workers though she despised John Mitchell, president of the U.M.W.U., whom she considered insufficiently devoted to the interests of the workers. Often she quarrelled with union officialdom; sometimes she violated union policy.
But her presence was welcomed in any situation; for her real contributions were in the field. She could throw a community into strike action by a single speech; hence the worried look on sheriffs’ faces when Mother Jones came to town. In West Virginia, once, she spoke to a group of miners. At the end of the speech they implored her: “Organize us, Mother.” Which she did, while a union flunkey stood by and complained that she didn’t know the ritual, and that a charter hadn’t been paid for and received from the national office.
Hard-boiled, and also sentimental, Mother Jones believed in using the most spectacular and the most militant means to put an action across. Once she imported a group of crippled miners to New York. A other time, in the coal strike of 1902, she organized a brigade of miners’ wives, armed with mops and brooms. Another time, a group of women were arrested for strike activity. At her advice they brought their children to jail, sang all night, slept during the day; in a few days they were released – no one in town had been able to sleep.
 
Couldn’t Be Stopped
She worked in a cotton mill to get material against child labor which she abhorred to fury. She posed as a peddler to get information for the U.M.W.U., which led to the strike of 1903 in Colorado. With general causes, like women’s suffrage, she had no sympathy. Women, she said, had to get into the class struggle and fight there.
She was in Pittsburgh during the labor riot of 1877; in Chicago during the Haymarket affair of 1886; in Birmingham during the American Railway Union strike of 1894. Colorado deported her in 1903, and again in 1913. A military court sentenced her to twenty years for inciting to murder, during the 1912 miners’ strike; a senate committee set the verdict aside. In 1914 she presented to President Wilson the facts of the Ludlow massacre in which Rockefeller troops cold-bloodedly murdered the wives and children of striking miners. In 1915, she was in New York working for the garment workers’ and street car strikes. In 1919 she lent her abilities to the great Steel strike. In 1923, at the age of 93, she was still working – in the West Virginia coal fields.
Threatened time and again by thugs and police, Mother Jones never once quailed. The little old woman in the black bonnet who could outswear a trooper couldn’t be stopped. She did as she chose, and hurled defiance at those who would prevent her. “Lad”, she told a miner’s boy who had witnessed a thug threatening her “the great Standard Oil is certainly afraid of an old woman.” And with good reason. For that old woman represented the spirit and courage of the working class.
 

 Garrett: John Brown (9 May 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
John Brown
(May 9, 1800–Hanged, Dec. 2, 1859)
(9 May 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 31, 9 May 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“But when the scaffold bore its fruit, and the dead hero’s heart was cold, the pulse of humanity once more began to beat; the timid, the coward, the time-server, the helpless and the weak looked on the brave cold clay, and from a million throats a cry for vengeance was lifted to the stars. Men cried from the hustings to wake a sleeping world.” – (Clarence Darrow)
It all depends on your point of view. If you’re smug, conservative, satisfied with things as they are, John Brown was a bloodstained madman, if human liberty means more to you than anything else, if oppression and slavery make you want to go out and do something about it, then John Brown was a glorious figure who did the right thing in .the wrong way, but who nevertheless did do something!
“Old Brown of Osawatomie” was, it is true, possessed by a single idea. But that idea was: ownership of man by man is intolerable.
Born in Connecticut of a poor, farmer family which was ardently abolitionist, Brown lived under straightened circumstances all his life. Without formal schooling, he got a fairish education by reading. Never a success, he shifted from business to business. Several times he set up tanneries and sold them either at a profit or a loss. For a time he speculated in land. Such money as he made he used almost wholly for his cause! Never at any time did he have enough money for the proper care of his large family.
 
Striking Out for Emancipation
The conflagration of the Civil War was in the making. Two rival systems of economy – plantation or industrial – were staging the preliminary contests of a battle for power. Out in Kansas the pro-slavery and anti-slavery forces were disputing the issue of entering into the Union as a Slave or Free State, disputing by means of guerrilla warfare. Brown followed his sons out to Kansas where he led a group of free-staters organized by his sons in Osawatomie.
“Border Ruffians” from the neighboring state of Missouri periodically invaded Kansas and attacked Free State advocates. These “Border Ruffians” sacked the city of Lawrence. Brown avenged Lawrence by massacring a family of five slave-staters. In retaliation Osawatomie was set on fire.
Brown’s great plan was meanwhile maturing in his mind. Financial backing he secured from various individuals in the east, finally, in preparation for the decisive deed he called a convention of his men in Chatham, Canada. He explained his scheme to them: a base was to be established in the mountains of Virginia and Maryland to which slaves could flee. Others, white and Negro, would join the community to create a Free State under the Constitution. The exact details of achieving this end he did not work but until later.
As “Shubel Morgan” he returned to Kansas. Branded an outlaw, a reward was placed on his Head by the President of the United States. To escape being caught, Brown fled with his sons to Canada. In 1859 he returned to the States, and rented a farm five miles from Harpers Ferry to which his band of men came.
On October 16, he gave the order to proceed with the attack on Harpers Ferry which was to serve as a signal for Negro revolt. The immediate objective was the arsenal.
News of his attack spread like wild-fire. The local militia was quickly roused, and blocked his retreat into the mountains while Brown made a stand with his band and some prisoners in an engine house. By dawn the next day, Colonel Robert E. Lee arrived with his marines and attacked the engine house. Brown’s two sons were shot down at his side. Brown’s forces held out as long as they could.
When the marines succeeded in breaking through Brown’s fire, they pounced on him viciously. He who had spared his prisoners, perhaps even contributed to his defeat by his humaneness, was beaten into a bloody ball. Brown and those of his comrades who had neither been killed nor escaped were arrested. Scarcely pausing for breath the government rushed him to trial.
 
Immortalized on the Gallows
Throughout the trial, Brown lying in a cot maintained his dignity and defiance. He knew the sentence that was to be passed on him and he was ready: “I am worth more to die than to live.” Virginia’s Governor Wise commented: “He is a bundle of the best nerves I ever saw cut and thrust and bleeding and in bonds.”
Sentence was passed on November 2.
“Now if it is deemed necessary,” he told the court, “that I should forfeit my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood further with the blood of my children and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel and unjust enactments, I say, let it be done.”
Brown was led to the scaffold. As he approached he slipped his last written words into the hands of a guard:
“I John Brown am now quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land: will never be purged away; but with Blood. I have as I now think: vainly flattered myself that without very much bloodshed it might be done.”
Two years later very much more blood was indeed shed. For four years armies battled to decide questions of power, and in that conflict it was decided in law that chattel slavery was doomed.
Brown had found few friends for his exploits. Even those who stood against chattel slavery were horrified by his deeds – their spirit was alien to an understanding of a man completely possessed by a desire for freedom. A few, like the poet Emerson, did see his worth – saw in him a rare, “a pure idealist of artless goodness” such as history produces every so often to impel the movement of great events.
Brown went down to defeat – yes, that is true, but only in a limited sense. We would have chosen other means, organized differently, appealed less to God. But no thrust at freedom is wasted. John Brown may be “mouldrin’ in his grave” but his spirit goes marching on.
 

 Garrett: Gracchus Babeuf (18 April 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Gracchus Babeuf
(Nov. 23, 1760–Guillotined, April 27, 1797)
(18 April 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 25, 18 April 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

That great day in 1789 came. The aroused masses stormed the gates of the Bastille, and French feudalism, the hereditary right to expoit, was delivered the first of a series of deadly blows. The oppressed took heart; freedom was ahead. The French Revolution had begun.
François Noel Babeuf (he later changed his name to Gracchus after the ancient Roman rebel) turned to the revolution with all his energy. He had been employed up to then by nobles in asserting their feudal rights against the peasants from whom it had become increasingly difficult to exact feudal payments and obligations. And “in the dust of the manorial archives I discovered the horrible secrets of the usurpations of the nobility.”
The Revolution spoiled him, he wrote, and made him “unfit for any kind of employment” except politics. Holding various posts, he worked feverishly among the poor, championing their interests, and developing his own program for social emancipation.
 
For “Equality without Illusions”
The large property owners found him meddlesome; they tried to discredit him. Because throwing off “all hypocritical tactics,” he demanded “equality without illusions,” and not satisfied with the limited gains of the Revolution he hoped for “the socialisation of all the resources which can be infinitely multiplied and increased by means of a planned organization and by the wisely directed labor of all.”
Arrested in 1790 for his communist agitation, he was released through the intervention of Marat. Out of jail he continued to be “meddlesome, “and more so as the idea of the class struggle matured in his mind: There were two classes, he said: first, the “bloodsuckers of the twenty-four million ... who for centuries have been enjoying their laziness at the expense of our sweat and toil;” and second the worker who must “toil much and eat little or you won’t have any work and you won’t eat at all. That is the barbarous law of capital.” So great was his hatred of oppression that he was momentarily blinded to the great accomplishments of the Revolution, and of Robespierre, its leader, because the oppressors had not all been vanquished. That is why when on the ninth of Thermidor, revolutionary calendar month, the reaction sent Robespierre to the guillotine so that it might put an end to social upheaval and sit back and enjoy its bourgeois victories, Babeuf approved. But not for long. He saw his mistake in the black reaction that Thermidor brought.
The “good folk” wined and dined, and drank in the luxuries of economic conquest. The poor lived on bread rations, starved, and drank in the full misery of poverty under the new despotism. Babeuf’s daughter, aged seven, died of starvation. His two sons were so pinched with hunger that he could scarcely recognize them when he returned from work in the provinces.
In 1795, Babeuf merged his group of comrades, organized around a journal he had founded, The Tribune of the People, with a group of advanced Republicans to form tile Pantheon Club. The Club read newspapers (which were expensive in those days), handled members correspondence, and collected funds for poverty stricken radicals and to free political prisoners. Men like Darthe and Buonnarroti (to whose great book on the Society of the Equals we are indebted for much of this information) were far to the left; others were merely bourgeois humanitarians. As workers joined the Club, the bourgeois elements were submerged, the Club became more militant.
With laws and lies the Directory (which ruled France until Napoleon was crowned Emperor) sought to suppress the Babouvists.
Like every group of despots before and since they accused the revolutionary opposition with being in the pay of the enemy – in this case, the monarchists.
 
Insurrection by Force
Meanwhile Babeuf perfected his program.
Believing at first that power could be won peacefully, he gradually discarded that illusion, realized that the oppressed must effect their insurrection by force.
In the streets, the masses were restive. Sporadic outbreaks occurred here and there. In the cafes, they sang Babeuf’s song Dying of Hunger. They listened to his tirades against the bloodsuckers. “Conquer or Die,” he told them, in an open war between patrician and plebeian. His bourgeois friends quaked at his frenzy; they chided him with being indiscreet. Napoleon sent out a warrant for his arrest. Babeuf went into hiding. Those close to Babeuf banded together and published a new paper. The Society of Equals was organized. “The destitute,” he told them, “are the power on earth. They have the right to speak as masters to the governments that neglect them.” The rebels armed. The Secret Directory of the Society met. Finally, Babeuf read the Act of insurrection; the day for the rising was set in May 1796. They were to seize power and institute a “revolutionary and transitional power, constituted in such a way as to free the people from the natural enemies of equality and to endow it with the unity of will necessary for the adoption of republican institutions.”
 
“Last Episode” of the Revolution
Through secret agents the government learned of the plan. All the leading members of the Society of Equals were arrested. Riots occurred in demonstrations of solidarity with the arrested. Months later they were brought to trial. The prosecutor spun a vivid picture of atrocities committed by the defendants. The verdict had been decided on in advance. Babeuf and Darthe were sentenced to be executed; the others to exile. When the sentence was read, Darthe and Babeuf stabbed themselves. The knives were blunt; they lived through the night. The next day they were guillotined.
The “last episode” in the French Revolution had come to an end in the figure of the man who combined the aims of the French Revolution with the yet to be fulfilled aspirations of the modern proletariat. In his day, the proletariat was too young to put his ideas into victorious execution. But as it grew the proletariat absorbed his ideas; those of the first practical communist. Blanqui after him drew upon them, the Communards experimented with them, the Russian workers put them into actual operation.
“The French Revolution,” Babeuf had written, “is only the precursor of another, far greater revolution, which will be the last.”
 

 Garrett: Uriah S. Stephens (11 April 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Uriah S. Stephens
(Aug. 3, 1821–Feb. 13, 1882)
(11 April 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 23, 11 April 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Had it not been for the Panic of 1837, it is quite possible that Uriah S. Stephens would have completed his training for the ministry. As it was, he became a tailor instead; and, through being a tailor, a worker, he became a leader of American trade unionism, the founder of the Knights of Labor.
Like a good many trade unionists of his day, Stephens concerned himself with the general problems of working class welfare in addition to those of simple trade union interest. The trade union to Stephens was to be a lever for the execution of ideas which aimed at the revision of the social system along semi-socialistic lines. In fact, it has been claimed that Stephens was partly influenced by Marx, though there is no evidence to support the claim, either in facts or the specific nature of his ideas.
Dissatisfied with narrow craft organization, Stephens aimed at a brotherhood of all wage earners that would include all sexes, all creeds and all colors. This latter was of especial importance. Abolitionist sentiment was strong among the northern workers, but few unions were willing to accept Negroes as members – as is the case with many trade unions to this day.
 
Secrecy a Cardinal Principle
Building on the basis of the Garment Cutter’s Association of Philadelphia which he had helped organize in 1862, Stephens moved towards the construction of a labor organization modelled according to his aims. In 1869, the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor was formally founded.
Composed of only a few unions at its beginning, limited to the east, the Knights gradually extended over the continent, to the point where, the most powerful labor organization of its day, it numbered ¾ million members in 1886.
Secret ritual governed the activities of the organization at its inception. Names were never referred to publicly. Stephens for example signed his articles with five stars, and was so known in the organization. (The Knights were not the only labor organization which went in for secrecy during the 70’s. Workers turned to secrecy as a reaction to the drive of the bosses against all unions, marked by lockouts, disruption of unions and various kinds of discrimination against union men.
When the first national assembly of the Knights met in 1878, Stephens was still sufficiently powerful in the organization to write the principle of secrecy into the preamble.
“Open and public association having failed after a struggle of centuries to advance or protect the interest of labor,” read the preamble, “We have lawfully constituted this assembly,” and “in using this power of organized effort and cooperation, we but imitate the example of capital heretofore set in numberless instances.” However, “We mean no conflict with legitimate enterprise, no antagonism to necessary capital.” Those evils of the social order which were beyond correction by ordinary trade union effort were to be corrected by education and legislation, from which a cooperative commonwealth would eventually emerge.
 
Anti-Secrecy Faction Wins
Though Stephens had carried the day on secrecy at the first national assembly, the reaction against it mounted constantly. First, the Catholics, who made up a powerful section of the organized workers in the United States opposed secrecy as being in conflict with their religion. Second, the defeat of the railroad strikes of 1877 and the crushing of the Molly Maguires after the great mine strike actions of the middle 70’s turned the tide sharply against secrecy. A good many unionists feared they would be accused of criminal activities if they continued their secret organization.
In 1879, Stephens resigned as Grand Master Workman. He was succeeded to the leadership of the Knights by Terrence Powderly who as leader of the Catholic faction had been challenging Stephen’s leadership. The oath and secrecy were expunged from the principles of the Knights. A new preamble was written. This new preamble pointed to the necessity of checking wealth, which, unchecked, would lead to the pauperization of the working class.
Under Powderly, the Knights reached its zenith of influence. But at the very time that it reached its peak in membership numbers, it was already on the downgrade. Lack of militancy in the conduct of strikes, its failure to lead strikes when necessary, cut into the influence of the Knights. Workers turning to militant action, joined other and newer bodies. Then, with the organization of the American Federation of Labor, the Knights had to contend with a young and vigorous rival, and on a national scale.
Stephens completed his life almost entirely separated from the trade union movement. A pioneer in organizing American labor, the initiator of new methods of organization, he was nevertheless not the kind to catch the imagination as Powderly did after him. He didn’t flash across the country with the brilliance of his oratory or his writing. But in the creation of the Knights of Labor and the introduction of a new phase in labor organization, he did leave behind him an important record – written across a large page of American labor history.
 

 Garrett: Albert Parsons (25 April 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Albert Parsons
(June 24, 1848–Hanged, Nov. 11, 1887)
(25 April 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 27, 25 April 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

When the eight Haymarket Martyrs came to trial, the labor-hating press, judge and jury slobbered venomously about “foreigners” come to this country to destroy its good institutions. And true, seven of the eight had come to this country from abroad seeking a freedom they had been denied in their own countries. The eighth, however, was so American in ancestry that his accusers gagged with envy and frustration.
The first Parsons landed in New England in 1632. Various members of the family fought in the American Revolution; one of them was with Washington at Valley Forge; a great-grand uncle lost an arm at Bunker Hill.
Whether because or despite his heritage – Parsons became a labor agitator, so great a one that even had he not been martyred for his revolutionary beliefs, his name would still be revered by worker militants.
 
For Real Negro Emancipation
Born and reared in the South, he joined the Confederate Army as a youth of thirteen. It seemed the right thing to do – everybody was. But by the time the Civil War had ended, his neighbors, the Army Generals, and above all the Ku Klux Klan hated him for his opposition to slavery. And hated him bitterly, because he not only advocated Negro emancipation as provided for in the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments to the Constitution, but really and whole heartedly stood for Negro equality. In Texas, to which he had gone, partly to be under the protection of his brother, General Parsons, he stumped for execution of the reconstructionist measures taken by the national government to destroy the economic power of the plantation lords, relics of a long past era.
Parsons found work in Texas as a printer’s devil. Having learned the trade, he worked on different newspapers and even founded his own, the Waco Spectator. During the years 1870–1873 he held a series of minor government posts – as chief deputy collector, etc. and visited many Texas cities on government business. On one of these he met, and later married, a Spanish-Indian girl (who it is said was also of part Negro extraction). Lucy Parsons became a colleague who joined in her husband’s work for human emancipation.
Parsons moved to Chicago in 1873. Here he immediately joined Typographical Union No. 6, and shortly afterwards helped organize the first branch of the Knights of Labor in Chicago. Interested in economic problems, he read the literature of socialism, became an ardent socialist, joined the Social-Democratic Party which merged with other groups to found the Workingmen’s Party in 1876.
Now it was that Parsons “unconsciously” became a labor agitator. The great Railroad Strike of 1877 had begun. Parsons one day in July addressed the strikers, explaining to them the program and purposes of his party – to use the ballot for securing control of production. The press seethed with fury. The Times fired him. The chief of police advised him to get out of town: “You ought to know better than to come up here from Texas and incite the working people to insurrection ... Why the Board of Trade would as leave hang you to a lamp post as not.” Parsons, of course, did not leave town, except as his revolutionary work, to which he henceforth devoted all his time, demanded. Workers looked up to him; union-men were all for him. Parsons had become a popular orator, a leading socialist.
Unlike his German comrades, Parsons was an aggressive leader of the 8-hour movement. In 1879, for example, he accepted the post as secretary of the 8-Hour League of Chicago.
Discouraged with the results of the ballot box, he turned to direct trade union action as against political action. In 1881 he joined with the left wing of the Workingmen’s Party to found the American section of the anarchist International. He was also present in 1883 at the founding conference of the revived International Workingmen’s Association. When the International began publication of Alarm in 1884, Parsons was appointed editor.
The year 1886 opened, the “revolutionary year” it has been called. The 8-hour movement was at its height. Workers were in motion, strikes frequent. In Chicago, the McCormick workers were on strike. On May 3, the police staged a brutal assault on the strikers. The next day a mass meeting was called to protest. August Spies, a prominent anarchist, was scheduled to speak. Arrived at the place of meeting (Haymarket Square), Spies saw few workers were assembled. Moving to a smaller location, Spies opened the meeting. Lacking speakers he asked a worker to find Parsons. Parsons came to the meeting, spoke, and a rain having begun to fall left the street to go to a hall. One of the speakers continued. The police arrived. A bomb was thrown – by whom it was never discovered. One policeman was killed, some others wounded.
 
Eight Are Accused
Parsons and seven others, including Spies, were charged with the crime. With a warrant out for his arrest, Parsons went into hiding. But when the day of trial came, Parsons entered the court and gave himself up so that he might face trial with his comrades – for the crime of being a revolutionist. The verdict of the jury was foregone. Five were sentenced to death, three to imprisonment.
Each of the eight made a final speech to the court. The accused turned accusers. Parsons, ill, spoke eight hours on two days. Opening with a short poem describing the lot of the worker he traced the development and meaning of capitalism, and the revolutionary struggle against it. “I am an internationalist. My patriotism covers more than the boundary lilies of a single state; the world is my country, all mankind my countrymen.”
A gigantic mass agitation that spread all over the world failed to secure the freedom of’ the eight. Staunch, defiant they faced their end. A preacher came in to give Parsons the last rites. Parsons told him that “Preachers are all Pharisees ... And I don’t desire to have anything to do with them,”
Parsons was led to the scaffold. As the rope was placed around his neck he tried to speak. “O men of America, let the voice of the people be heard ...” The hangman cut the rope.
 

 Garrett: Eugene V. Debs (4 April 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Eugene V. Debs
(Nov. 5, 1855–Oct. 20, 1926)
(4 April 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 21, 4 April 1939, p. 3. [1]
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“I hate; I loathe; I despise Junkerdom. I have no earthly use for the Junkers of Germany, and not one particle more for the Junkers of the United States.”
Gene Debs was speaking. The day was June 16, 1918. The place, Canton, Ohio.
The United States had declared war upon Germany a few weeks earlier. The great majority of leading socialists, even those who had in April approved a Declaration by the Socialist Party convention against the war (the St. Louis Declaration) had turned avid war patriots. Charles Edward Russell, William Walling, and scores of others. The entire “peace” movement, had collapsed in an orgy of jingoism.
 
The Moral Courage to Stand Erect
Gene Debs rose that day in Canton to pillory the jailers, the bosses, the traitors who were hounding worker militants, and socialist fighters. His tall figure towering from the platform, his arm outstretched, his finger pointed accusingly at boss injustice, Gene Debs affirmed his solidarity with all the persecuted anti-war fighters. Bitterly he denounced the turncoats, and those who howled for working class blood. Passionately, he made his own sympathies known:
“They who are animated with the unconquerable spirit of the socialist revolution, they who have the moral courage to stand erect, to assert their convictions, to stand by them, to go to jail or to hell for them – they are writing their names in this crucial hour, they are writing their names in fadeless letters in the history of mankind.”
The government swooped down on him. The boss press was furious. The Terre Haute Tribune wrote that Debs was suspected of being “in a plan with the Trotsky group to spread Bolshevism in this country.”
Debs was arrested. Debs was tried. Debs was sentenced – to ten years imprisonment for the crime of speaking his mind. Wilson denied him an amnesty. And so Debs entered the jail on April 18, 1919. “I enter the prison doors a flaming revolutionist – my head is erect, my spirit untamed, and my soul unconquerable.” Later, Debs wrote his Prison Creed:
“While there is a lower class I am in it; While there is a criminal element I am of it; While there is a soul in prison I am not free.”
In 1921, the war-time hysteria abating, Hard ing released him, without restoration of his citizenship rights.
 
A Life Devoted to Socialism
Debs’ loyalty to the socialist cause in the face of war was the crowning act of a life richer in its devotion to the working-class than any other American. When Debs, the leader of American socialism, walked through the gates of the jail, he had behind him years of ceaseless socialist labor.
Born into a family of ten children, Debs had gone to work in his youth on the railroads.
Joining the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, he before long rose to the position of national secretary. Disgusted, however, with the conservative methods of the Brotherhood, realizing the need of new, more militant tactics, Debs quit the Brotherhood, and organized the American Railway Union. In April 1894 the A.R.U. won an important victory from the Great Northern Railway, after an eighteen day strike.
When shortly afterwards the Pullman workers struck, they turned to the A.R.U. for aid. The A.R.U. declared a boycott against the Pullman Company, and Debs lent his services to the leadership of the strike. A sweeping injunction was handed down by the courts against the strike; an injunction more severe in its provisions than any previously issued. President Cleveland sent federal troops to smash the strike. Troops and injunction together did smash the strike. Debs, who had defied injunction, was tried for contempt of court, and sent to jail for six months.
In jail he read; in jail he became a socialist. Debs, leaving the jail, was no longer a mere trade unionist. Debs was a socialist; he understood the need of working class political action. He worked at first with Daniel De Leon, and then in 1904 he helped found the Socialist Party.
Five times, Debs ran as socialist candidate for President. His “Red Special,” in the campaign of 1908, became famous as he toured the country, thundering his denunciations of capitalism. In 1912, he polled 901,062 votes. In 1920, while in jail, he polled 919,799 votes.
Hardly a worker, conscious of his being a worker, failed to go to hear Debs. Debs was the idol of the American worker – in Terre Haute, Indiana, and in New York. Mothers, fathers, children, came to hear Debs not only because he was a great orator; they came also because they loved this relentless fighter in freedom’s cause.
 
A Citizen of the World
Great events pressed. And Debs did not try to avoid them. From his jail cell, Debs criticized the S.P. for watering its revolutionary aims. From his cell, he defended the Russian revolution from attack despite incidental criticisms he himself made. “Behold,” he had written of the Revolution, “its sublime majesty, catch its holy spirit and join in its thrilling, inspiring appeal to the oppressed of every land to use their might, shake off their fetters and proclaim their freedom to the world.”
In the history of American labor, Debs stands as its greatest figure. He was great because he did not have the feeling of nation; he was a worker, a socialist, and only that. While “socialists” voted war credits in Germany, and others turned to the selling of liberty bonds – for American or German, or French “democracy,” Debs cried out: “I have no country to fight for; my country is the earth; I am a citizen of the world.”

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version Debs’ year of birth is erroneously given as 1885.
 

 Garrett: Ira Steward (7 March 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Ira Steward
(March 10, 1831–March 13, 1883)
(7 March 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 13, 7 March 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Connecticut-born, Ira Steward at the age of nineteen went to work as an apprentice machinist, working twelve hours a day. One year later his bosses fired him for his peculiar views, to wit: twelve hours a day was too long a working day.
What is more, Ira Steward was outspoken about his views to which he added the additional “peculiar” twist that eight hours a day was more than enough for a working man. And that, in the 1840’s and 50’s, was indeed a “peculiar” proposal.
 
Steward and the 8-Hour Movement Were One
To the cause of the shorter work-day, Steward devoted the rest of his life. Indefatigably, he pressed the shorter day, sparing himself not at all, with the result that the movement in the United States for the ten and eight hour days was, properly speaking, one and the same with his life and activity. During his lifetime he served as organizer and president of the Boston 8-Hour League and the National 10-Hour League, as well as active participant in other labor organizations.
A delegate to the convention of the International Union of Machinists and Blacksmiths which met in Boston in 1863, he proposed and obtained the passage of a resolution calling for the 8-hour day – the first such resolution adopted in the United States by an important labor body. Thereafter, constantly agitating, speaking, propagandizing, his proposals secured an ever widening basis of support.
It was largely through his efforts that the first effective 10-hour law was passed in Massachusetts. And later, when the 10-hour day had by no means yet become established practice even formally, it was through the tireless efforts of Steward and his co-workers that the 8-hour day was accepted by various localities and industries, if only in limited application.
 
Shorter Work-Day Not An End in Itself
Eventually, the fight for the shorter work-day became part of the program of every trade union and social reformer. With Steward, however, the shorter work-day was not an end in itself. For him it was the focal point of an attack on the whole system of capitalist society. Shorter hours would result in higher wages; higher wages would compel improvements in technique, and would give the workers an ever increasing share in the national income of the country; the progressive reduction of working time would allow for the absorption of all unemployed workers, thus keeping wage levels high; and in time the workers would be in a position to buy out the capitalists and institute socialism.
Today, in the light of working class experience and the teachings of the great socialist leaders, Steward’s program was, to say the least, inadequate. As a program for overthrowing capitalism it bordered on the ridiculous; it nowhere fully considered the process of capitalist overthrow, and certainly overlooked the detail of boss unwillingness to yield power.
But, in a general and very one-sided way, it did nevertheless posit the absolute necessity for the working class to fight for better economic conditions and indicated the trend of capitalist society towards concentrated production and improvement of technique – essential economic bases for the future socialist society. These are now accepted facts; in those days they were novel and significant. Especially so, since at the time he worked, it was a popular opinion among many of the so-called socialists that it was futile to ask for higher wages because these could not be won under capitalism.
 
Urged Organization of the Unskilled
Beyond his specific philosophy of social change, Steward’s activities contributed considerably to the early inculcation of socialist ideas in the American labor movement. Hardly a pioneer of American socialism in the strictest sense (he had been preceded by Joseph Weydemeier and scores of others), many “firsts” are associated with his name. His work was perhaps more fruitful than that of most in establishing the identity of labor’s economic struggles with the ultimate socialist goal.
In a day when the trend of labor organization was directed towards the skilled workers, he urged the organization of the unskilled. With members of the First (Marx’s) International in the United States he founded in 1876 the International Union of Labor – the first really sizeable move towards organizing the unskilled workers.
Steward’s writings were few. Works that he planned remained unfinished at the time of his death. But in his speeches, in the articles he wrote for various journals, above all in the movements he created or helped build, we have a record of an important period in American labor’s fight for better conditions and emancipation – one in which Ira Steward served as leader and teacher.
 

 Garrett: James Connolly (28 March 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
James Connolly
(June 5, 1870–executed May 12, 1916)
(28 March 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 19, 28 March 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


The newspapers report the resurgence of the Irish independence movement. “Up the Rebels,” is again heard in the streets of Dublin – this time directed against a one-time rebel, Eamon De Valera, as well as the British tyrants. The anniversary of Red Easter Week is only a few weeks away.
* * *
Jim Connolly was once asked at a lecture how it was that he knew so much about revolutionary and military matters. “You forget,” he replied, “that revolution is my business.”
And that it was. For though he worked at any number of trades in Ireland and in this country – as baker, shoemaker, tiler, machinist, linotyper, etc. – Jim Connolly was primarily a revolutionist, in the words of his biographer, Desmond Ryan, the “first builder of an insurgent barricade in war-wrecked Europe.”
 
Irish Question Is a Social Question
Himself a worker, and the son of a worker, Connolly sought to free the movement for Ireland’s freedom from the petty-bourgeois and nationalist elements who dominated it at the time; he viewed with distrust the official nationalist leaders who had, he said, “bowed the knee to Baal.”
A student of Marxism, and proud to acknowledge that, he insisted that “only the Irish working class remains as the incorruptible inheritors of the fight for freedom in Ireland.” For “As we have again and again pointed out, the Irish question is a social question, the whole agelong fight of the Irish people against their oppressors resolves itself in the last analysis into a fight for the mastery of the means of life, the sources of production.” His great book, Labor in Irish History, is based on that thesis.
Back in the 90’s when Connolly first began his socialist work, the nationalist movement was in pretty bad shape. The British, riding the wave of imperialist prosperity, tossed the Irish a few crumbs and devitalized the movement for liberation into a mere plea for Home Rule. (Connolly was especially bitter against the Home Rulers.) Such revolutionary work as was being done, was done secretively. Connolly broke through this “ridiculous secrecy,” and brought the socialist movement into the open. In 1896 he founded the Irish Socialist Republican Party, and became editor of its paper, the Worker’s Republic. (The paper bore on its masthead this legend: “The great appear great only because we are on our knees, let us arise!”)
Emigrating to the United States in 1903, he immediately enrolled in the trade union and socialist movements of this country. An industrial unionist all his life, he became in America one of the earliest organizers of the I.W.W. For a time he was a member of the National Executive Committee of the Socialist Labor Party. Disagreeing with Daniel De Leon, leader of the S.L.P., over some questions of policy, he joined the newly formed Socialist Party, for which he worked as a national organizer.
 
England’s Crisis – Ireland’s Opportunity
Returning to Ireland in 1913, he arrived at the very moment when the great strike battle, led by the Irish Transport and General Workers Union, against Dublin’s united bosses was getting under way. 20,000 workers fought for six months to assert their right to join a union. Jim Larkin, a striking figure and orator, was the best-known leader of the strike. Connolly worked as Larkin’s right-hand man.
Connolly judged crises according to their revolutionary possibilities. In England’s war crisis, he saw revolutionary Ireland’s opportunity. Realizing that collaboration of all the independence movements was absolutely vital, Connolly united, in preparation for action, the I.T.G.W.U., the Socialists, the Citizen’s Army the Sinn Feiners, and the Republican Volunteers.
Both sides mobilized. April was stormy with preparations and preliminary skirmishes. Finally, the British moved in to disarm the Volunteers and the Citizen’s Army. Connolly, who, as the most popular and undoubtedly most able person, had been appointed Commander-in-Chief of the revolutionary forces, gave the order for the rising on April 23. The petty-bourgeois leaders of the Volunteers rescinded the order, but the rising went on – their cowardice was too late. The “Provisional Government of an Independent Irish Republic” was proclaimed.
By the morning of April 24, virtually every important point of Dublin was in the hands of the rebels, so carefully had Connolly laid his plans. Facing the ruthless bombardment of British artillery which destroyed the center of the city, the rebels nevertheless fought fiercely for a week with inferior weapons. The uprising was crushed, and the democratic British immediately imposed a bloody reign of White Terror.
 
Ours ... Fighting and Hoping
The moment may not have been fully ripe for revolutionary action. But the valiant action led by Connolly was by no means an ill-considered, valueless stroke. Like the Russian 1905, it was a preliminary battle, preparatory to the final struggle. Weak-kneed traitors, and “I-Told-You-So” cowards can dismiss Red Easter as an adventuristic putsch; but in the words of Lenin, “those who can term such a rising a putsch are either the worst kind of reactionaries or hopeless doctrinaires, incapable of imagining the social revolution as a living phenomenon.”
Connolly was held prisoner in Kilmainham Jail (Eamon De Valera was privileged to be there with him). On May 12, wounded, carried out on a chair, “fighting and hoping” (he always ended his letters thus), courageous beyond flinching, he faced a British firing squad.
 

 Garrett: The Communards (14 March 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
The Communards
(March 18, 1871–May 28, 1871)
(14 March 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 15, 14 March 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


They “stormed heaven.” They charged the gates of boss-class security. They proved the strength and the solidarity of the oppressed. They lived for ten weeks as conquering, self-disciplined proletarians, organizers of their own society. And they died, thousands upon thousands of never-to-be-forgotten martyrs in freedom’s cause.
Who were they? Bakers, cobblers, teachers – radical intellectuals, and proletarians of all trades. A few of them are known by name: the clerk Jourde who carefully guarded the finances of the Commune; the German Marxist Leo Franckel who as head of the Commission of Labor and Exchange was responsible for the propagation of socialist ideas; Delescluze, who was Civil Delegate for War; Louise Michel who organized and led the revolutionary women. These and some others are known. But the great, great majority are known only as anonymous fighters for liberty who struck the first staggering blow at capitalism, who sought to build a society of equality and freedom, and whose blood spattered the barricaded streets of Paris.
 
Raise the Red Flag of the Commune
For months they had withstood the Prussian siege of Paris. (The Franco-Prussian War of 1870 was drawing to a close.) Lacking faith in the capitalist ministers who were preparing capitulation to Bismarck, they had placed the defense of Paris in their own citizens’ army, the National Guard.
Food was short; want was great. They had begun to demand that government power be transferred to them; revolutionary committees sprang up in all sections.
All they hated was epitomized in the head of the capitalist republic that had been proclaimed some few months before: Thiers, “that monstrous gnome ... the most consummate intellectual expression of their (the bourgeoisie’s) class corruption” (in the words of Karl Marx). And when Thiers, who had not dared enter Paris for weeks, organized a raid in the early morning hours of March 18 to seize the arms held by the National Guard, all Paris rushed to the defense. Barricades were thrown up quickly. Soldiers sent to attack the barricaded workers, fraternized instead. The red flag of the Commune was that day raised.
 
Begin the Work of Socialism
The Communards were improperly organized. They had no group of leaders with a clear program of what to do, no party. They committed mistake after mistake: they allowed the Bank of France to continue unmolested: they did not expropriate the property of the financiers and industrialists; they failed above all to make a clean sweep of the state machinery.
But they did prove the ability of the working class to take the reins of society, an ability which was again to be proved by the Russian workers, and which will some day soon be again tested in France. Crime, murder virtually disappeared; the motives of inequality and injustice gone, crime ceased. Provisions and food were parcelled out to all.
Night-work in bakeries stopped; illegal traffic in bread was punished. A moratorium on rent was declared. Shops abandoned by their owners were to be taken over “by the cooperative association of the workers employed in them.” Reorganization of the disorganized and undemocratic school system was begun. An eight-hour day for all workers was the goal. In the arms factory, the workers had a ten-hour day, but the director, foreman, and other officials were all elected by the workers; a factory council met every evening to discuss the conditions and work in the shop. And much else – some actually put into effect, others aimed at.
Towards the end of May, the Versaillese, the army of the capitalist state officials, began a concerted attack on Paris. For seven days, from May 21 to May 28, the fiercest fighting raged. The resistance of the Commune finally cracked. The Versaillese swooped down on Paris and massacred the defeated Communards. Some thirty thousand were shot down in cold blood. Those who were allowed to live were exiled to fever-ridden penal colonies, or locked for years in dungeon cells.
Throughout the Commune, the capitalist agents and press had howled about the “terror” of the Commune. Actually, the Commune had sinned in the reverse respect. The Commune was over-tolerant to its enemies, only in its last few days did it try seriously to root out the traitors in its midst. Far from being cruel to private property owners inside Paris, it erred mortally by being over-considerate of the parasites. Yet, no sooner had the Communards been vanquished than the atrocity-story-tellers unleashed an unrestrained ferocity and bestiality against the Communards.
 
Harbinger of a New Society
In their mistakes and failures as well as in their victories the great teachers of socialism, Marx, Engels, Lenin, saw lessons to be learned – how the working class must organize in a revolutionary party, how the proletariat can only succeed if guided by a consistent socialist program, how the workers must completely destroy the state machinery of the bosses, and substitute their own.
“Working-men’s Paris, with its Commune, will be forever celebrated as the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are enshrined in the great heart of the working class. Its exterminators history has already nailed to that eternal pillory from which all the prayers of their priests will not avail to redeem them.” (Karl Marx.)
 

 Garrett: Louis Auguste Blanqui (21 March 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Louis Auguste Blanqui
(Feb. 1, 1805–Jan. 1, 1881)
(21 March 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 17, 21 March 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


“For the realization of this emancipation of the workers, this abolition of the classes, aim of the social revolution it is necessary that the bourgeoisie be deprived of its political privilege by which it maintains all its others. It is necessary during a period of revolutionary dictatorship for the proletariat to employ for its freeing the power till then used against it, to turn against its adversary the very weapons that till then have held it down in oppression.”
Nineteenth century France was chock full of people who had worked up beautiful schemes for the betterment of society. Some of them added to their pictures of a future perfect world a really vivid and potent criticism of contemporary society, thus answering in part the demands of the masses. Virtually all of these schemers, Utopians, were found wanting when events, the successive series of revolutions which culminated in the Paris Commune, actually required leadership and program.
The truth was that “organizers” of a future world had no real idea of how their own world operated, or what to do about it; they were not, in short, revolutionists. All, that is, except a few, and of these few, one in particular. That one was Louis Auguste Blanqui who was in every sense of the word a real revolutionist, and who paid for his convictions and activities with forty years imprisonment.
 
Masters Held Him Prisoner
Blanqui was born into a family whose members had been active participants in the great French Revolution of 1789. Before he was twenty, he joined a conspirative insurrectionist society as a member of which he participated in the Revolution of 1830. From then on, he was a prominent and leading figure in every revolutionary action of the French masses up to the day of his death.
Sentenced to death after an abortive attempt at insurrection in 1839, his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. Released shortly before the Revolution of 1848 (because his jailers expected him to die), he advocated a more socialist policy in the conduct of the revolution, and criticized the coalition government that was then established. Arrested again, he was interned until 1859. Released, he began to organize secretly, and built up a secret armed force of 4,000 men.
On the eve of the Paris Commune, on March 17, Thiers who was preparing to seize the arms of the Paris National Guard, had him arrested. Though kept under lock and key by Thiers, who knew his enemy well, Blanqui was elected to a
seat in the Commune. Again sentenced to a life term, he was freed in 1879 after a great agitation for his release which ended in his election as a deputy. For the remaining two years of his life, he edited a journal, Neither God, Nor Master!
 
Advocated Proletarian Dictatorship
There was more however to Blanqui than singleness of purpose, loyalty and self-sacrifice. Few men have ever been more resolutely devoted to the cause of the oppressed than was Blanqui who never for a moment wavered despite persecution and hounding. But Blanqui contributed more to the working-class than an incorruptible spirit and a body wracked by revolutionary labors. Blanqui brought to French socialism the life-blood of the class struggle. In that respect he may be said to have built the bridge between the Utopian philosophers (“political reactionaries,” he called them) and the fighting Marxists.
Most important, however, is that he was among the first to advocate in action the dictatorship of the proletariat. Unfortunately, a stigma has been attached to his theories which belittles the tremendous value they had in the middle of the last century. It was his view that the workers and declassed bourgeoisie had to band together, arm themselves, seize power, disarm the bourgeoisie and establish a working class dictatorship. Inasmuch as communism cannot be introduced by decree (he overlooked his own warning on this score), it would be the duty of the new government to educate the masses to communism. The actual seizure of power need not involve the bulk of the masses; it would be accomplished by a conscious minority that would win over the majority after the transfer of power had been accomplished.
 
Lifted Utopian Fog
It is possible to explain at great length the flaws in this theory. Today we know that the great majority of the working class must be won over to revolutionary action by a well-conceived plan of action. Without the support of the masses, the revolution cannot possibly succeed, or defend itself from attack.
But his views in the context of their generation helped lift the fogginess of Utopian hopes from the working class movement. Like Marx he was primarily concerned with the world around him, and how to destroy it, and not with the world to be.
And if today with the greater precision and understanding of Marxism, we can give a more complete and adequate answer to the problem of how to seize power, it is nevertheless well-worth pausing for a moment to pay tribute to the contributions and devotion of a truly great proletarian leader, Auguste Blanqui.
 

 Garrett: Frank Little (Lynched, August 1, 1917) (15 August 1917)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Frank Little
(Lynched, August 1, 1917)
(15 August 1917)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 59, 15 August 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


When they cut Frank Little’s bullet-riddled body from the railroad trestle where a gang of masked vigilantes had hanged him some five hours earlier, they found a note pinned to his undershirt.



Others Take Notice
First and Last Warning
3-7-777        LDCSSWT



The vigilantes were out to do the bidding of the Copper Trust. But the murder of Little no more scared the other strike militants away from their posts than had the warnings which they had sent Little before the lynching. Men like Little don’t scare. The newspaper even reported that “So far as is known, he made no outcry.” He was made of that kind of mettle found often in worker-militants who live their lives wholly in the cause of the working class.
 
A One Hundred Percent Worker
Little was “Half Indian, half white, all I.W.W.” Not that the first half was particularly important, except as it answered the patriots who howled about “Germans.” Born of a Cherokee Indian mother and a Quaker father, Little was far less devoted to his simon-pure American birth than to his life’s work. There he was a one-hundred-percenter – a Wobbly, a labor organizer whose life reads like a record of major strike battles. And in that work Little bridged the “difference” between “Hunky”, “wop”, Swede and American by the one vital aim in life, labor solidarity for human emancipation.
What he did when he was ten years old, what ambitions he had as fifteen aren’t recorded. Little probably never thought it important enough to mention these details to anyone. But in 1906 he did join the fighting group of unionists organized in the Industrial Workers of the World. And that fact is recorded. From then on it was this strike, that campaign, first as a rank and filer and then, for the last four years of bis life, as a member of the Executive Board of the I.W.W.
For seven years he worked in Fresno, Calif. There, in 1910, he led a free speech fight. Jailed, he refused to work on the rock pile and his jailers threw him into a dark cell, fed him only on bread and water. In 1916, he was on the Mesaba Iron Range, Minnesota, during the great strike battle led by the I.W.W. That same year he was down in Arizona for the mine strikes which were rapidly spreading from state to state.
As the war hysteria assumed vaster proportions, a reign of terror was loosed against strikers, labor militants in general, and anyone who could be identified with them. The copper and other mine barons saw to that. Raids were frequent and widespread. The Bisbee Deportation instanced the full viciousness of the boss offensive against labor. [1]
 
We Carry His Flag
Shortly after the Bisbee Deportation, Little left Arizona for Butte, Montana, to lend a hand in the mine strike. Local vigilantes acting under orders from the company lords sent several warnings to Little, William Dunne, and other strike leaders, telling them to clear out. The warnings were ignored. Men like Little aren’t easily intimidated..
At three in the morning of August 1, a band of masked men forced their way into the Finnish Lodging house where Little was staying. They broke into his room, dragged him out without his crutches (he had shortly before broken his leg), and carried him by car to a railroad trestle outside of town where they hanged him.
The state flunkies who found his body five hours later, “regretted” the incident, the attorney general called it “unfortunate” and the Butte City Council, promising an investigation, offered a reward for the capture of the criminals. Needless to say these were never apprehended. The I.W.W. offered evidence establishing the identity of five of the masked men. These proofs were ignored while the flunkies pursued their “investigation” and then quietly dropped the whole matter.
Little went to his death without a whimper. He had worked for the working-class. He died on the line of duty. “The red flag he dropped, a million will carry on.”

Footnote
1. The Bisbee Deportation, July 1916, ranks as one of the most brutal outrages perpetrated in the history of American anti-labor violence. On June 26, a strike was called in Warren, Arizona. The sheriff of the county, a henchman of the Copper Trust, asked for federal troops. These were denied by the Federal Army officer who investigated and found the situation altogether peaceful. Not to be swayed from carrying out his obligations to his mine owning overlords. The sheriff organized a band of 2,000 men. This band descended on the miners’ camp in Bisbee, rounded up 1,186 men, herded them into cattle cars, and dumped them at Hermanas in the desert where for two days the deportees had no food, no water, no shelter. A nation-wide scandal resulted and the men were transported to Columbus, New Mexico, where they were taken care of by the National Government until September. The President’s commission, headed by Felix Frankfurter, was duly horrified, deplored the incident, and said that something ought to be done. Nothing was.
 

 Garrett: Sacco and Vanzetti (Executed, August 23, 1927) (22 August 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past
Sacco and Vanzetti
(Executed, August 23, 1927)
(22 August 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 61, 22 August 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Nicola Sacco (born in Italy, April 22, 1891) was a shoemaker. For years he worked in a Milford, Mass., shoe factory as a skilled edger. Bartolomeo Vanzetti (born in Italy, June 11, 1888) was a worker who had tried his hands at many trades. For years he peddled fish in Plymouth, Mass. Sacco and Vanzetti were no different from any other worker – except in one thing. Sacco and Vanzetti were anarchists. They hated tyranny and oppression. They dreamed of a society in which man would be free. They paid for that crime with their lives.
The year 1920 was the year of the Palmer raids, of the post-war hysteria. On April 20th of that year a paymaster was held up and killed in Braintree, Mass. Sacco and Vanzetti were nowhere near the scene of the killing. There wasn’t a shred of tangible evidence to connect them with the crime. But they were anarchists – and so they were arrested and tried before a judge (Webster Thayer) who publicly bragged that he’d burn the damn anarchists. Sacco and Vanzetti were found guilty and sentenced to death. The Massachusetts courts chalked up another triumph for boss justice.
 
A Seven-Year Fight
Appeals, mass action stayed execution of the sentence for seven years. During those years, the wave of protest swelled higher as added evidence confirmed their innocence, pointed the guilt in fact at a gang of professional thieves. From Shanghai to Boston workers demonstrated. Bourgeois liberals (Felix Frankfurter and others) declared the trial a frame-up. In Paris, barricades were erected. A real united front of labor fought for the release of Sacco and Vanzetti. Union Square was many times packed as labor leaders of differing political viewpoints, James P. Cannon, Carlo Tresca, etc., demanded freedom for Sacco and Vanzetti.
But an “impartial” investigating committee of prominent “liberals” appointed by Governor Fuller “weighed” the evidence, ignored all the facts clearing Sacco and Vanzetti and proving the case a frame-up and confirmed their “guilt”. Massachusetts justice had to have its toll. Sacco and Vanzetti had to die. That they did – with the cry “Long live anarchy!” on their lips.
* * *
How better recite the lives of those two great martyrs than in the unmatchable words of one of them, Vanzetti, from his address to the court before sentence was pronounced, and from his final statement to the court:
“Everybody that knows these two arms knows very well that I do not need to go into the streets and kill a man to take money. I can live by my two hands and live well. But besides that, I can live even without work with my hands for other people. I have had plenty of chance to live independently and to live what the world conceives to be a higher life than to gain our bread with the sweat of our brow.
“My father in Italy is in good condition. I could have come back in Italy and he would have welcomed me every time with open arms. Even if I come back with not a cent in my pocket, my father could have give me a position, not to work but to make business, or to oversee upon the land that he owns ...
“Now, I should say that I am not only innocent of all these things, not only have I never committed a real crime in my life – though some sins but not crimes – not only have I struggled all my life to eliminate crimes, the crimes that the official and the moral law condemns, but also the crime that the moral law and the official law sanction and sanctify – the exploitation of man by the man, and if there is a reason why I am here as a guilty man, if there is a reason why you in a few minutes can doom me, it is this reason and none else ...
“Our Career and Our Triumph”
“I have talk a great deal of myself but I even forgot to name Sacco. Sacco too is a worker from his boyhood, a skilled worker lover of work, with a good job and pay, a bank account, a good and lovely wife, two beautiful children, and a neat little home at the verge of a wood, near a brook. Sacco is a heart, a faith, a character, a man; a man lover of nature and of mankind. A man who gave all, who sacrifice all to the cause of Liberty and to his love for mankind; money, rest, mundane ambitions, his own wife, his children, himself and his own life. Sacco has never dreamt to steal, never to assassinate. He and I have never brought a morsel of bread to our mouths, from our childhood to to-day – which has not been gained by the sweat of our brows. Never. His people also are in good position and of good reputation.
“Oh, yes, I may be more witful, as some have put it, I am a better babbler than he is, but many, many times in hearing his heartful voice ringing a faith sublime, in considering his supreme sacrifice, remembering his heroism I felt small small at the presence of his greatness and found myself compelled to fight back from my eyes the tears, and quanch my heart trobling to my throat to not weep before him – this man called thief and assassin and doomed. But Sacco’s name will live in the hearts of the people and in their gratitude when Katzman’s and your bones will be dispersed by time, when your name, his name, your laws, institutions, and your false god are but a dim rememoring of a cursed past in which man was wolf to the man.
“If it had not been for this thing, I might have lived out my life talking at street corners to scorning men, I might have died, unmarked, unknown, a failure. Now we are not a failure. This is our career, and our triumph. Never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance, for justice, for man’s understanding as now we do by accident. Our words – our lives – pains – nothing! The taking of our lives – lives of a good shoemaker and a poor fish-peddler – all! That last moment belongs to us – that agony is our triumph.”
 

s Passos: Joe Hill (Executed Nov. 19, 1915) (1 August 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past

John Dos Passos
Joe Hill
(Executed Nov. 19, 1915)
(1 August 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 55, 1 August 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Joe Hill wasn’t the sort of man who left much of a record of his life – what he had done this year, where he had gone the next. All he left was a monument of song known and sung by every worker-militant. That and the memory of a courageous working-class fighter who stood his ground up to the very last moment. What is known of Joe Hill’s life, John Dos Passos has put down in the magnificent portrait we reprint here [1]:
* * *
A young Swede named Hilstrom went to sea, got himself calloused hands on sailing ships and tramps, learned English in the focastle of the steamers that make the run from Stockholm to Hull, dreamed the Swede’s dream of the west; when he got to America they gave him a job polishing cuspidors in a Bowery saloon.
He moved west to Chicago and worked in a machineshop.
He moved west and followed the harvest, hung around the employment agencies, paid out many a dollar for a job in a construction camp, walked out many a mile when the grub was too bum, or the boss too tough, or too many bugs in the bunkhouse; read Marx and the I.W.W. Preamble and dreamed about forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old.
He was in California for the S.P. strike (Casey Jones, two locomotives, Casey Jones), used to play the concertina outside the bunk-house door, after supper, evenings (Long-haired preachers come out every night), had a knack for setting rebel words to tunes (And the union makes us strong).
Along the coast in cookshacks, flophouses, jungles wobblies, hoboes, bindlestiffs began singing Joe Hill’s songs. They sang ’em in the county jails of the States of Washington, Oregon, California, Nevada, Idaho, in the bullpens in Montana and Arizona, sang ’em in Walla Wallah-San Quentin and Leavenworth, forming the structure of the new society within the lails of the old.
At Bingham, Utah, Joe Hill organized the workers of the Utah Construction Company in the One Big Union, won a new wagescale, shorter hours, better grub. (The angel Moroni didn’t like labor organizers any better than the Southern Pacific did.)
The angel Moroni moved the hearts of the Mormons to decide it was Joe shot a grocer named Morrison. The Swedish consul and President Wilson tried to get him a new trial but the angel Moroni moved the hearts of the supreme court of the State of Utah to sustain the verdict of guilty. He was in jail a year, great on making up songs. In November 1915 he was stood up against the wall in the jail yard in Salt Lake City.
“Don’t mourn for me, organize,” was the last word he sent out to the workingstiffs of the I.W.W. Joe Hill stood up against the wall of the jail yard, looked into the muzzles of the guns and gave the word to fire.
They put him in a black suit, put a stiff collar around his neck and a bow tie, shipped him to Chicago for a bangup funeral, and photographed his handsome stony mask staring into the future.
The first day of May they scattered his ashes to the wind.

Footnote
1. From 1919 by John Dos Passos, pp. 421–423.
 

ohnson: Thorstein Veblen (July 30, 1857-August 3, 1929) (8 August 1939)






Garrett Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Emanuel Garrett
Men and Women of Labor
Out of the Past

Bruno Johnson
Thorstein Veblen
(July 30, 1857–August 3, 1929)
(8 August 1939)
 

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 57, 8 August 1939, p. 3. [1]
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Thorstein Veblen, a radical intellectual who stood aloof from the class struggle, was yet the sarcastic author of some of the most effective attacks on the profit system and perhaps America’s most original thinker in his generation.
Born on a Wisconsin farm, of Norwegian immigrant parents, Veblen spent most of his life, except when unemployed and living off the old folks, in colleges, studying, teaching, writing. The college authorities never liked to have him around, because they thought his ideas as well as his life not respectable, though he brought a certain fame to the college. Most of his students didn’t like him because they didn’t understand him. The “public” never knew whether his books were serious or not.
Veblen’s books, however, were his real contribution to the labor movement. In a pedantic tone, using six long Latinized words instead of one short one, he solemnly ridiculed the stuffed shirts of America, the business men, so skillfully that they never got the point. The implications of every one of his books were revolutionary, but they remained only sarcastic implications.
A careful student of Marx, Veblen did much to explode the criticisms of bourgeois economists. He showed that the labor theory of value, so mightily belabored by the critics, was self-evident as expressed by Marx. His The Socialist Economics of Karl Marx, is a brilliant outline of Capital. But Veblen rejected the law of capitalist accumulation because, writing in 1906, he could not see what follows from that law, the constant growth of the “reserve army of labor” (the unemployed) and the increasing misery of the workers. Had he written in 1939, so honest an observer could not have failed to see the predictions borne out. Veblen made mincemeat of the “Marxist” revisionists like Bernstein, but he seemed at this time not to have read the work of Lenin or Luxemburg.
 
Veblen’s System Fragmentary
Veblen wrote no book that contains his whole system of thought. The reader has to pick it up from side remarks and sly comments. But from these remarks, in such books as The Instinct of Workmanship, The Theory of Business Enterprise, and Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution, one can see the outline: the common man, the worker, works for perfection. But the business man, who is interested not in industrial production but in profits, practises a “conscientious withdrawal of productive efficiency” (Veblenese for sabotage) which kills the “instinct of workmanship”.
The higher learning in America is managed for the exclusive benefit of the business men; law and politics are mere cloaks for the “predatory” interests; patriotism and business, useless to the whole community, are the chief barriers to peace; and the vested interests (“a marketable right to get something for nothing”) control our lives. Germany became a great power by imitating England’s industrial technique but not her “democratic” ideas and politics: the feudal-military absolutism of Germany fitted far better with the realities of capitalism; here Veblen gives an interesting premonition, if not a prediction, of the necessity of a Hitler to maintain capitalism. Almost parallel with Lenin, Veblen pointed out the relentless growth of monopoly capital toward a world of war and the strangling of the common man, or else —.
 
Defended Bolshevik Revolution
Veblen made only tentative stabs at the class struggle: as editor of The Dial he defended the Bolshevik Revolution, signed protests against the trial of the 101 Wobblies in Chicago, and denounced the Palmer Red Raids as the dementia praecox of rotting capitalism. And in one of his last books, The Engineers and the Price System, he sketched a new plan for revolution, the formation of Soviets of engineers and technicians who are the real bottle-neck of production and who are irked by the sabotage of big business. He even helped to form the nucleus of such a soviet, the Technical Alliance; but lacking organizing ability and misunderstanding the nature of the class struggle, he failed.
In his earliest and greatest book, The Theory of the Leisure Class, Veblen dissects capitalist culture and finds it rotten. The literary lights who loved and quoted the book for its satire on a money-culture missed the revolutionary implications: the only way to create a true culture is to wipe out capitalism. Veblen’s irony shows the roots of art and the social graces under capitalism as merely the desire for “conspicuous waste” and “conspicuous leisure” (i.e., showing off money). The rich man’s “pecuniary reputability” demands that styles change before clothes wear out, that useless servants clutter up a useless estate, that only costly things can be considered beautiful, that education be classical, useless, and good only to prove that the rich man did not have to work for a living while acquiring the “ceremonial futility” of his manners.
It is typical of this detached, ironic, scholarly genius that his last work was the translation of an old Norse saga. Yet the revolutionary movement in America must always acknowledge its debt to Thorstein Veblen for his savage analysis of the rottenness of our society.

Footnote
1. This column on Thorstein Veblen was contributed by Bruno Johnson.
 

