

The Worm in the Bud
Ronald Pearsall
Pimlico £12.50
‘The best mothers, wives and managers of households
know little or nothing of sexual indulgences. Love of home, children
and domestic duties are the only passions they feel ... She submits
to her husband, but only to please him; and, but for the desire of
maternity, would far rather be relieved from his attentions.’
This statement from a 19th century doctor – who studied
reproductive organs! – is our received view of Victorian sexual
attitudes. Sex is a miserable experience for women, to be undergone
only when absolutely necessary.
Most people, apart from the Tory neanderthals Redwood and Lilley,
would regard such ideas today as completely fantastic, adhered to by
only a tiny number of bigots. But even in Victorian times this view
of women and sex simply did not match reality.
Ronald Pearsall’s book – written in the 1960s and now reissued
– is a comprehensive study of every aspect of ‘the world of
Victorian sexuality’. That world is pretty remarkable for the
prevalence of sexual activity on the one hand and of hypocrisy on the
other. Pearsall studies every aspect of his subject from menstruation
through divorce to flagellation. His sources include popular songs,
bawdy poems set to hymn tunes and health statistics.
He builds up a picture of a society marked for its very sharp
class divisions, in attitudes to sexuality as in all other matters.
The study of prostitution in the book is a fascinating example of
this. Pearsall draws on Henry Mayhew’s study London Labour and
the London Poor, written in the mid 19th century, which places
prostitutes in six categories: kept mistresses and prima donnas,
convives, low lodging houses’ women, sailors’ and soldiers’
women, park women and thieves’ women.
One contemporary authority on prostitution argued that Â£8 million
a year was spent on prostitutes. Out of a London population of just
under 2.5 million, it was estimated that there were 80,000
prostitutes. The vast majority of them were very poor and lived a
short and hazardous life of disease and danger. The minority of rich
prostitutes mixed with royalty and politicians and were well looked after.
Single parents were widespread. In 1851, a total of 42,000
illegitimate children were born. ‘Many thousands more were killed,
and dead babies in the Thames were so common that attention was not
drawn to them’. Women turned to prostitution because it was better
than the alternative. ‘The fruits of vice were, in fact, what
should have been the fruits of virtue – reasonably clean living
conditions, food and good clothing.’
The overwhelming impression the book gives is that the people who
suffered most from sexual repression were the respectable middle
classes. Working class people appear to have had a fairly healthy
contempt for Victorian values when it came to their own sexuality.
Similarly, the ‘top ten thousand’ of the aristocracy and their
hangers on spent much of their time in extra marital sexual liaisons.
The middle classes too had their fair share of sexual scandals but
these were much more likely to be hidden and public exposure of them
usually meant disgrace. It was this class, however, which more than
any other stamped its morality and narrow outlook on the family and
society.
Dip into Pearsall’s book if you are interested in the arguments
about Victorian values. Its style and attitudes are somewhat old
fashioned for the 1990s, and some of the detail can get a bit much.
But you will find a great deal of information to help you fight those
descendants of the Victorian moralists who today dominate the Tory Party.
 



Labourism and the English Genius
Gregory Elliott
Verso £11.99
The sorry state of Labour’s current ideas make you want to
scream. The desperate rush to trail Tory policies and to praise the
market seems never ending. Just as right wingers fall out over
whether to tax or cut spending, Gordon Brown declares his undying
opposition to raising taxes. Ann Taylor has joined the Tory attack on
student grants by claiming that they are a handout to the middle
classes. David Blunkett describes supporting single mothers as
‘defending the indefensible’.
But we cannot explain this by looking at the politics or
personalities of these individuals. As Gregory Elliott’s new book
demonstrates, this is a phase they are going through. Unfortunately
it doesn’t seem that Labour is going to grow out of it.
There have been, says Elliott, three phases in this century which
have marked not just Labour in Britain but all the Socialist and
Labour Parties internationally: ‘the adoption of a reformist
strategy for socialism (up to 1945); the retraction of socialism in
favour of regulated welfare capitalism (1945–75); the abandonment
or attenuation of the latter in the 1970s and 1980s.’
At every stage of its development, Labour was marked by a
commitment to preserving the British state, maintaining a
parliamentary monarchy and, well into the postwar period, hanging on
to many of the remnants of the British Empire.
Its reforms, most notably those of the 1945 government, were
designed not to challenge the rule of capital, but to make it more
efficient while ameliorating some of its worst excesses.
Nationalisation was restricted to those industries such as railways
and mines which attracted little private investment and needed
massive injections of state funding to make them profitable. The
health service was set up while making big concessions to doctors and
consultants about their autonomy.
It was a Labour government which introduced the most savage cuts
ever, in 1976, at the behest of the international Monetary Fund.
Since then, Labour’s successive electoral failures have been
matched by successive abandonment of its commitment to welfare and equality.
Elliott describes all this well. He is also highly critical of
attempts to turn Labour leftwards in the early 1980s around the
campaign for constitutional reform and Benn for deputy. ‘For all
the heady talk of a “new model Labour Party” foreshadowing a
“mass socialist party”, the rather more humdrum reality was a
hollow shell occupied by the “rank and file democracy” of
some 50,000 or fewer activists’. The Bennites as much as the right
wing relied on the ‘dead souls’ of the trade union block vote to
win victory.
But his real scorn is reserved for the ever rightward moving
leadership under Neil Kinnock, seeking to occupy the middle ground
which ‘was forever shifting, under its feet, further rightwards –
dragging the party along in its train, and therewith onto hostile
territory, where its hasty and ill-organised manoeuvres proved no
match for an enemy deploying on home ground and encouraged, by
Labour’s retreat towards it, to extract further concessions.’
Much of Elliott’s analysis would be shared by many readers of
this Review. However there is a weakness at the core of his
argument which prevents him from drawing any useful conclusions. He
believes that British society is an archaic system dominated by
commercial and financial capital, in which manufacturing capital has
long been subservient.
Calls for socialism are, he says, impractical and should be
replaced instead by a series of constitutional changes which would
allow a proper democracy to flourish. This would presumably be a
stage towards some form of democratic socialism.
It is, however, a utopian project. Despite differences of interest
between sections of the capitalist class, their class unity is much
greater than anything which divides them.
Any substantial constitutional reforms – especially the
abolition of the monarchy and the House of Lords – would be opposed
by the vested interests of the rich and powerful represented within
that capitalist class. Such reforms could not be implemented without
taking on aspects of class struggle aimed at overthrowing the whole system.
Elliott roots Labour’s failing in its appeal to a mythical and
imperialist ‘nation’ rather than class. What a pity that he too
falls into the trap of believing that somehow reforming the
constitution can begin to overcome the contradictions of British capitalism.
 






The victory of the fascists in a council by-election in
London’s Docklands sent shock waves through the left. The vote
represents the polarisation of politics today and the contempt for
the main parties. Lindsey German looks at why it happened and
what the alternatives are



Wherever you look in Britain today, the air of crisis, decay and
despair is greater than it has been for many years.
Contempt for mainstream politicians (a recent poll showed over 90
percent of people distrust them), erosion of support for institutions
such as the police or monarchy, and the feeling that every area of
British life is in decline have never been greater.
When nearly 1,500 people voted for the fascist British National
Party in Millwall last month, giving them their first local
councillor, the grim reality of the crisis of British politics hit
home. The decay, the closure of industry, the rundown of public
services, the feeling of paralysis about any political change, have
become the dominant features in a society where only five years ago
we were being told we had escaped economic crisis forever.
The magic of the market, the trickle down of wealth from the rich
to the poor, the enterprise culture, have been exposed as a sham.
Nowhere in Britain is this more the case than in the Isle of Dogs,
site of the BNP victory, where the grotesque monolith of Canary Wharf
stands as a monument to the values which are so detested by most
people today.
All the evidence suggests that institutions which have
traditionally been central to holding British society together and
winning the adherence of the majority of the population – including
a sizeable chunk of the working class – have been dramatically
weakened in recent years. Even the police themselves now declare that
they have no confidence in the criminal justice system. What hope can
there be for the rest of us?
At the centre of so much of the contempt and unpopularity are the
politicians from the main parties themselves. The Tories are of
course the main recipients of this feeling. Partly, they have fallen
out among themselves. John Major has, after all, been quoted by the
press in recent months referring to other cabinet ministers as
‘bastards’ and Tory backbench critics as ‘barmy’.
Local Tory activists are at their most demoralised for years. For
example, the membership officer for the Western region, Dr Adrian
Rogers, said on John Major’s recent visit to his area:
‘I wanted to know if he really appreciated how hard it
was being a Conservative and I think he did. It’s a very loyal
party but it’s had the worst year ever and I think that’s got
through to him.’
Another loyal activist, the leader of the Tory opposition on
Taunton Deane council, John Meikle, said: ‘People are concerned
about a number of things, including VAT on fuel and a whole lot of
unpopular issues. I feel that probably the party has unnecessarily
inflicted on people things to grumble about’.
But rows between Tory politicians are only one sign of more
widespread contempt. There is a universal feeling that
politicians are all liars.
And the ideological crisis goes much deeper than merely
superficial discontent with politicians. It has its roots in the
complete failure of Thatcherism to deliver what was required for the
British ruling class.
A recent opinion poll shows that 46 percent of people, including
24 percent of Tory voters, agree that ‘more socialist planning
would be the best way to solve Britain’s economic problems’. This
demonstrates how far the mood has swung against the ‘free market’
and its supposed benefits.
Recent surveys on taxation show a similar change in attitudes.
Fifty nine percent were in favour, in a recent ICM poll for the
Guardian, of raising the higher rate of tax. Only 14 percent
were in favour of higher VAT. In response to the question of what
public spending should be cut if it is necessary, 93 percent and 90
percent were against cutting health and education spending
respectively. The only area where there was a clear majority for
spending cuts was in defence, where 64 percent favoured cuts.
The imposition of VAT on fuel has led to further erosions in its
already low popularity. Privatisation of rail, the closure of more
and more mines despite popular opposition, the drying up of funds for
NHS hospitals, have combined with uncertainty about jobs and low
wages to increase the level of bitterness.
However; contempt for Tory politics also spreads to the other
parties. Despite some success by the Liberal Democrats in winning
disaffected Tory voters in rural constituencies, their policies are
unlikely to provide any alternative to Tory cuts or unemployment, and
they are now quite correctly tarred with the brush of right wing
populism and racism, a tactic they have employed for years far wider
than just in Tower Hamlets.
Labour is increasingly seen as the main alternative by the
majority of working class people, with its poll ratings suggesting a
majority government if there were an election. But there is little
enthusiasm for – and much disillusion with – Labour.
There are two main reasons for this. One is the total failure of
Labour to address the problems facing ordinary working people. On
taxation, on social security, on education, it trails after the
Tories, wanting to ameliorate the worst of their excesses, but
accepting the ground on which they stand. Labour, backed up by its
allies, the trade union leaders, has opposed or downplayed any idea
of direct action by people themselves to prevent attacks.
The second reason for Labour’s unpopularity is its own record in
local government. Acceptance of government cuts, a refusal to fight
for better provision, the erosion of council services and a tendency
to do deals with businessmen and property developers at the expense
of local people have increased. Disillusion with Labour is at its
greatest on many of the declining council estates, with their
non-existent services, which are often little better than prisons for
many of their residents.
Attacks on council workforces through the cuts and areas such as
competitive tendering have eroded much of the Labour councils’
traditional support.
So any positive endorsement of Labour almost always now hangs on
what they would not do – they would not privatise
rail, cut public spending as far as the Tories have or extend VAT.
This lack of support and identification does not mean that Labour
cannot grow or cannot win elections.
But it does mean that a polarisation has developed. The old
consensus politics, which was the bedrock of postwar society, has
disappeared. In its place have appeared apathy and cynicism,
punctuated by huge explosions of anger, such as over the poll tax or
the miners. The economic crisis has greatly increased this mood,
which is why the fascists were able to win their vote in Millwall.
But disillusion with the system also gives a new audience for
socialist ideas as an alternative to the dead end of parliamentary politics.
The polarisation in politics, the vacuum created by Labour’s
decline and the inertia of the unions, and the terrible effects of
the crisis on ordinary working people, all combine to create an
atmosphere in which the fascists can gain some support. Why is this,
when the BNP represents race hatred, forced deportation of
immigrants, destruction of any form of democracy, the smashing of
trade unions and democratic political parties and the silencing of
any voice of protest?
Their appeal is not, of course, based on propagating these views.
If they were to campaign on such a platform their support would never
get any bigger than the tiny number of boneheads and fanatics who
comprise their inner core. That is why it is so important for them to
gain respectability – something the fascists have been so far
unable to do – and why they base their campaigning on identifying
with some of the key areas of discontent which so worry working class
people today.
The Isle of Dogs was fertile ground in this respect. The contrast
between wealth and poverty is vast and dramatic. Promises of jobs and
houses for local people with docklands redevelopment have not
materialised. There is a justifiable feeling that these people have
been left to rot by national government and by the local council as
well – both Liberal and Labour.
The BNP has a completely false yet superficially plausible
argument: the neglect of local people and the lack of concern by big
business mean that Asians and other ‘foreigners’ are taking the
houses, jobs and schools which should by rights go to locals – i.e.
whites. This argument alone would perhaps not be persuasive – after
all, it has had little resonance in many other equally deprived parts
of the country – were it not for the fanning of racism by the local
Liberals, which has given these arguments wider purchase and a
respectable face.
The fascists will use these and other populist arguments to try to
tap into the mood of bitterness and anger which the mainstream
politicians are shocked by but have no answer to.
At the same time, we should put into perspective what has actually
happened in the Isle of Dogs and how weak the far right’s prospects
still are. They have one councillor elected on just over a third of
the vote in the area. They will obviously try to use the result to
build in other inner city areas with bad housing and services. But
the scale of opposition to the BNP, and the horror felt by millions
at the result show that they will not get it all their own way.
It is still very easy to smash what little influence they have
built. Compare their one seat with the 1000 local government seats
held by Jean-Marie Le Pen’s National Front in France. Or compare
the support the British National Front gained in the mid-1970s. Not
only are the fascists much weaker today, there are far more people
who understand the need to oppose the Nazis.
This would seem to be a universal feeling. Everyone from John
Major to the editorials of the posh papers has condemned the election
result. But although these people will recoil in liberal horror –
they will do nothing to stop the Nazis. Indeed, they are already
accepting the need to work with the fascist councillor, on the
grounds of ‘democracy’, and condemn mobilisations against the
fascists. As in the past, in the 1930s and 1970s, beating the Nazis
will lie with rank and file activists on the ground who directly
confront them.
Already there are many signs that this is happening, from the
magnificent walkout of Isle of Dogs council workers who struck in
protest at having to work with a fascist councillor, to the
mobilisations in Brick Lane to drive off the Nazis and the
demonstration this month to close down the BNP headquarters in Bexley.
The success of the Anti Nazi League in the 1970s means that even
now it is much harder for the fascists to gain a foothold or a
respectable veneer. The mobilisations have to ensure that it stays
that way.
However, mobilising against the Nazis alone will not destroy the
threat. The scapegoating of blacks for bad housing and unemployment
will continue unless there is an alternative put forward. That means
fighting on the social issues whose failings give the fascists their
chance. If this fight were taken up by the whole of the labour and
trade union movement it would soon be victorious. Unfortunately, the
Labour and union leaders are apathetic or indifferent – sometimes
even hostile – to these struggles. Labour councils are often in the
forefront of implementing policies which result in at best a sharing
of the crumbs from the Tories’ table.
In every locality there has to be a fight over these issues –
squatting empty luxury homes in Docklands, keeping hospitals open,
opposing cuts in schools. Most Labour and trade union members will
back such campaigns enthusiastically – and their leaders can be
pushed into doing so. Success in these issues will undercut any
potential base for the fascists, by providing real improvements in
people’s lives.
However, the crisis of politics in Britain today requires more
than these small scale reforms, important though they are in building
confidence rather than despair. It requires trying to build an
alternative to a system increasingly in decay.
The ruling class crisis means that there are more and more attacks
on workers coming from both employers and government. The Tory
declaration of a wage freeze is one example, which has already led to
a greater degree of generalisation among many public sector workers
than had previously been the case.
The main recipient of the anger and bitterness at these attacks is
not at present black people but the government itself. The wage
freeze is likely to increase the fury already growing from worsening
living standards and increased VAT on fuel.
Unfortunately there has not yet been a significant fight by large
groups of workers against the government. The public anger over pit
closures was not turned into industrial action, and the attitude of
the trade union leaders can be summed up by the new head of the TUC:
‘The job of unions is to avoid strikes, particularly
ones of any duration. There is often an initial enthusiasm among
workers when they embark on industrial action. But during strikes
income is lost, job security threatened and people are vulnerable to
victimisation. Strikes ... are a weapon of last resort.’
Yet the more the union leaders counsel caution, the more they are
likely to disillusion at least a section of their membership who look
for more militant action. And the more likely it is that those who
want to fight – and the scale of the crisis is leading tens of
thousands in that direction – will look to socialist organisation
to link up and give expression to a whole range of different struggles.
It is commonplace for most media commentators to believe that the
crisis in politics today will easily be resolved. Maybe a new prime
minster will do the trick, or maybe economic recovery will solve the
political problems. It is not going to be like that. We have higher
taxes or further spending cuts in store, whatever happens and whoever
is in government. The 1980s, when many believed that everyone could
just get better off, have now been revealed as a cruel joke.
Despite all the hype during that decade, there are no clear
answers to economic crisis, to how schools can be improved, how we
can house the homeless, how we can end unemployment. Even
capitalism’s most optimistic forecasts allow for millions on the
dole and a huge ‘underclass’ in all the major capitalist countries.
In such a situation the political crisis may have its ups and
downs, but it is here to stay. The best that most people can hope for
is that their personal situation will not get worse, but few believe
it. Most people accept that their children’s lives will be worse
than their own.
The polarisation which has opened up in politics will continue,
and is already posing the urgent question about how society goes
forward. In such circumstances, a revolutionary socialist
organisation like the SWP can grow – if it understands it has to
provide an answer to those tens of thousands looking to an
alternative to this rotten system.
 



A Scots Quair
by Lewis Grassic Gibbon
Adapted by Alastair Cording
The Glasgow based TAG theatre company has brought Grassic Gibbon’s
trilogy of books to life.
Sunset Song, Cloud Howe and Grey Granite –
collectively known as A Scots Quair – are the story of a
dying culture and the birth of a new one. Through the eyes of the
heroine, Chris Guthrie, we see the destruction of the old Scottish
peasantry accelerated by the First World War, and the encroachment of
a brutal system of exploitation which leads to the open class warfare
of the 1920s and 1930s.
This staging is one of the most exciting and political of recent
years, bringing to mind some of the best agitprop theatre of the
1960s and 1970s.
The closed and narrow community of Kinraddie is centred on a land
which has remained unchanged for generations, but which finds the
outside world encroaching on it dramatically. In Sunset Song
young men go off to the war, some – like Chris’s young husband
Ewan – never to return. The landscape itself is destroyed when the
trees are felled for the war industry.
The upheavals and class polarisation of the interwar years are
central to Chris’s story. She marries an idealistic Church of
Scotland minister, whose aim is to eliminate poverty in the mill town
of Segget where he preaches. The failure of Labour Party reforms, the
betrayal of the 1926 General Strike and the bitter fruits of that
betrayal for workers in the late 1920s are all shown as contributing
to Robert Colquohoun’s despair.
When a rat kills the baby of an evicted couple, he is stirred to
protest at the failure of the churches and the need for revolution,
but dies after giving his sermon.
In Grey Granite Chris and her now grown up son Ewan move to
the city, where Chris struggles to run a boarding house and Ewan
leads a strike in the steelworks, is beaten by the police and becomes
a Communist. The trilogy ends with Ewan leading a hunger march to
London and Chris returning to her original ruined home to end her life.
But the bare bones of the plot in no way do justice either to the
books or to the plays. Perhaps the most remarkable feature of the
books is their use of language. Grassic Gibbon uses the Scots dialect
to convey his image of a community in the Howe of the Mearns, in the
east of Scotland. At first, many of the words are incomprehensible
(at least to an English reader), but Grassic Gibbon in a preface asks
the reader to bear with him, and to imagine a situation if the Dutch
language disappeared and the writer had to write about Dutch life in
German. He would include all sorts of words and dialect which are
incomprehensible to a German speaker, but the meaning would become clear.
So it is with Sunset Song. And as Chris’s story
progresses and she leaves her childhood home, the language becomes
more anglicised. By the time we reach the city in Grey Granite,
much of the dialect has disappeared under the impact of the radio,
cinema and other mass media. In place of the lyrical feel to the
language of the earlier books, there is a feeling of brittleness and
shattering, as the stable world collapses and Chris and Ewan’s
lives diverge.
A theatre production which reproduced these stories literally
could have produced a nostalgic chunk of Scottish heritage.
But this production is as political as you could wish for. It has
opponents of the war imprisoned as conscientious objectors, marchers
singing the Red Flag and the Internationale, strikers
fighting with scabs and police.
More than that, it conveys – through music, imaginative staging
and very good acting – people grappling with a changing world and
new ideas, and, in the case of Chris, with the oppression of being a
woman: domestic drudgery, sexual pressure from her father, the pain
of childbirth, her loveless final marriage.
Yet Chris is also portrayed as a woman with strong sexual feelings
and social independence.
Perhaps best about these plays is their sense of political
commitment. Obviously the novels lose something in being staged, but,
as Gibbon’s daughter has said, ‘a much more significant loss
threatens the Quair as its revolutionary spark is snuffed out
beneath the weight of academia, school syllabuses, the heritage
industry.’
The plays are in the tradition of Gibbon himself – subversive
and revolutionary. Whether you have read the books or not, try to see
them. They are a thrilling theatrical experience.
A Scots Quair tours Scotland, including Fife, Dundee,
Aberdeen and Glasgow, during October and November
 



Riots, slump, decay and despair: these are the results of John Major’s term in office. The Tory party which briefly united around Major just three years ago, and rejoiced at his re-election 18 months later, is now deeply divided on every issue from Europe to taxation, from Bosnia to privatisation. Its divisions reflect a much wider ideological splintering as the different ruling class interests which grouped together in the 1980s under the hegemony of Thatcherism find themselves bitterly divided.
Economic collapse has undermined the ideological certainty. Perhaps the most intense opposition to the Tories stems from many who once accepted Tory policies. Now they feel betrayed. This leaves even the ruling class with no real confidence that the present government can do anything to end the economic and social crisis which has them in its grip. This is a huge change in the political climate.
Thatcher was able to impose her policies not because she never compromised – the ludicrous claim made in her memoirs – but because the ruling class in Britain largely accepted the Thatcherite project in the 1980s. There was widespread opposition to the early government policies during the recession of 1980–81, especially from manufacturing industry. But once the economy began to grow again, that resistance began to disappear. By 1986 and 1987, when powerful groups of workers had already been defeated, when the economy was growing very fast and when even unemployment figures were falling, Britain’s rulers really did begin to believe that the Thatcher miracle had worked, that slump was a thing of the past and that Britain could lead Europe economically and politically.
The reversal of economic fortunes exposed the solution of the 1980s as a sham. The British ruling class was faced with uncomfortable choices. The argument over entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System was about these choices. The options were to become a junior partner in the EC on relatively unfavourable terms, or stay outside a fully integrated Europe on even more unfavourable terms. The political crisis which erupted on Black Wednesday, 15 September 1992, when the pound was forced out of the ERM, laid bare these splits. The prestige of the Tory government has never recovered. As Tory right winger Simon Heffer put it recently, ‘The worst problem facing the Tory Party ... is that the government has still not rebuilt its moral authority after the political catastrophe of Black Wednesday 13 months ago.’ [1]
The crisis at the top is partly a reflection of and partly creates a crisis among the lower middle classes. The popular dissatisfaction and bitterness among the traditionally stable backbone of the Conservative Party is now rampant. It is all the more fierce for coming from people who placed absolute faith in Thatcherism but who now find their businesses bankrupted, their homes repossessed and even managerial jobs under attack. The political alliance which included the ruling class, most of the middle classes and substantial sections of workers has broken down. It was symbolised by Rupert Murdoch’s Sun, whose uncritical and enthusiastic reflection of Thatcherism conveyed many of its ideas in popular form. Any cursory glance at the paper in the days following Black Wednesday reveals how that enthusiasm has been turned to angry opposition, reflecting a sense of betrayal.
Among many workers too there has been a sharp political shift. The effect of the market has produced a political revulsion among many people who were once tempted to believe in its miraculous qualities. At the root of this change in political mood has been the attack on workers’ living standards through the poll tax and the accelerated assault on the welfare state. Millions of workers who thought themselves secure have found themselves disillusioned. Since the election Major’s premiership has been exposed as weak, indecisive, unpleasant and vindictive, and quite often unable to carry a majority of people with it in any of its central policies. Far from the Major years representing a period of calm following the turbulence of Thatcherism, they have produced a level of discontent and anger, and increased politicisation, greater than anything seen in Britain for many years.
Recession and stagnation have marked Major’s entire period of office. Options supposedly available to buy the Tories out of their problems, for example the ‘windfall’ subsidy provided by North Sea oil in the early to mid-1980s, or the injections of billions of pounds’ worth of public money to win the miners’ strike of 1984–5 are simply no longer available. At an individual level workers have found that their jobs are no longer secure as unemployment has soared, wages have been held down and overtime has disappeared.
The effect of the Tories’ crisis has been that their ‘mandate’ won in the 1992 election has effectively been eroded. The rot began just three months after the election victory. CBI boss Howard Davies was calling for a wage freeze, there was a sterling crisis and the stench of corruption, scandal and decay around the government even before the crises over the ERM and pit closures.
Tory and ruling class hopes that signs of economic recovery would restore their fortunes have so far proved false. The internal crisis of the Tory party as well as its disastrous showing in opinion polls by the spring and summer of 1993 (between 23 and 28 percent in August 1993) indicate that the Tories are as unpopular as ever. [2]
And yet among socialists and trade unionists there is still a great deal of unease. Labour is well ahead in the opinion polls (but it has been before) and its leadership seems incapable of giving either voice or direction to protests. The feeling of October 1992, when hundreds of thousands marched for the miners and succeeded in shaking the government to its foundations, has been allowed to dissipate. Subsequent strikes at the Timex factory in Dundee and at University College Hospital in London succeeded in galvanising very wide layers of support but did not mark signal victories.
The significant numbers of one day or half day strikes which take place tend to remain under the control of the trade union leaders. Meanwhile, job losses seem to pile up without any action against them, conditions in virtually every workplace are under attack – in both the private and the public sectors – and wage increases are at very low levels. Union membership still seems to be falling inexorably, the number of strike days is extremely low and the unions are repeatedly described as ‘dinosaurs’ by government and media alike.
So is it all an illusion? Will the discontent and anger find an outlet in mass strikes which can defeat the government and reverse the years of attacks on workers which were such a feature of the 1980s, or will it be dispersed by lack of clear direction and leadership? Even worse, with last year’s victory of the BNP candidate in the Isle of Dogs, will the mood of bitterness turn in a much nastier direction, with racism being used to divide and rule those workers who have suffered so much from the crisis?
Will the Tories and the ruling class manage to regain the offensive, scoring a significant defeat against workers’ organisation? Or will the working class movement eventually succeed in rolling back some of these attacks? The sort of stand off between the two sides which we have witnessed over the past three years cannot, after all, continue indefinitely. What are the prospects?
 
Great expectations?
The most frequently expressed hope of Tory politicians is that everything will come right when the economy does. Then, it is said, their popularity will return. The disaffection of millions of erstwhile Tory supporters will disappear, according to this view, if they can once again afford to buy houses and consumer durables, go on holidays and earn higher real wages. That means returning security to the jobs market and ensuring that earnings rise. This in turn means replacing the recession and stagnation of the past three years with a new boom. Recovery will both create a mood of contentment among those now disaffected with the government, and obviate unpopular or difficult governmental decisions. Increasing taxation, for example, will be unnecessary if economic growth is sufficient. Right wing cabinet minister John Redwood described this scenario in a recent interview:
I think we are now coming out of recession quite quickly. I think commentators are estimating the extent of the recovery already. That is becoming manifest in new car sales, developments in the housing market and it is certainly fully recognised by the stock market which has been hitting new highs for many months. There has been a rush by private investors to participate now that the market has risen quite a long way. I think all that is really quite positive. Looking to the future, I see a good period for strengthening and broadening the base of popular capitalism. [3]
On this analysis, the most superficial aspects of recovery will be sufficient to win new devotees of ‘popular capitalism’, ready once again to buy their council houses and stocks and shares, to set up their small businesses and to buy their new company cars. It is the Tory ideal, and as remote from reality as most idealised pictures. Nonetheless, a parallel view is also promoted by sections of the left, including much of the Labour leadership. They do not believe in ‘popular capitalism’, but believe that most workers do. Any dissatisfaction with the government is shortlived, they argue, and will disappear when there is money in workers’ pockets.
But Tory optimists and Labour cynics are wrong on both counts: the Thatcher-Lawson boom cannot be repeated in the near future, and any economic upturn is unlikely to eradicate the sorts of difficulties which the Tories face. The government cannot look forward to an easy solution to their economic problems – and so will not be able to solve their political problems.
Hopes of economic recovery are absolutely central to the Tories’ political strategy. Such a recovery is, according to various government sources, just around the corner. Just as they found the recession shocking precisely because it was so inexplicable, so they expect recovery to be like blue skies after rain. They are likely to be sorely disillusioned. There is no certainty of sustained recovery. It is true that expectations are high, with the majority of surveys of bosses and managers revealing an optimistic future for sustained growth of their industries. But expectations are not matched by hard facts. One typical survey – among manufacturing employers – showed a high degree of optimism, with 57 percent of companies predicting growth of up to 10 percent during 1993, while another 26 percent saw growth at over 10 percent this year. A staggering 96 percent believed their companies would grow significantly over the next three years. But, as the author of the survey pointed out:
Given their failure to meet 1992’s targets, however, it seems that Britain’s manufacturers are being over optimistic. How will they achieve such a major reversal in their fortunes? Is an economic upturn of the magnitude necessary to support this predicted growth really ‘just around the corner’? [4]
The optimism is certainly not matched by the facts. There was growth in Gross Domestic Product during the first half of 1993, but it remained very slight, with output still well below the figure when recession began. Recovery has also been patchy and uneven, with some sectors of the economy doing much better than others. There is no hard evidence that this recovery can be sustained. Even government figures have had to be revised downwards. Earlier in 1993 it was estimated that manufacturing output since autumn 1992 had grown by more than 3 percent – that figure has had to be cut nearly in half to 1.8 percent. [5] Other figures registered a larger than expected fall in manufacturing investment in the second quarter of 1993 after several quarters of slow upward growth. [6] A recent CBI survey showed that manufacturing order books had fallen from earlier 1993 levels in the majority of its regions. [7] Treasury statistics issued in the autumn of 1993 pointed to a slight slowdown in growth which was at only 0.4 percent (excluding oil and gas) between July and September. But manufacturing output actually shrank, and one economist cautioned that the figures were anyway ‘extremely unreliable’, while another said that ‘the economy is starting to slow down’. [8]
Reports of a sustained recovery are therefore much exaggerated, and there is every possibility that the pattern of recovery will at best be similar to the United States in the past year: low levels of growth which peter out, then re-emerge, but never really develop. Very few jobs are created and many problems of the recession, such as huge levels of debt, remain central features.
Recession affected Britain much earlier and much more deeply than virtually any of its major competitors. ‘Recovery to what?’ is therefore a real question in an economy where ‘UK output fell by 4 percent between the second quarter of 1990 and the second quarter of 1992 and has not yet returned to its level at the beginning of 1989’. [9] The August 1993 poll of economic forecasters in the Economist projected UK growth at 1.6 percent and at 2.6 percent for 1994. This is a better rate than most of its European competitors who have only recently gone into recession, but compares highly unfavourably with projections for the US, Canada and Australia (the other long standing victims of ‘Anglo-Saxon recession’). [10] The current boast of government ministers, that Britain’s will be the fastest growing economy in Europe in 1993, is misleading. The big European economies were growing quite strongly during the early 1990s when output in Britain was falling. [11] In any case, Britain’s export markets are heavily connected to countries such as Germany. Recession there affects British capitalism, as the recent layoffs at the big car factories have shown. Despite an upturn in car sales in Britain, the car market in continental Europe shrank dramatically during 1993, thus affecting exports from Britain. [12]
Is British capitalism therefore in a position to compete with its main rivals and so solve its problems even if a recovery is sustained? The answer is no, if past performance, even during the booming 1980s, is a guide. If we date growth back to 1979, rather than to the end of recession in 1981 as the Tories prefer to do, we find that the total increase in output in manufacturing industry during that period was 7 percent. Manufacturing capacity increased by the same amount – not bad for Europe, but lagging behind the US and Japan where capacity grew by 32 percent and 39 percent respectively. If we go further back, British manufacturing capacity between 1970 and 1990 grew by 19 percent, but by 43 percent in the big three European economies, 86 percent in the US and 129 percent in Japan. [13] Although there has been an increase in investment in manufacturing capacity, this may not reflect a growth in jobs or output but rather that ‘the UK may simply be replacing the wrong sort of capacity with more efficient and up-to-date equipment’. If this is the case, ‘the danger is that Britain will still be left with a small and efficient manufacturing sector that is too small for the nation’s future prosperity’. [14]
Inability to compete through lack of a sufficiently large manufacturing sector can be compounded by the other problems facing British capitalism, some of them products of the recession, others the legacy of the Lawson boom: high unemployment, bankruptcies, a colossal debt hangover, lack of investment, a record public sector borrowing deficit and a balance of trade deficit which threatens to suck in even more imports when economic upturn comes. Budget deficit and public debt far – from being eradicated, as we were told in the late 1980s – are likely to remain a running sore in the British economy for a long time to come. Recent projections by the International Monetary Fund about the budget deficits show just how serious this problem is:
The UK in particular is on an explosive course: by 1998, its budget deficit is expected to remain more than twice as great as that needed to stabilise its debt ratio. Little wonder that the IMF privately fears that the debt threat is moving north. These days it is the build-up of first world debt, not Africa’s lingering crisis, that haunts the sleep of IMF officials. [15]
Unemployment levels remain high despite minute falls in the jobless levels through the summer of 1993 – with official figures of 3 million and an overall rate of 10.4 percent. [16] The jobs which we were told had been created by the Lawson boom of the mid-1980s have simply not been sustained. The figures are fairly staggering. Employment fell by 1.4 million between 1979 and 1983 during the first Thatcher recession. It then rose during the boom to not only replace those lost but create another 1.9 million jobs in total. However, since 1990 the second Thatcher recession has removed nearly all of these jobs – with only half a million net extra jobs being created since 1978! ‘Over the period 1979–92, US employment grew by 19 percent, French employment by 3 percent and UK employment by 0.4 percent.’ [17]
So expansion of employment – even in the low wage, low tech jobs which have marked much of the new employment in recent years – has been negligible. But perhaps the greatest hidden fear of the employers is that an increase in industrial output and signs of real recovery will lead to demands for big wage increases. Wage rises have been held down in recent years through a combination of low inflation, recession and lack of industrial struggle. The Tory government has insisted on a wage freeze in the public sector for 1994. Its aim is to put down a marker to private industry (it fears that private sector wage increases will get out of control) while at the same time taking a hard line on public spending. [18] But the political backlash against the government is in large part a result of its assault on public sector spending so far. Attacks on a wider front are only likely to raise the level of general political opposition to the Tories’ policies and to ruling class strategy. It is to this that we now turn.
 
Breaking all the records
At the very least, if we are to live within a market capitalist system, it is unsatisfactory that we should have doubts about its moral foundations. One or two recent speeches, even by some members of the present government, betray a worrying insecurity ... Once the legitimacy of egalitarianism is accepted, however much equality there is, the cry will always be for more of it. [19]
These were the words of Lord Lawson of Blaby who in his previous incarnation as Chancellor of the Exchequer presided over the frothy boom of the late 1980s, the overheating of the economy and the onset of slump. His is the authentic voice of 1980s Thatcherism: confident, arrogant and a passionate advocate of inequality. Like Gordon Gekko in the film Wall Street, Lawson believes that ‘greed is good’. Such views could be echoed by half a dozen former cabinet ministers who also now sit in the House of Lords.
Yet despite the excesses of the 1993 Tory party conference with its attempts to find scapegoats among single parents, ‘foreigners’ and young criminals, there are still not many of the present cabinet who would dare to be so blatant as Lawson. Most pretend that they are more committed to egalitarianism, to choice, against the excesses of the very wealthy. Yet very few people believe them. They are, if anything, even more unpopular than their predecessors. As a recent Daily Telegraph article pointed out, ‘the government and the Conservative Party continue to establish new records in Gallup’s surveys’. These new records include that ‘the proportion of voters “approving” of the government’s record, 12.2 percent, has remained below 20 percent for 10 months ... a tiny 23 percent of voters now say they would back the Conservatives ... fewer than 20 percent of voters are “satisfied” with Mr Major as prime minister ... No previous prime minister ever fell below 20 percent. [20]
Why are they so unpopular? After all, when Major replaced Thatcher in the winter of 1990 he had offended few people even inside the Tory party, let alone outside. He had the virtue of not being Margaret Thatcher, which alone raised his popularity a few notches, and he fought the leadership campaign largely on the claim that he understood ordinary people because he had spent a short period of his life in Brixton. Today he is pilloried in the newspapers, hated by many in his own party and despised by millions of working people.
There are three main components of this dramatic change in fortune: the Tories’ own political mistakes, the worsening and intractable problems which face the mass of ordinary workers, and the increased politicisation of millions of people.
 
The Tories’ own mistakes
It was commonplace for both the Major cabinet and the press to assume that the removal of Thatcher would restore Tory popularity. Consequently there was little if any attempt to alter most of the policies which had contributed to her growing unpopularity. This was even true of the poll tax, where Major and Heseltine were reluctant to completely abandon the notion of a tax on individuals, and where the final form of the council tax was a hybrid between a property and a personal tax. [21] Levels of non-payment remained extremely high. Months after Thatcher’s departure thousands were still being taken to court for refusing to pay. Although the levels of poll tax were held down in March 1991 by adding 2.5 percent to the level of value added tax, the poll tax itself was only finally abolished in March of 1993.
John Major had the briefest ‘honeymoon’, which did not even last through the Gulf War, preventing him from exploiting that victory in the way that Thatcher had done with the Falklands War in 1982. The simple explanation for his failure was the terrible impact of the recession, whose adverse affects seemed to be accelerating daily by the spring of 1991 when the figures for unemployment hit 2 million. [22] Everyone could see it coming. Two thousand five hundred workers were sacked in a single day in January 1992 from firms including Peugeot, Ford, BICC and NatWest. British Airways announced 4,600 jobs to go, and British Steel 800. [23] By February 1,500 were losing their jobs every day.
The government was completely paralysed by the recession and its political consequences. It had no clear idea what to do, veering from complete inactivity to Norman Lamont’s declaration that unemployment was ‘a price worth paying’ to get inflation down. If it was tempted to buy its way out of problems, this was not apparent. The recession meant pressure to keep spending low. The ideological commitment to Thatcherism and a remoteness from the concerns of ordinary people all compounded its unpopularity.
During the heyday of Thatcher’s rule the Ridley Plan – to isolate and then defeat different groups of workers – successfully guided government strategy. Major’s government, in contrast, acted in ways which only worsened its position by uniting those opposed to it. The government continued and sometimes accelerated its attacks on welfare, the health service, housing and jobs. It pushed through vicious attacks if it thought it could get away with them, but its weakness meant that it could also easily be forced to retreat if it met even limited opposition.
So in late 1991 and early 1992 it increased levels of public spending and retreated from or avoided a whole number of potential industrial confrontations. The rail workers, for example, found British Rail’s ‘final offer’ of 7 percent was upped to nearly 8 percent. [24] Money was found to bring down the NHS waiting lists in the months before the election. The promises were that recovery was just around the corner – and growth would mean taxes could stay low, spending would not have to be cut, new jobs would be created.
But two events soon pushed government standing to new lows. Black Wednesday, 15 September 1992, was the day Major and Lamont spent billions of pounds shoring up the pound to no avail, and demonstrated their willingness to raise interest rates by 5 percent in a matter of hours. There could not have been a greater blow to a government which claimed there was no more money for hospitals or schools, and which said it had the interests of mortgage holders at heart. And Black Wednesday contributed to the mood of anger and hostility which erupted just a month later on the announcement that 31 pits were to be closed, effectively destroying the coal industry and the lives of whole communities.
Since then Major’s unpopularity has been constant, as he stumbles from crisis to crisis over the Maastricht Treaty (only ratified through a deal with the Ulster Unionists and arm twisting of Tory rebels), the universally unpopular VAT on fuel and the retreat on testing in schools and other Tory education ‘reforms’. Various leaks of proposed cuts in social security spending such as raising the pension age of both sexes to 67 or of women to 65, cutting invalidity benefit or restricting unemployment benefit to six months instead of a year, have all contributed to this unpopularity.
The once reliable loyalty of Tory supporters is no longer certain, as the Tories’ catastrophic defeats in the Newbury and Christchurch by-elections show. Even members of the Tory party, including loyal activists, are extremely disaffected, though this manifests itself in the paradox both of nostalgia for the ‘strong government’ of Thatcher and disquiet at the attacks on welfare. Two long standing party activists, a retired surgeon and a dentist in Cheshire, were quoted in a recent Observer magazine feature:
I think the way [Thatcher] was got rid of was appalling. I honestly remember thinking I didn’t want to have anything more to do with the party. We all reluctantly felt after she had gone we should have Major. I think we all thought he was a very nice man. Then he came in and won the election and it has all gone from bad to worse.
They cite their main objections to the government as the defence of David Mellor by John Major, Major’s failure to call a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty, the Matrix-Churchill case and ‘the most appalling thing was the miners: we just looked like a party that didn’t care at all. Totally insensitive. And that got people really upset. I don’t think they showed any compassion or respect’. [25]
Similar attitudes were shown when John Major visited the West Country after losing the Christchurch by-election. The local Tory membership officer said, ‘It’s a very loyal party but it’s had the worst year ever. [26] The 1993 Conservative Party conference in Blackpool contained fewer local representatives – ‘there were fewer of them this year, many regulars having suffered such a crash of morale that they did not attend.’ [27]
The demoralisation among those who a few years ago would have been the enthusiastic cheerleaders of Margaret Thatcher gives some notion of the ideological collapse of ‘popular Toryism’ and indeed ‘popular capitalism’. The collapse seems provoked by two aspects of the crisis: from the ravages of the system itself as boom has turned into slump and forced unemployment and poverty on millions who once believed they could find a comfortable niche within the system and, at the top of the social pile, the behaviour of the Tory government, big businessmen and others close to it, who have been revealed as greedy, corrupt, sleazy and unprincipled. Public outcry over top directors’ pay or over business funding of the Tory party is an indicator of this.
But these factors alone clearly cannot explain the political shift which has taken place since Thatcher went. During the 1980s there were equally huge increases in top people’s pay, funding of the Tories by big business was equally prevalent and there was as much corruption. Nor can the change be explained by John Major’s personality – he became leader of the Tories precisely because he did not have the force of personality of Thatcher. The real reason lies with much more fundamental problems which it will take much more than cosmetic changes to alter.
Put simply, the economic difficulties facing British capitalism are much more severe than problems created by a single recession. Britain’s declining standing as a great power internationally has left it with a legacy of spending, particularly in the areas of defence and welfare, which are no longer sustainable without taking much more from workers in the form of taxation, or else cutting into profits. But the government has so far been unable or unwilling to do either, and so has had to continue funding public spending at an even higher level than in the late 1980s. [28] The boom hid, but did not solve, this problem which has come back to haunt the Tories with a vengeance.
 
The worsening situation for most workers
’A nation at ease with itself’ is hardly how most people would describe life in Britain today. Here is the view of financial journalist Christopher Huhne:
In time, our form of capitalism will come to resemble the American variety. We will not regard ourselves as part of a society, but merely as individuals who must fend for ourselves as best we may, and devil take the hindmost.
With even more of the poor always with us, we will not seek to provide security as a public good; we will buy burglar and car alarms, anti-theft radios, private picket gates. We will earn more and spend more just to maintain the same sense of security we had when society was kinder and fairer. We will drive from a night-watchman-protected dormitory through ghettoes of the underclass to security-coded office buildings. Shut out the world, we want to be rich – whatever the cost. [29]
While this picture depicts the ‘yuppie nightmare’ which many national newspaper journalists no doubt fear, it also portrays a popular view of 1990s Britain – even if from the other side of the fence to most of us. Society is more violent, the ‘old values’ have broken down, there is a growing gap between rich and poor, and any idea of consensus politics has completely disappeared.
Certainly those who believed that the old evils of capitalism were gradually disappearing to be replaced with a more just, fairer society have been sorely disappointed. The Beveridge Report published in 1942 indicated the great problems of British society which needed to be eradicated – want, ignorance, disease, squalor and idleness. The basis of the post-war welfare state, and the political ideas which underpinned it, were intended to ensure that these miseries disappeared. Full employment, a national health service, council house building and adequate state benefits for the old, sick and disabled were regarded as its foundations.
The reality has turned out rather different. Unemployment is running at 10 percent of the population overall, the male rate being even higher. [30] The real situation is much worse than the figures indicate. Many men who would previously have been classified as unemployed are now categorised as ‘economically inactive’. ‘On average in the 1980s ... 14.9 percent of UK prime age males were out of work.’ [31] Poverty has grown, with 11.33 million people on or below the supplementary benefit/income support level in 1989 compared with 7.74 in 1979. [32] The decline of NHS funding has meant an alarming rise in preventible diseases such as dysentery. NHS provision is inadequate in many areas. For example, 14,000 babies in need of special care were, according to one report, competing for only 800 beds, two thirds of which were paid for by charities. [33] In 1992, 400,000 people were registered as homeless, but the housing charity Shelter puts the real figure at closer to 2 million. Around 150,000 young people become homeless each year. [34] Those with houses are not always so much better off. Although in the last two decades there has been a sharp reduction in the number of houses lacking amenities (such as baths, inside toilets, hot and cold running water), there has been only a marginal reduction in the number of ‘unfit’ dwellings, and an actual increase in the number of those in serious disrepair. [35]
The sense of decay pervading Britain comes from the worsening situation in all these areas. The slashing of capital spending on hospitals, schools, housing and other areas of infrastructure has resulted in virtually every publicly funded building being in need of repair, redecoration or complete rebuilding. The contrast between the public and private sectors could not be greater.
However, we should not assume that this picture of decay is one which only affects an ‘underclass.’ The attacks on welfare, jobs, housing and health care affect the vast majority of the population. We should be wary of assuming that figures for inequality of income distribution apply only to the very rich and the very poor. There is no doubt that the gap between rich and poor has widened, but the full picture of British society is not at all what the ruling class and the middle class commentators would have us believe.
Poverty is supposedly restricted to a small minority of those living mainly on state benefits. So Christopher Huhne quotes a recent government report arguing that it demonstrates that the bottom 10 percent in Britain ‘have suffered real falls in their income since 1979 despite the enormous increases for everyone else’. [36]
But ‘everyone else’ has not done quite as well as Huhne and others imply. They have certainly not been the recipients of ‘enormous increases’. Basing its figures on the government’s own statistics, the Commission on Social Justice has demonstrated that nearly two thirds of the population have an income below the average. [37] This hardly fits in with the ‘two thirds prosperous, one third poor’ image we are constantly bombarded with by, among others, Labour leader John Smith. Indeed, the past 15 years have shown a marked move away from egalitarianism towards a widening gap between rich and poor – not just the poorest. So ‘the bottom half of the population now receive only a quarter of the total income, compared to a third in 1979’. [38] In addition, changes in income for the bottom half of the population are demonstrative. It is true that average income rose 36 percent per household between 1979 and 1990–91. [39] But the share of the bottom tenth declined by 14 percent, that of the second bottom tenth stayed the same, the third, fourth and fifth lowest share increased by 7, 16 and 22 percent respectively – all much less than the average.
A small proportion of the rich have got much richer. Even government figures which tend to underestimate real ownership of wealth show that the top 2 percent own a quarter of all wealth, and the top 10 percent a full half of all wealth. [40] And ‘of the £31 billion given away in tax cuts between 1979 and 1992, 27 percent or £8.7 billion went to the top 1 percent of income earners. £15.2 billion went to the top 10 percent and 15 percent or £4.8 billion went to the bottom 50 percent.’ [41]
The net result of this redistribution in favour of the rich has been to leave the mass of those in work far from comfortably off. A chart produced by the Commission on Social Justice recently demonstrated that 36.7 million people live on incomes below £250 per week. Only half a million earn over £1,000 a week. [42] The average weekly disposable income for households stands at £280.04, with average family expenditure at £272.10. But expenditure is rising at twice the level of inflation. [43] The bulk of that income is spent on essentials. A whacking £95.70 is spent on or around the house, if the costs of housing, fuel, light and power, and household goods and services are taken together. Another £47.70 goes on food and £42.90 on motoring and travel, leaving £85.80 per week for every other bit of family expenditure: clothes, holidays, books and newspapers, sports and entertainment, alcohol and tobacco. [44]
Many of the families eligible for the family credit benefit do not claim it because they do not realise they are meant to be ‘poor’. Explaining the failure of this benefit to reach more than 64 percent of eligible families, a recent survey concluded that ‘they did not realise they were entitled to means tested benefit. They tended to be white collar couples who were buying their own home.’ [45]
 
What’s happening to pay?
During the 1980s wages rose in real terms for most workers (although benefits for pensioners and those on social security, as well as student grants, failed to keep pace). Attacks on welfare, anti-union laws and privatisation were accompanied by significant wage rises in many areas, which helped to prevent more general industrial opposition to government policies. Most people therefore felt themselves better off year by year. As Hugo Young has put it, writing of the 1987 election campaign:
Inflation did not rise above 5 percent at any point during this parliament. In the four years after the 1983 election, average weekly earnings rose by 14 percent in real terms ... All employed people, therefore, felt better off, even if ministers had made a mess of the rest of their programme. [46]
This remained the case up to the 1992 election, since fear of confrontation over pay led to substantial increases in a whole number of industries.
Now there are signs that the situation is beginning to change. Government figures recently revealed that ‘pre-tax personal incomes between April and June [1993] showed their first quarterly fall for 27 years, partly because of low wage increases, a fall in social security benefits and weaker investment income.’ [47]
Indeed, it would appear that manual workers have seen their living standards and wage levels held below the rate of inflation, while managerial and administrative white collar grades have been rewarded with increases much higher than the average. If we add to this the effects of short time working, lay offs, periods of unemployment and a cutback in overtime, we can see that the financial situation of many workers, especially manual workers, has deteriorated fairly sharply in the last year or two. The lower paid, who include the bulk of manual workers, have been disproportionately hard hit.
The government’s latest New Earnings Survey shows that manual workers have been particularly badly hit, with average manual wages only increasing by 2.5 percent, compared with a rise of 4.4 percent for non-manual occupations. These averages hide the extent to which managers’ pay has risen much faster than routine white collar workers. Some workers suffered real wage cuts in 1992–93. Non-manual women workers under 18 suffered pay cuts of 9.3 percent, and all full time women workers under 18 saw pay cuts of 5.9 percent. Royal Mail manual workers, for example, also suffered a pay cut of 3.2 percent.
The survey gave the weekly average male manual gross wage at £274.30, while non-manuals averaged £418.20. Women manuals averaged £177.10 and non-manuals £268.70. Despite the claims of Labour’s leadership several years ago that dockers were earning £400 a week, even at 1993 levels, 89.1 percent of male manual workers had gross weekly earnings of less than that amount. [48]
These figures are the result of squeezes on both the private and public sector wage levels. A Confederation of British Industry survey put manufacturing industry pay rises between April and June 1993 at 2.3 percent, the lowest for at least 16 years. It also claimed that ‘pay freezes of less than 12 months are widespread, affecting about one in three manufacturers and one in four service sector companies’. [49] There are disputes about whether private sector pay settlements are now beginning to rise again. For example, Incomes Data Services argues that the number of pay deals between 2 and 4 percent is rising, and the number of pay freezes and pay pauses is declining. [50] There is no doubt, however, that the level of wage increases has remained low and shows little sign of dramatic change.
The current public sector pay freeze is at least partly justified by the Tories on the grounds that public sector pay is rising at faster levels than private sector. But, while it is true that for the last three years (up to April 1993) the figures show public sector pay increasing faster than that in the private sector, this balance may already have changed. [51] In any case the overall figure hides a great deal of unevenness, with some of the lowest paid receiving barely any increases on already very low basic pay, while many managers and administrators have received substantial increases. More significantly, the long term decline of public sector pay compared with private is marked: since the early 1970s public sector pay has fallen by nearly a fifth relative to the private sector, and since the Clegg comparability awards of the early 1980s it has fallen by over 10 percent. [52]
These comparative figures are hardly likely to be improved by the public sector freeze on wages imposed at 1.5 percent for 1993–94 and now extended for a second year, and the continuing stagnation in many parts of private industry. Both government and employers are stressing the need to keep wage increases low. If they are successful, then many British workers will discover that they are becoming worse off.
The government wants to pursue a strategy of holding wages down and so will welcome such a development. But the political consequences of such a change in workers’ fortunes for the first time since the late 1970s will be explosive. The second year of public sector pay freeze is a very risky strategy indeed, which is why only last June Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke claimed he had reservations about such a policy since it led to a ‘bounce-back after the restraint. The longer you keep it on the more ... the dangers become.’ [53] The possibility of holding the line on wages, as the Tories did in 1993–94, but then finding more and more disputes including strikes the following year, is one which the government does not relish. Historically, pay struggles in response to pay restraint and wage freezes have often had a generalising and politicising effect on the unions. Struggles against pay freezes have frequently been successful in winning higher wage levels, at first for ‘exceptional cases’ but then for more and more groups of workers who follow the ‘exceptions’.
Given the general decline in living standards in recent years, there will be widespread anger about further wage restraint. That in turn is likely to be compounded by the growing differences between workers’ wages and those of managers and bosses. Professionals’ pay has risen by 5.7 percent in the year up to April 1993, and that of managers by 6.2 percent. [54] But, although twice the increase gained by manual workers, it pales into insignificance next to the huge increases paid to company directors. Their average basic salary increased by 6.2 percent, but even this hides the extent to which top directors in particular have benefited. The average chief executive receives basic pay of £157,706, which nearly doubles to £261,327 when all the perks are taken into account. This in turn doubles again when share options, worth on average £298,320, are included. [55] The employers are continuing to reward themselves extremely generously – something which will fuel discontent about the pay freeze imposed on the rest of us.
The increase in poverty is not just caused by low wages, however, but is compounded by two other crucial factors: the level of taxation and the level of debt. The level of taxation is set to rise by £6 billion in March 1994 and £10 billion in March 1995 – and this does not take into account any further tax increases in Chancellor Clarke’s autumn 1993 budget. Despite successive cuts in income tax and a reduction of the top earners’ rate of tax from 83 percent to 40 percent, the overall burden of taxation has risen under both Thatcher and Major. It has been shifted onto National Insurance contributions and onto value added tax, extended now to domestic fuel and threatened with extension to newspapers, children’s clothes and even food. [56] The impact, as the tax is essentially regressive, has been to place a greater burden on the poor. Estimates of the March 1994 and 1995 increases, which also limit mortgage tax relief to 20 percent, show that the vast majority of households will lose around 2 percent of their incomes, but the lowest 10 percent of households will lose 3 percent, while the top 10 percent will lose only 1.5 percent of their incomes. [57] The regressive nature of the taxation – leaving the rich proportionately least burdened – is set to continue, leaving the vast majority feeling worse off.
The other key factor responsible for destroying the feeling of well-being so prevalent even among many workers during the 1980s is the debt hangover. This does not affect just the big companies, but also millions of households. The Thatcher years saw a gigantic expansion of personal debt. At the centre of this was the housing boom and the huge increase both in the number of mortgage holders and the levels of repayment with which they were burdened. In 1989, 29 percent of those with a mortgage were paying £3,000 a year or over, and another 21 percent were paying between £2,000 and £3,000. [58]
In 1981 the number of mortgages stood at 6.3 million. By 1991 it had risen to 9.6 million. Whereas arrears of over 12 months stood at 5,500 in 1982, they had reached 13,800 in 1989, 36,100 in 1990 and a staggering 59,700 in 1991. Arrears of between six and 12 months rose from 21,500 in 1981 to 66,800 in 1989, 123,100 in 1990 and 162,200 in 1991. Repossessions nearly trebled between 1989 and 1990 to 43,900. [59]
Housing debt was the largest but by no means the only area of debt. Workers were encouraged to borrow with very little restraint through the boom years of the 1980s. This made it seem as if their pay levels were actually considerably higher than they were, as credit cards took the ‘waiting out of wanting’. In contrast the effect of the ‘debt hangover’ is to make their actual wage levels today lower than they might at first seem. Total personal sector debt trebled between 1980 and 1992, from £100 billion to £300 billion. ‘As a percentage of total disposable income, personal-sector debt rose from less than half in 1980 to more than disposable income in 1990.’ [60] Nor have most workers managed to repay much debt. Indeed, one report recently claimed that ‘the proportion of consumers getting into debt rose in the second quarter [of 1993]’. [61] Levels of debt have only turned down very slightly in the depth of the recession, suggesting the costs of servicing the debts make it impossible to pay them off in full. This often leads to new debt being taken on.
No wonder any comfortable feeling of well being has disappeared.
 
The changed political climate
It is hard to overestimate the change in political mood which has taken place since Thatcher’s heyday. At root is the change in the economy: economic expansion, skill shortages in many areas, boom industries in many parts of the country, rising property prices which gave those workers with mortgages a sense of growing prosperity, rising real incomes, all contributed to the complacency of the mid to late 1980s. Those who worried about riots, rising crime, homelessness, or the decline of health and education provision were told that these problems would be solved as the free market took hold. The wealth generated by companies and rich individuals would eventually ‘trickle down’ to everyone. But the rich had to be allowed to get richer, public spending had to continue being reined back, otherwise the magical forces of the market would not be able to work.
This view was always only rather grudgingly and partially accepted by most workers. Thatcherism has been described as being ‘hegemonic’ during the 1980s, suggesting a positive and enthusiastic endorsement of Thatcherite values by millions of workers. This was never the case. Electorally, the Tories remained a minority party throughout the decade. Politically, the grasping, selfish, yuppie values associated with the creed never permeated to the mass of ordinary working people. So even at the height of ‘Thatcherism’ after the defeat of the year long miners’ strike in 1985, and during the Lawson boom, most people espoused collectivist, welfarist and egalitarian attitudes over most issues. Indeed, comparisons between opinion surveys in the mid-1970s and those in 1983 and 1986 show that Thatcher’s rule created a higher awareness of the social causes of poverty in the later years. [62] Labour’s electoral doldrums were still mainly a result of its attacks on workers when last in government in 1974–79 and the failure of its local councils to protect people from Tory policies. Its constant moves towards Tory ground did not help. And Thatcher could not have won most of her victories without a degree of treachery from within the workers’ movement itself. The miners’ strike could not have been defeated without the splits in the Labour Party and TUC over the strike. Rupert Murdoch could not have moved to Wapping and smashed the print unions without the willingness of the electricians’ union to recruit scabs. And when the attacks on the NHS became obvious in 1988, there was a national wave of sympathy for the striking Manchester nurses which forced the government onto the defensive – a position it has occupied ever since.
Once the boom began to come to an end, even the superficial gains which most workers had made during the Thatcher years looked less attractive. The residue left after the tide went out included record debt, millions with mortgages they could not afford – often on houses whose value fell far lower than the value of the mortgage itself – the decline of overtime, bonuses and other opportunities to augment salaries whose basic levels were quite low. On top of this was the continuing decline in the public sector: transport, hospitals, libraries – and, perhaps most important, the looming threat of unemployment.
The sense of betrayal felt by millions during the recession has been tangible. Workers were cajoled, persuaded and bribed into buying houses, using easy credit to buy cars, holidays and furniture, on the assumption that the good times would never come to an end. Then they did. The economy ran out of control, and could not slow down gradually. Instead it crashed to a halt. This reversal of fortunes was part of what led to a change in attitudes. But the common assumption, even by some on the left, that hostility to government and other changes in attitudes are simply the product of workers being directly hit in the pocket is false. If we look more closely at the changes in attitudes which have taken place, they clearly stem from a much broader and deeper disaffection with society.
It is true that many people are centrally concerned about one question; whether their jobs are safe. Despite a fall in total unemployment for a few months in the spring and summer of 1993, the number of people who feared they would be thrown on the dole grew. For example, in August 1993, 47 percent of those asked said they were very or fairly concerned about losing their job. [63] The same survey demonstrated that between April and August 1993 the number of people aged under 24 who worried about redundancy and unemployment rose from 40 percent to 50 percent. The number of unskilled and semi-skilled manual workers concerned about the dole rose from 44 to 53 percent. But we should remember that fear of unemployment is not something limited to the ‘down’ side of the business cycle. Mass unemployment, varying between the historically high levels of 1 million and 3 million, has haunted British society for 20 years. That fear has been translated into hatred of a government which has presided over unemployment.
Attitudes on other issues have also shifted. So another poll, conducted in September 1993, showed that 77 percent thought that ‘there is one law for the rich and one for the poor.’ Only 18 percent favoured privatisation, and 46 percent thought that ‘more socialist planning would be the best way to solve Britain’s economic problems’ – including 24 percent of Tory voters questioned. [64] Polls on taxation show a similar change in attitudes. Not only do a clear majority favour increasing taxes rather than cutting public spending, they also favour increasing the higher rate of tax. In a recent poll 59 percent wanted the higher rate raised, compared with 41 percent wanting the basic rate raised and only 14 percent wanting higher VAT. The most popular area for cuts was defence spending, with 64 percent in favour. Even cuts in social security benefit – the favourite Tory scapegoat – were only favoured by 31 percent of those questioned. [65]
Perhaps even greater changes of attitudes have taken place in areas which cannot be considered narrowly economic. Education – long an area where the left has been on the defensive and a small band of right wingers have been making the running – has become an arena where the right has found itself totally isolated. A recent poll showed that 73 percent of those polled thought league tables were ‘damaging’ and 83 percent were against moving teacher training to classrooms. Testing at seven years old was thought unnecessary by 66 percent. [66]
A similar change in attitudes has undermined the sorts of institutions which most people believe are central to any sort of consensus in British politics: parliament, the judiciary, the police, the monarchy. Respect for such institutions seems to be at an all time low. A recent poll in the Financial Times showed that the institutions most perceived to have improved between 1992 and 1993 were the supermarkets, while those seen to have got worse included prisons, law courts, the police, hospitals, transport, job centres and social security offices. [67]
The justice system is widely perceived as being corrupt and unfair. The Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four and the Judith Ward case are just three of the Irish cases which have undermined popular faith in the police and the judiciary. But it is clear that rottenness and corruption of the system extends to many supposedly non-political cases such as the M25 Three or the Taylor Sisters. And Winston Silcott languishes in jail despite being cleared of the killing of PC Blakelock.
The monarchy has been badly tarnished by the successive royal scandals, the queen’s grudging and belated agreement to pay some tax and the monarchy’s demand that the taxpayer foot the bill for repairing the fire damage at Windsor Castle. Parliament is seen as full of politicians on the make. By 1991, fewer people expressed public confidence in the police, legal system, education, parliament, the church, the civil service and the press than had done so in 1981. The only two areas which attracted higher public confidence in 1991 than ten years previously were the armed forces and the trade unions. [68]
 
The employers’ offensive
The employers were as surprised as anyone when boom turned to recession. True there had been agonising since 1988 about what would happen to the economy. How would the overheating of the economy develop? Would there be a soft landing or a hard landing? Were company assets over-valued? But these were a minority of worried voices. Most employers just got on with making the most of the good times. They responded to the speed and severity of recession in the traditional way: in addition to plant closures and job losses they attempted wage cuts or freezes, lay offs and attacks on conditions. Large numbers of workers suffered attempts to reduce or abolish tea breaks and benefits, and, in some places, to impose temporary contracts on new workers. Everywhere the recession was used as a means of trying to worsen workers’ conditions and to tilt the balance between workers and employers in favour of the latter.
By 1990 such incursions were well under way. However, despite the pessimism of the trade union leaders that fear of unemployment would frighten anyone who even thought about fighting back, these attacks met with opposition, although of varying degrees of intensity and success. An attempt to restructure working patterns at Rolls-Royce was rolled back by the threat of action. Shipyard workers at Yarrow’s in Glasgow managed to stop new workers being taken on at a lower rate. [69] The effect of recession on different industries and groups of workers was uneven. So pay increases still tended to be in double figures (compared with 1993 they seem astronomical), with 12 to 13 percent at Ford and Vauxhall [70], and 12.5 percent offered at Jaguar, Coventry (a figure narrowly accepted, with two fifths of workers against the deal). [71] It was as though the employers were willing to pay for industrial peace so that they could squeeze the last drops of profit out of the boom. They were also still suffering from one of the features of late 1980s expansion – skill shortages. Although overall jobs were being lost, the shortage of skills was still acute in certain industries. So, for example, in late 1990 some British Rail signals staff won 25 percent wage increases in order to keep their skills in the industry. [72] But the picture was very uneven. At the same time, there were moves towards wage cuts. [73]
The past three years have been characterised, however, by a remarkable failure on the part of the employers to really use the recession to attack workers’ organisation on the scale that they would like. The period has seen employers move onto the offensive, encounter at least verbal opposition, and very often make at least some tactical retreat rather than move into full confrontation with their workforce. This outcome is all the more remarkable given the general nature of the attacks. It was commonplace early in the recession to argue that this was a ‘services recession’ and that manufacturing industry would not be so badly hit. In reality the slump has affected every area of industry, and the attacks on wages and conditions have applied across both the private and the public sectors, creating a situation whereby today no worker (and indeed no member of lower or middle management) feels secure in his or her job, and where every worker is facing threats of change in working conditions.
The generalised nature of the attacks is one reason why the political mood is so volatile and angry. The attacks have tended to have a contradictory effect. The whole point of privatisation, market testing in the civil service, or indeed ‘rationalisation programmes’ in the private sector has been to cut jobs, raise levels of productivity and introduce ‘flexibility’ within the particular workforce. There have been two simultaneous reactions to this. The first is a sense of demoralisation and weakening of workers’ organisation, as shop stewards find their position under attack and workers find ‘custom and practice’ undermined. Such feelings of demoralisation tend to play into the employers’ hands. At the same time the attacks can have the opposite effect. So there can be an increased level of fightback, as the employers’ offensive forces often previously passive and ‘moderate’ groups of workers into action.
Even groups of workers such as college lecturers, who only two decades ago would have hardly considered themselves as trade unionists, are now turning to militant action, including strikes, as the only means of defending their conditions. The motivation is simple: from relatively privileged conditions compared with many workers (short hours, reasonable working conditions and above average pay) they find themselves subject to downward pressure on wages, and speed up at work – increased through-put of students, longer hours, shorter holidays, administrative burdens on top of teaching work. Some of the old attitudes still linger, but they increasingly see their work as little different from routine clerical work. Teachers are suffering the same sorts of pressure, with their work becoming harder and less valued. The boycott of school tests received almost total support from teachers (and even head teachers), reflecting both the accumulation of years of bitterness at worsening conditions, and a feeling that the only way of stopping the attacks is through industrial action.
The view of the trade union leaders and many in the media that ‘workers won’t fight in a recession’ has been shown to be very wide of the mark. The past three years have seen a willingness to fight over pay, jobs and conditions. Sometimes the levels of anger have expressed themselves in struggles over non-economic issues, such as the 1,500 strong Oxford post office workers’ strike in opposition to sexual harassment of a female worker by a supervisor. [74] However, it is also true that these strikes have not led to a generalised fightback, or to any qualitative change in the industrial struggle over the past three years. Why has that been the case, and how can we overcome the weaknesses of the movement?
 
What is the nature of the fightback?
A pattern has emerged in recent years. Attacks take place on workers from government and private sector employers. The scale of the attack provokes in nearly every case real resentment and opposition. The workers concerned protest. They stage ballots, lobbies and one day strikes. At every stage the union leaders will reflect this anger only in the most passive and obsequious way. They caution against strikes, rush to compromise with the employers (sometimes before any real concession is made), and do their utmost to restrict the action to the most token and limited kind. The outcome is usually, therefore, at best compromise, at worst sell out which results in defeat for the workers concerned, who in turn face victimisation and demoralisation.
Time and again the picture of the disputes during the last three years is one of false starts, militant feeling and often a real urge for action which is frittered away by months of balloting and negotiations. We can see this early in the recession in disputes such as the long running Greenwich housing workers’ strike, or the strike by British Rail guards at Manchester Piccadilly in the autumn of 1990. TUC leader Norman Willis stated in January 1991 that ‘now is not the time for class warriors on either side to be locked into an historic conflict over allocation of fast disappearing spoils which will destroy their own and their colleagues’ jobs’. [75] Such views have remained the watchwords of the union leaders right through the recession years.
Yet the seemingly unfavourable circumstances existing in the first half of 1991 – steeply accelerating job losses and deepening recession against the background of the Gulf War – did not stop many groups of workers from disregarding Willis’s advice. The main impetus for many of these strikes was employers raising the stakes in one way or another – imposing cuts in jobs, victimising shop stewards and union activists, changing rotas and shift patterns to squeeze more work out of the workforce. But the strikes very often showed a militancy and involvement which took them beyond the purely defensive. A strike at Glasgow’s Queen Street station over management attacks on guards led to a partial victory for the workers. In the same week, in January 1991, 2,000 Tower Hamlets council workers staged a one day strike against victimisation, there were votes to strike at GM buses in Manchester over the sacking of a union chair, and Southwark council workers voted to strike against the cuts. [76]
By March and April 1991 the stage was set for bigger confrontations. Rail and tube workers, members of the RMT union, were set for a fight over job cuts. There was every sign that the fight over pay would take off among a wide range of workers: there were the possibilities of battles in health, power, steel and the BBC. [77] In May the tube workers’ ballot – overwhelmingly in favour of strike – was announced, and at the same time textile workers, post office counter staff and rail workers were balloting over pay. [78]
There were signs that the militant and successful strikes over government pay policy in the summer of 1989 could be repeated. A mini strike wave in the north east of England took place as 600 ship repairers at Appledore’s struck over pay and were sacked, 1,500 Tyneside bus drivers struck over pay, AEI Cables workers in Gateshead joined an indefinite pay strike and 1,000 Teesside British Steel workers rejected a 4 percent pay offer. [79] In Glasgow 1,600 Kvaerner Govan shipyard workers walked out against the advice of their officials and shop stewards over pay and shift changes. [80] Perhaps most remarkable, not in terms of industrial action but in demonstration of the change of mood since the mid-1980s, workers at Rupert Murdoch’s Wapping plant voted six to one for action ‘short of a strike’ and printers held up production in protest at redundancies and new shift patterns. [81]
The mood was certainly not for surrendering to the employers’ demands. Indeed, a much more common feeling was that the recession was the fault of government and employers and that they should pay for it. The mood continued into the summer, when bus workers from the London Forest company came out on indefinite strike against pay cuts and changed working conditions. [82] But none of the strikes succeeded in marking a wider breakthrough, although many of them ended in at least a partial victory. Throughout the union leaders were for compromise and retreat. They increasingly used the imminent election as an argument against direct action. So at the NALGO and COHSE union conferences that year the key argument was that defence of the NHS had to wait for a Labour government. [83]
A combination of union leaders’ reluctance to take the struggle forward, and the employers backing off when faced with the threat of or some limited industrial action meant the promise of action was not fulfilled. Sometimes too the employers just dug their heels in and sat out long strikes, such as those at Albacom and Craven Tasker in Scotland. By the autumn of 1991 there were signs that this sort of confrontation with the employers was becoming more of a pattern. For example, in engineering there were disputes at the two workplaces mentioned plus Unipart, Perkins Diesels and Marston. [84]
The prospect of an approaching election made the union leaders more cautious than usual, with the AEU hailing a single-union deal with Toyota, [85] which conceded a 39 hour working week at a time when most major engineering plants had won 37 hours. GMB leader John Edmonds declared that the Tories would use ‘industrial trouble as a desperate election ploy’. [86] In the last months of 1991 and the first months of 1992 the level of struggle was low, with just a handful of often very long and bitterly fought strikes, such as the dispute at the Rotherham Advertiser over union derecognition, and the militant but ultimately defeated strike at Manchester’s GEC Alsthom plant against compulsory redundancies. [87]
The mood to ‘wait for Labour’ played a great part in ensuring that industrial struggle remained muted, although there were strikes and demonstrations against local government cuts, and strike ballots on the London underground over job losses, among Barclays Bank workers over pay, and at Blue Circle Cement against a pay freeze. [88]
The election result itself destroyed the ‘wait for Labour’ argument in one blow. Although it caused further demoralisation to tens of thousands of activists, the sense of shock and bewilderment which greeted the Tory victory did not last for very long. Within three months of the election, there had been a sharp change of mood reflected not necessarily in the number of struggles but in their militancy and intensity, and in the sense of crisis already facing the Major government. Waves of protest at the cuts in education, health and council services swept London in the summer of 1992. The mood of anger was created by a further sense of betrayal among those, some of whom had voted Tory in April, suffering from further job losses and cuts. Socialist Worker’s headline of 20 June summed it up: ‘Major’s big lie: slump continues, record dole queues, savage new cuts’. [89]
Black Wednesday dramatically increased the sense of tension. Sackings were continuing inexorably – with 3,000 jobs going at British Aerospace and 1,500 at Ford – when the announcement over pit closures on 13 October brought to a head all the resentment and anger into one giant protest which threatened to bring down the government just six months after its election.
In every workplace in every local community all but the most diehard right wingers were horrified at plans to destroy what was left of the coal industry. Local demonstrations in support of the miners and two gigantic marches in London attracted near universal support. Talk of general strike was on the lips of people who had voted Tory the previous April. John Major’s personal unpopularity now exceeded that of Thatcher. The movement round the miners saw the resurgence of a level of generalised working class consciousness which had not been seen for many years. The weekday demonstration called by the miners and their supporters in central London attracted sizeable contingents of workers from every city in the country. There was sporadic strike action, especially where local militants argued for it, even though this was discouraged by the trade union leaders. Delegations came from post offices, fire stations, construction sites, from Ford and Vauxhall, Rolls-Royce, Rover Longbridge, from rail depots, hospitals, schools and council offices. [90]
The movement around the miners created a feeling of confidence among workers generally. At the end of October Daily Mirror journalists occupied their newsroom in protest at the appointment of union buster David Montgomery. Newham council workers went back on all out strike in their long running dispute over sackings. Workers staged a brief occupation of their ice cream factory against closure in Kirkby, Merseyside. [91] The Tories were completely taken aback and fearful that the protests could spread to industrial action elsewhere, hence their U-turn intended to take the sting out of the controversy. The announcement that the queen would agree to pay tax followed shortly afterwards, as they tried desperately to shore up support and appease some of those who increasingly realised that their society was based on class inequality.
Perhaps most important, however, was the role of the union leaders themselves, both in taking control of the movement and in trying to deflect it into lobbying, ‘broad’ popular front campaigns with Tory MPs, and away from any notion of industrial action. Crucially they prevented other workers from taking the sort of action which could build the growing opposition to the government. So Jimmy Knapp, leader of the RMT union, called off the tube workers’ strike – after three votes for action – on the grounds that there was no real mood for a strike! [92]
As a result the pits campaign had really lost its momentum by the time, months later, that Heseltine produced his ‘reprieve’ for some of the pits. The trade union leaders and the Labour Party gave the government time, and it used the time to defuse the anger, make minor concessions, and claim that the ‘free market’ (actually a market totally rigged in favour of gas and nuclear power), not the government, was forcing the closures through. The outcome of the TUC strategy has been disaster: all the 31 originally threatened pits will close and probably more besides. The much vaunted Tory rebellion eventually amounted to five MPs, a year after the original closure announcement had provoked so much anger. [93] This represents a complete frittering away of the biggest mass campaign for years by the leaders of the working class movement.
We can see the same picture in microcosm in a whole number of the disputes which broke out during 1993. These have been characterised by higher levels of bitterness even than those of the previous summer, let alone those before the election. There is more of a sense that it is better to fight and be defeated than do nothing, since the advantage of doing nothing becomes less and less when jobs are going on such a massive scale, and when so many workers are having to work harder for less money. Two disputes in particular reflect this mood. Timex workers in Dundee (mostly women) refused to accept worsened conditions imposed on them by management and struck. They preferred to see the factory close (the eventual outcome) than to see the union broken and workers in Dundee forced onto worse conditions. The huge support for their lengthy strike demonstrated how many other workers agreed with them. But the failure of the strike to move beyond picketing to winning blacking from other British Timex plants (illegal under the anti-union laws and therefore expressly forbidden by the engineering union leaders) meant they were never able to really deal a body blow to the company.
The strike by nurses at University College Hospital, London, against closure again attracted huge levels of (albeit more localised) support. The nurses struck knowing that the alternative would be job losses anyway. The six week strike was an incredible achievement given the lack of health service tradition over all out strike action, and the lukewarm support from the nurses’ union, UNISON. But in the end the relatively small scale strike, popular as it was, could not overcome the lack of action elsewhere and UNISON’s failure to give it full support, finally pulling the plug on finance for the dispute. The nurses went back with management agreeing not to discipline the strike’s leaders. Yet both strikes demonstrate the lengths to which workers are prepared to go, and the anger that such disputes represent.
How can we sum up the events of the class struggle in the past few years? The majority of disputes have been characterised by extreme bitterness. This has become more marked over the past year. The mood after the election has been quite different from what went before.
This, obviously, is a subjective view. There is no easy way of measuring why workers do or do not strike. And the strike figures certainly show a very low level of strike activity. In 1991 there were 800,000 days ‘lost’ through industrial disputes, supposedly the lowest figure for 100 years. But they were also very low in 1976, in 1981–83 and in 1986–87. The number of stoppages is also the lowest for 50 years, although, as the government statisticians themselves admit, ‘small stoppages involving fewer than ten workers or lasting less than one day are excluded from the statistics ... disputes not resulting in a stoppage of work are not included in the statistics. [94]
What we learn from the figures therefore is that there is little mood among the official leaders to call disputes (unlike the two high points of strike days in recent years, the 1979 Winter of Discontent and the 1984–85 miners’ strike). Nor is there a mood of militancy among workers sufficient to see the figures climb without the blessing of the union officials. But the figures do not tell us much more.
Most important of all, it is impossible to judge the political situation simply by reference to the strike figures or even the industrial struggle alone. There are several other factors to take into account. Firstly, there are a number of strikes balloted for successfully which simply do not take place – usually because the employers make some concessions and the union leaders accept a compromise. There are some disputes which do not even get to the final strike ballot – the dispute of the firefighters, in the summer and autumn of 1993 over the retention of their pay formula would not show up in any of these figures. Half day strikes over cuts, or walkouts in support of the miners, or that of the council workers in the Isle of Dogs in protest at the election of a fascist councillor, would similarly be ignored.
Secondly, much of the industrial action which does take place is restricted to one day strikes at most. There have been very large numbers of these over the past three years – by council workers in various parts of the country, by teachers (for example Islington teachers staged three one day strikes in the summer of 1992 against compulsory redundancies) [95], by London bus workers, and by rail workers. Very often they attract overwhelming support and high levels of militancy. The Islington teachers voted 85 percent for strike action on a 92 percent turnout, for example. But, because the strikes are restricted to one day affairs, they very often do not have a lasting impact on the consciousness of the workers themselves or on other workers.
The third feature of the disputes which never surfaces in the statistics is the growing anger and disgust of a minority of those involved with the sell outs of the trade union leaders. In every dispute a minority sees through the dominant strategy and wants to do something more. Although this minority is not usually sufficient to alter the balance of forces, it makes it harder for the union leaders to get their own way. One important example of this was the UCW strike in Cardiff in the summer of 1993. The strike involved high levels of militancy and solidarity from other post workers, only to be sold short by an official who was then besieged in his office by angry workers. [96]
All these factors help to paint a much more complex picture of the industrial scene than the one with which we are usually presented. And the mood of militancy extends far beyond workplace issues to embrace anger at attacks on living standards, the problems of debt, the huge increases in bosses’ salaries, rising taxation under the Tories, and the rundown of the NHS. There is a substantial degree of rank and file anger which is belied by the strike figures.
Evidence of the breadth of protest is there in the demonstrations, campaigns and pickets which have occurred over a range of issues in recent years. The opposition to what is happening to the NHS has extended far beyond those directly working in the health service, with huge levels of support from other workers. There have been militant protests at the siting of yet more superstores on greenfield sites. The attempt to stop a motorway through the Hampshire beauty spot of Twyford Down failed, but not before direct action required injunctions to stop the protesters. As the result of a similar protest, plans to drive a motorway through ancient woodland in south east London were abandoned, and there have been continuing demonstrations to stop the bulldozers demolishing houses in east London for the M11 link road. Every city and many towns in Britain can point to similar grass roots resistance.
Protesters over job losses, schools cuts and environmental damage have been joined by campaigners against VAT on fuel. Largely led by pensioners, who have demonstrated and lobbied repeatedly against this iniquitous tax increase, it is likely to become one of the biggest issues facing the Major government in 1994.
The British National Party election victory in September 1993 raised the political temperature in Britain considerably. The size of opposition to the fascists was demonstrated in the Unity demonstration in Welling the following month, when nearly 600 coaches helped to bring 60,000 people from every corner of the country to demand the closure of the BNP’s headquarters.
Given the high level of politicisation in Britain today, large numbers of people are drawing the connections between these different issues. Unfortunately they are given little leadership or direction from those at the head of the labour movement.
 
Softly, softly: the Labour and trade union leaders
The Thatcher and Major years have revealed a crisis of Labourism. The worst phase of this crisis was during the early 1980s when Thatcher’s second election victory led to a sharp shift to the right under Neil Kinnock, then the party’s new leader. This move to the right has continued in the decade since, with the gradual abandonment of every major policy on which Labour stood in the early 1980s. By the 1992 election any idea of Labour as a party committed to radical change had all but disappeared, as its policy accepted more and more of the Tory ground on economic strategy, unemployment, defence and foreign policy and privatisation.
Of the four pillars of the post-war settlement – counter-cyclical demand management, mixed economy, full employment, welfare state – only the last remained inviolate. Its improvement, however, depended upon the economic growth expected from an orthodox liberal managerial posture, aided by the ERM, in conjunction with a long term industrial strategy whose harvest was, by definition, for the future. ‘Supply-side socialism’ was, in effect, what one observer dubbed a ‘left Heseltinism’. [97]
After the 1992 defeat even the welfare state has been less than inviolate. So Labour’s ‘modernisers’ are moving away from ideas of collective provision such as universal benefits, using the excuse that many people no longer need them, or that they subsidise the middle classes. They have also moved away from their traditional economic mixture of high taxation and high public spending. The Commission on Social Justice, set up by John Smith in January 1993 to ‘think the unthinkable’ about the future of the welfare state, is engaged in producing new Labour policies which will almost certainly concede many Tory arguments. Labour’s ambition to run a more modern, efficient British capitalism, regardless of the cost to workers, is clear.
Labour’s move rightwards has not been without a price. It has suffered internal conflict, including expulsion of many left wing activists and repeated faction fights within the party, but has come little closer to achieving parliamentary power. Labour’s lead in the opinion polls, which was beginning to evaporate as early as September 1991, disappeared completely on polling day itself. This led to Kinnock’s departure, and the conclusion by the bulk of Labour’s membership, as well as its leaders, that Labour had to further ‘modernise’ – loosen its links with the unions and appeal to the middle classes who, the story goes, were put off by fears of higher taxation under Labour.
To date this strategy has had little success. Labour is ahead in the opinion polls – but there would be something badly wrong if it were not, given the record unpopularity of the Tories. November 1993 figures put Labour at between 40 and 45 percent, not exactly an overwhelming endorsement. [98] Labour’s lack of differentiation from the other parties means that it still does not seem a sufficiently distinct alternative. Its record in local government – it now has the largest number of local government seats – of cuts, redundancies, and jailings over the poll tax has also helped tarnish its image.
The Labour Party also has huge internal problems. Labour is withering at its roots, a recent survey shows. Its activists are deserting in droves, its membership shrinking fast, and there is no obvious sign of how this trend can be reversed. Nearly 7,000 Labour Party members contributed to the survey by Patrick Seyd and Paul Whiteley which shows deep disaffection among Labour activists and a sharp decline in activism. For example, ‘in 1990, 82 percent of members had been involved in some form of party campaign in the previous year, whereas by 1992 only 56 percent had.’ Less people were delivering leaflets, canvassing and attending meetings by 1992; the only activity which had increased was giving money. Former members questioned about why they had left revealed a quarter quit because Labour abandoned basic principles or moved too far to the right. A further quarter mentioned specific policies, particularly Labour’s support for the Gulf War. [99]
These findings are very serious for Labour, although perhaps not surprising for many active on the left in Britain, as Labour’s lack of inspiration, willingness to fight and its attacks on activists has left its members disoriented, demoralised and passive. It is in danger of becoming an increasingly old party with a smaller and smaller membership, a finding which the survey’s authors say means that ‘the activists are a diminishing number, and Labour could thus become a parliamentary head with no roots’. [100]
The lack of concern felt by much of Labour’s leadership for these sorts of problems has led to the divisions expressed during the past year between Labour’s ‘modernisers’ and ‘traditionalists’. This is not obviously a clear left-right split, since most of the protagonists are still hostile to the far left, and since even in the traditionally left wing constituency parties there has clearly been a sharp rightward shift. [101] Instead it reflects a feeling that the ‘modernising’ changes are threatening the whole basis of Labour as a party capable of delivering any reforms and making it indistinguishable from the Tories. Talk of leapfrogging over the Tories often leads some shadow cabinet members closer to the Tory right than to its left wing, as Ian Aitken, by no means a Labour left winger, has pointed out:
We have the remarkable spectacle of the post-Thatcherite Tory party riven from top to bottom over exactly the question at issue – namely, whether to raise taxes in order to maintain effective services, or cut services in order to maintain low taxes. Yet Mr Brown has chosen this very moment to attach himself, however tentatively, to the right wing side of the argument. [102]
The same sort of fear appears in the debate on the link between the unions and Labour, with some thinking that one member one vote will throw the baby out with the bathwater and leave Labour weaker, not stronger. Peter Hain, the ‘soft left’ MP for Neath, has argued that:
To win, a party must first motivate its members, its potential recruits and its core voters. That will not be sufficient but it is an essential precondition for victory. By such a test, the modernisers are failing badly. The steady demoralisation of the party’s membership has accelerated with every modernising lurch – and is now almost terminal. [103]
The message put across by Hain and those union leaders such as Bill Morris and John Edmonds who led the fight against one member one vote (the attempt to substitute individual votes in constituencies for any collective trade union input) at Labour’s conference is that leapfrogging has gone too far. The ‘modernisation’ of Labour’s 1992 election campaign left it with a vote barely higher than the two previous elections, but with a much smaller and more demoralised membership. Yet the ‘traditionalists’ are denounced as old fashioned, even though it is much more likely that they reflect a feeling of discontent among Labour and trade union activists. A typical expression of this mood – not from hard left wingers who have in large part been driven out of the party, but from the centre left of the party – came from a Labour member in Norwich, a large, active ‘traditional’ party:
It’s absolute bollocks to say the electorate doesn’t want us to retain those links [with the unions]. I’ve done about 50 meetings on the subject around the south [of England], and everyone thinks the present constitutional debate is an irrelevance. People are more concerned about the health service, education and crime. It’s a media myth, and I think I represent the mainstream in that view. [104]
The narrow vote which eventually brought the modernisers victory at Labour’s 1993 conference in the move towards one member one vote has not resolved this tension. John Smith was forced to make concessions towards the importance of the unions, both at the TUC’s own congress and at Labour Party conference itself, in order to win the votes of a whole number of affiliated unions. Indeed, Smith claimed the move would strengthen the link between the party and the unions in his conference speech. [105] He could not win without reaffirming some of the ‘traditional values’ of Labour. He, along with his shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, then seemed to distance themselves from arch moderniser Tony Blair. [106] And the media, having demanded the vote, then claimed that Labour was still in hock to the unions and that little had changed, thus negating the point of changing the voting system anyway.
The argument over one member one vote is symptomatic of Labour’s problems. Like the generals in the First World War it is continually fighting the battles of the previous war. Its changes are therefore either too little too late, and denounced by the media as brought about grudgingly or the changes fail to match the mood of the public opinion the leadership is so desperate to chase. The decline in its active membership leads Labour into a vicious circle. The leaders are more and more out of touch, and in many parts of the country – especially the south of England – have effectively written off the possibility of victory. There are fewer and fewer active members in these areas to campaign and argue with potential voters, so the whole place is abandoned to the Liberals. Liberal victory is then in turn hailed as evidence that Labour cannot win. It will take more than conference debate to shake the Labour leadership from this course. It will require events outside the narrow world of parliamentary party politics to push Labour in another direction.
What of the union leaders? Despite their often bitter differences over how much they influence Labour policy, and their justifiable resentment at the idea that the unions lost Labour the 1992 election, they have no serious alternative strategy. Labour’s leadership may be reluctant to endorse any industrial action, but the union leaders themselves are hardly more enthusiastic. The head of the TUC, John Monks, said recently that calls for days of strike action were ‘simplistic’. At a time when a TUC commissioned poll found that nearly eight out of ten people thought trade unions were necessary to protect workers’ interests, Monks declared:
The job of unions is to avoid strikes, particularly ones of any duration. There is often an initial enthusiasm among workers when they embark on industrial action. But during strikes income is lost, job security threatened and people are vulnerable to victimisation. Strikes can be necessary against bad employers, but they are a weapon of last resort. [107]
In evidence to the House of Commons employment committee the TUC outlined its strategy of worker-employer participation to strengthen British capitalism: unions can help competitiveness, and collective bargaining can lead to smoother workplace relations. As the Financial Times reported, ‘the TUC denies any inherent conflict between capital and labour in the workplace.’ The TUC document argues that ‘it does not follow that trade unionists are less committed to their company than other employees.’ [108] There is no sign that most of the trade union leaders differ in any crucial respect from this view. So, despite angry words when the government announced a second year of public sector wage freeze last September, they rapidly retreated from any notion of strike action. John Edmonds argued that ‘the chancellor’s pay freeze is an attempt to trap public sector workers into a strike and to take the spotlight off his own difficulties’, while the TGWU’s Jack Dromey declared that ‘it is clear that part of the government’s agenda is to trap us and thereby trap the Labour Party’. [109]
This approach has dominated the union leaders’ attitude to industrial action throughout the Major years. They argue that such action is outdated, and that the successive legal constraints passed by the Tories prevent strikes being successful. There is no doubting the effect of the law on disputes. The engineering union officials and Scottish TUC successfully argued against mass picketing and blacking of goods in the Timex dispute. There are countless examples where action has been prevented because the union officials claim it is illegal and will bankrupt the union.
Yet although the union leaders portray themselves as the helpless victims of the law, there is some evidence that they use the law as a shield to hide their own lack of militancy. It is quite clear that the main function of the anti-union laws is to reinforce the union leaders’ own caution and conservatism, and that most of the time, even when there is not much industrial action involved, the laws remain paper tigers. A London School of Economics survey of negotiators from 25 trade unions, representing over 5 million workers, found widespread support among them for pre-strike ballots, with 68 percent finding them ‘a good thing for trade unions’. The survey also found that employers were reluctant to use the law. It says that ‘legal proceedings – or even a solicitor’s letter – are still clearly the exception’. Only a quarter of those questioned said employers had threatened to use the law over industrial action – and only a quarter of these (i.e. just one-sixteenth of the total) had even begun legal proceedings. [110]
So the real picture is that employers are still loathe to use the law in industrial disputes – luckily for them the officials’ reluctance to call action means they are not often faced with the choice. Time and again in the past three years they have claimed there was not the support for action or that proposed action was illegal. Even when officials have wanted some limited action they are so fearful of the law that they refuse to call it directly, instead couching their language in veiled hints which do not help to mobilise. In particular, they keep any disputes which do break out as narrowly based as possible, refusing to call any solidarity action which is, of course, illegal. This was most apparent round the miners in October and November 1992, when solidarity strikes were rejected as a strategy, and replaced by one of winning public opinion and lobbying dissident Tories.
The right wing of the movement was enthusiastic about this strategy; if the left was less so, it raised no public opposition. Even Arthur Scargill went along with the TUC’s campaign uncritically, at least in public. Claiming that he would act when the time was right, he attacked those (such as the Socialist Workers Party) who argued in November and December for occupations of the pits in order to escalate the campaign. [111]
However, it would be wrong to assume that the only reason for lack of militancy inside the working class is the conservatism of the trade union leaders. If this were the case, it would be relatively easy to sweep them out of the way on a tide of militant generalised struggle. But the picture is much more complicated than this. There are many instances when the rank and file does not fight, even when the union leaders urge action. An analysis of why there is not more militancy has to take account of the working class movement as a whole. How do we explain it?
The feeling among the trade union leaders does not exist in isolation at the top of the movement, but rests on and is reflected by a whole layer of shop stewards, convenors, trade union branch secretaries and trades council activists. They hate what is happening to them at work, the weakening of the unions and the attacks on the welfare state. They feel that something has to be done to roll back these attacks. But they are the victims of the Thatcher and Major years – and even of the Callaghan Labour government before them. The downturn in class struggle during those years, the successive defeat of strong groups of workers such as the miners and print workers, has left them with a sense of powerlessness. They feel that very little can be done to change things, and that the only hope is the election of a Labour government. They are not even optimistic about that. They reflect a strong element of pessimism and cynicism, caused partly by the national union leaders who they feel are out of touch with them and with ordinary workers. But they are also sceptical about the ability of ordinary workers to fight after years of accepting Tory attacks.
Yet this pessimism jostles side by side with more militant ideas even in the mind of a single individual: these are the activists who, for example, reflected a much higher level of militancy at the union conferences in the spring and summer of 1993, but at the same time feel that they cannot carry industrial action in the health service or fire brigade. This pessimism reflects the attitudes of the Labour and trade union leaders, with the assumption that direct action never works and that all that can be done is to rely on voting to change things. This in turn leads to passivity among many workers which itself reinforces the same reformist conclusions.
In every dispute or strike all sorts of different ideas and considerations are in competition for the allegiance of those involved. Anger at a particular grievance, a deep sense of injustice as custom and practice are unilaterally varied, the erosion of wage levels and living standards, all create motivation for action. But there is always fear and hesitation at the same time: will there be victimisations or sackings, is it worth striking for the money involved, can anything be gained from an intransigent government or employer? Here the subjective question of confidence, of experience of strikes, of some assessment of the balance of forces, is vitally important.
In this sense the role of leadership is particularly important today. Even though the picture is not simply that the leaders hold back the members, it is true that the conservatism of the union leaders is very often strongly in contrast with the militants who get involved in disputes. So, even where there is a fight, the union leaders can influence levels of confidence and militancy. But so can organised socialists. The fact that this fine balance between fightback and retreat exists is the great change since the 1980s – and a great challenge for the left.
 
The future in the present
Writing in this journal 15 years ago, Tony Cliff explained why the working class movement had gone into decline from the mid-1970s. He explained the erosion of rank and file workers’ organisation of shop stewards, and the limitations of industrial militancy in a period of economic and political crisis. The early 1970s had seen a workers’ industrial offensive on the one hand and political generalisation by the employers on the other:
The unstable balance between the political generalisation on the employers’ side and the industrial militancy on the workers’ side could lead to one of two extremes: to political generalisation of the industrial militancy, or to the decline of sectional militancy. The latter took place as a result of the misleadership of the trade union bureaucracy, the Labour left and the Communist Party. [112]
With the onset of economic crisis, politics are absolutely central to leadership inside the workers’ movement:
[the crisis] cannot be met with the weapons of yesteryear. Such fragmented reaction will not do now, on the wages front, not to say on the front of cuts, closures and unemployment. The muddled thinking of workers in the years of the boom did not prevent them from still improving their material conditions. Now what happens in the grey matter of workers’ heads is decisive for their material well-being. Politics, socialist politics, has therefore to be brought to the shop floor. [113]
Then the movement faced a turning point between decline and advance. The failure of the movement as a whole to learn the correct lessons from the disputes led to a whole series of defeats during the 1980s. Now we face another turning point between further decline or revival. In both cases socialist politics are vital.
The struggles of the Major years have only reinforced the analysis outlined above. Since it was written we have seen two recessions and a boom which delivered little permanent improvement in the living standards of most workers. The crisis of capitalism has proved to be lengthy, intractable and met with increasingly desperate solutions. What would have been very straightforward questions with simple answers 30 years ago – how do we create full employment, where will the money come from for new hospitals, can we provide a good living standard for the old? – are now issues which bring into question the very future of capitalism. When the employers and government describe high unemployment as a natural disaster or hospital closures as a natural consequence of the market, those fighting on such issues have to be prepared to question the priorities of the system itself.
The working class movement will not be rebuilt on the old syndicalist notion of stronger unions alone, but will have politics – socialist politics – at its centre. Despite the relatively small number of socialists in workplaces today, their numbers are growing as a result of the series of economic and political crises internationally, and their influence on the industrial struggle is becoming greater. Socialists played a crucial role in Timex, in the UCH strike and in the resistance to pit closures. Unfortunately in none of these was their influence sufficiently strong to tip the balance in favour of victory rather than defeat. But the situation can change, both through the numerical growth of socialist organisation and through the influence it can exert on a much wider layer of militants. The role of Socialist Worker is central to this. It can become the thread linking a network of militants far beyond the Socialist Workers Party, arguing for solidarity, rejecting the divisions inside the working class movement of race and sex, carrying an alternative strategy to that put forward by those at the top of the movement. It can therefore be the key to rebuilding strong rank and file organisation.
The early 1990s have seen the working class movement leave the worst years of the downturn. The government no longer dares to use a strategy such as the Ridley Plan which led to the defeat of one powerful group of workers after another. The employers do not at present have the confidence to organise a union busting operation like that organised by Rupert Murdoch at Wapping. The working class movement is poised on the brink of volatile struggles, the outcome of which is by no means certain or foreseeable. Either the workers’ movement scores some decisive victories or eventually it can be once more defeated, with predictable consequences. Although there is a large politicised minority inside the working class movement, it lacks confidence and political direction. Socialist organisation and publications can help to provide that direction.
The period ahead will be stormy. The British ruling class is determined to force down the living standards of British workers at the same time as raising productivity. The ‘social wage’ will be further cut back. A deeply unpopular government will attempt to scapegoat various sections of society – from immigrants to New Age travellers. But discontent is certain to continue – taxation is set to rise, further cutting into already eroded real wages, and a further year of public sector pay freeze is under way.
At the same time, the battering the working class has taken under Thatcher and Major has left it fairly intact. Union membership remains high, at over 40 percent of employed workers. [114] The attitude of British workers is still very strongly in favour of state provision in areas such as health and welfare. [115] The lack of big industrial struggles in the past three years has a great deal to do with the caution of both the employers and the leaders of the working class movement. The signs are that the contradictions of British capitalism will lead that to change.

Notes
1. S. Heffer, The Beginning of the End, Spectator, 16 October 1993.
2. See Pollwatch, New Statesman and Society, 3 September 1993.
3. Interview with John Redwood, Independent, 9 September 1993.
4. High Hopes, Poor Strategies: Can Industry Plan for Growth? (Pera International, London) p. 4.
5. Central Statistical Office figures, Independent, 15 September 1993.
6. Central Statistical Office figures, Financial Times, 22 September 1993.
7. Financial Times, 12 August 1993.
8. Recovery slow but steady (sic) by Robert Chote, Independent, 23 October 1993.
9. Financial Times, 16 August 1993.
10. Economist, 7 August 1993, p. 99.
11. See D. Beecham, No Exit Ahead, in Socialist Review, June 1993.
12. A CBI survey published at the end of October showed manufacturing orders and output flat, export orders falling and industrial jobs going. Slow or no growth in continental Europe was held to be a major factor in this gloomy picture. See Financial Times, 27 October 1993.
13. Economics notebook by P. Norman, Financial Times, 8 March 1993.
14. Ibid.
15. E. Balls, Lurking Threat of First World Debt Crisis, Financial Times, 27 September 1993.
16. Financial Times, 13 August 1993.
17. See E. Balls, Financial Times, 6 September 1993.
18. See B. Clement, Anger Over Clarke Ultimatum, Independent, 15 September 1993.
19. Speech by Lord Lawson (formerly Nigel Lawson) to the British Association for the Advancement of Science (sic!), reported in Financial Times, 1 September 1993.
20. Gallup report by A. King, Daily Telegraph, 6 August 1993.
21. See Socialist Worker, 23 February 1991, for reports of Tory disarray over the poll tax, and for reports of Labour councils attacking non-payers.
22. See Socialist Worker, 27 April 1991.
23. See Socialist Worker, 19 January 1991, 9 February 1991, 23 February 1991.
24. See Socialist Worker, 1 June 1991.
25. A. Billen, Tory Party Blues, Observer Magazine, 26 September 1993.
26. Quoted in L. German, The Crisis of British Politics, Socialist Review 168, October 1993.
27. S. Heffer, The Beginning of the End, Spectator, 16 October 1993.
28. See L. German, The Last Days of Thatcher? in International Socialism 48, Autumn 1990, pp. 15–19, for both the unpopularity caused by attacks on public spending and the inability of the government to really cut substantially the proportion of national wealth which went into spending.
29. C. Huhne, Tory Choice that Hurts the Poorest, Independent on Sunday (Business Section), 4 July 1993.
30. Financial Times, 13 August 1993.
31. E. Balls, Missing the Unemployment-Deregulation Link, Financial Times, 6 September 1993.
32. Institute for Public Policy Research, The Justice Gap (London 1993) p. 21.
33. Ibid., p. 29.
34. Ibid., p. 24.
35. Social Trends, (HMSO, London 1992) p. 148.
36. C. Huhne, op. cit..
37. The Justice Gap, p. 44.
38. Ibid.
39. See Households Below Average Income (HMSO, London 1993).
40. The Justice Gap, p. 47.
41. Ibid.
42. See Independent, 19 July 1993.
43. Family Expenditure Survey, quoted in Observer, 5 September 1993.
44. Ibid.
45. Independent, 8 September 1993.
46. H. Young, One of Us (final edition, London 1991) pp. 501–502.
47. Central Statistic Office figures, Financial Times, 22 September 1993.
48. New Earnings Survey 1993, Part A (HMSO, London).
49. Quoted in Financial Times, 16 August 1993.
50. Incomes Data Services Report 647, August 1993.
51. New Earnings Survey 1993, op. cit.
52. C. Huhne, Public Pay Policy is not Productive, Independent on Sunday (Business Section) 19 September 1993.
53. Interviewed in Financial Times, 26, 27 June 1993.
54. New Earnings Survey, op. cit.
55. Bacon and Woodrow survey quoted in Financial Times, 11 October 1993.
56. Social Trends (HMSO, London, 1993) p. 90.
57. H. Sutherland, Poorest could be hardest hit, Independent, 17 March 1993.
58. Social Trends (HMSO, London, 1992) p. 153.
59. Ibid., p. 154.
60. E. Tucker, Debt tightens its grip and threatens to hit recovery, Financial Times, 29 July 1993.
61. Financial Times, 9 July 1993.
62. In response to the question, ‘Why do you think there are people who live in need?’ a Eurobarometer survey in 1976 showed the following responses: because they have been unlucky 10 percent, because of laziness or lack of willpower 43 percent, because of injustice in our society 16 percent, and it’s an inevitable part of modern life 17 percent. A study in 1983 put the responses at 13 percent, 22 percent, 32 percent and 25 percent respectively, while a 1986 study showed 11 percent, 19 percent, 25 percent and 37 percent. There was a marked increase in those who blamed it on injustice or an inevitable part of modern life, while there was an even steeper fall in those who blamed the individuals concerned. See British Social Attitudes (Aldershot 1987), p. 10.
63. Redundancy fear survives upturn, Financial Times, 31 August 1993.
64. ICM poll, Guardian, 17 September 1993.
65. ICM poll, Guardian, 18 September 1993.
66. Observer and Cassell poll, Observer, 5 September 1993.
67. Public services rapped, Financial Times, 26 August 1993.
68. Social and Economic Trends for Local Government survey, quoted in UNISON magazine, London, October 1993..
69. Socialist Worker, 13 October 1990.
70. Socialist Worker, 27 October 1990.
71. Socialist Worker, 17 November 1990.
72. Socialist Worker, 27 October 1990.
73. The most notorious example at the time was at Toleman’s in Essex. See Socialist Worker, 27 October 1990.
74. Socialist Worker, 10 November 1990.
75. Socialist Worker, 12 January 1991.
76. Socialist Worker, 26 January 1991.
77. See Socialist Worker, 6 April 1991 and 13 April 1991.
78. Socialist Worker, 4 May 1991.
79. Socialist Worker, 11 May 1991 and 18 May 1991.
80. Socialist Worker, 18 May 1991.
81. Socialist Worker, 1 June 1991 and 25 May 1991.
82. Socialist Worker, 20 July 1991.
83. Socialist Worker, 22 June 1991.
84. Socialist Worker, 12 October 1991.
85. Socialist Worker, 9 November 1991.
86. Socialist Worker, 12 October 1991.
87. Socialist Worker, 22 February 1992 and 7 March 1992.
88. Socialist Worker, 14 March 1992 and 28 March 1992.
89. Socialist Worker, 20 June 1992.
90. For a much more detailed (though still incomplete) list of who came from where see C. Kimber, On the Move, in Socialist Review, November 1992.
91. See Socialist Worker, 24 October, 31 October and 7 November 1992.
92. Socialist Worker, 28 November 1992.
93. See Five Tories defy whip in coal vote, Financial Times, 28 October 1993.
94. Social Trends (HMSO, London, 1992) p. 59, and see Appendix, pt. 4, p. 191.
95. Socialist Worker, 4 July 1992.
96. Socialist Worker, 21 August 1993.
97. G. Elliott, Labourism and the English Genius (London 1993) pp. 161–162.
98. Pollwatch, New Statesman, 3 September 1993.
99. Survey reported in Guardian, 25 September 1993.
100. Ibid.
101. Indicative of this is the change in composition of the constituency section of Labour’s NEC, once the bastion of the left, now not even including Tony Benn, and electing such right wingers as Gordon Brown and Tony Blair (although interestingly at the 1993 Labour conference both received lower votes than in 1992).
102. I. Aitken, Brown’s Thatcherite gobbledegook, New Statesman, 3 September 1993.
103. Quoted in Observer, 12 September 1993.
104. Local party basing success on traditional brand of socialism, Guardian, 25 September 1993.
105. See Conference Notebook by P. Stephens, Financial Times, 30 September 1993.
106. Ibid.
107. John Monks interviewed in Independent on Sunday, 5 September 1993.
108. Quoted in Financial Times, 6 October 1993.
109. Quoted in Financial Times, 18 September 1993.
110. Survey carved out by the Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics, quoted in Financial Times, 31 August 1993.
111. Reported by Socialist Worker journalist Mike Simons and SWP miners about a meeting in Armthorpe, Yorkshire, in November 1992 when Scargill rounded on the left.
112. T. Cliff, The Balance of Class Forces, International Socialism 6, Autumn 1979, p. 45.
113. Ibid., p. 45.
114. See Notes of the Month, Socialist Review, October 1993. Also see Social Trends (HMSO, London 1993) pp. 158–159.
115. Britain ranked with Italy as top of several countries (the others were the US, Australia, West Germany and Austria) for believing that government should provide health care, and decent living standards for the old and unemployed, and reduce income differences between rich and poor. See British Social Attitudes, special international report (Aldershot 1989), p. 41.



RECENT events in the student world have thrown many socialists into confusion. This confusion centres round the application of the National Union of Students’ ‘no platform’ policy. In the past months this policy has been used to deny a platform to a whole range of people whose ideas are very far from the original intention of the ban.
So Tory ministers have been attacked in the name of ‘no platform’, and in a bizarre twist to the policy last month, a black students’ society at South Bank Poly was ‘no platformed’ for listening to tapes of the American black nationalist leader, Louis Farrakhan, who has made anti-Semitic statements.
These bannings have at best caused confusion and have at worst led to allegations that socialists will try to ban everyone with whom they do not agree.
It is worthwhile in such circumstances to consider what was the idea behind no platform originally, and how it developed in this particular direction.
The slogan ‘no platform for racists and fascists’ was raised inside the student movement as early as 1973 in response to the growing toehold of the organised extreme right and fascists. The argument behind it was very specific. Fascist and racist organisations had a particular aim: to organise against black people and other racial minorities and drive them off the campuses – and of course ultimately drive them out of the country altogether. Their arguments were not based on rational debate, but on race hatred.
The experience of fascism in Germany and other countries before the war demonstrated that fascists could not be treated as simply another political party. They would use democratic channels to build their support, and then suppress all forms of political opposition – not simply left wing organisations, but trade unions, campaigning groups and so on.
It was therefore argued that it was not enough to challenge such organisations to debate – they had to be prevented from gaining a platform to propagate their ideas.
It was also extended to those racists who were organised in groups like the Monday Club. These had very similar ideas to the fascists and were also prepared to organise along racist lines. The policy was never extended to those who simply held some racist ideas – probably the majority of most trade union or student union members. The way to deal with those ideas – of say, support for immigration controls, or for the general line of the popular press – was through open and democratic debate. Here socialists could hopefully win at least some of the arguments against racism.
The organised racists and fascists were to be restricted – denied free speech – precisely to protect the democratic rights of the majority. An NUS pamphlet published at the time explained why very well:
‘We reject the view that the restriction of fascist organisations in this way is to deny all freedom of expression; our aim is to make the ideal of freedom of assembly and expression meaningful in reality. To turn the problem of “free speech” from a practical into an abstract question is to jeopardise the position of the labour movement and its defence of democratic rights, and to allow fascists and racists to shelter under the democratic freedoms when their ultimate aim is to destroy such freedoms.’
The argument had a certain amount of success. ‘No platform’ meant stopping the fascists from marching where possible, and preventing them from holding rallies and meetings. Sizeable counter demonstrations were mobilised: in 1973 and ’74 at Red Lion Square in London, in 1974 in Leicester and in 1977 in Wood Green. These and many others culminated in the successful mass mobilisation against the National Front in Lewisham, and the subsequent founding of the Anti-Nazi League.
By 1979 the NF had become a spent force, on the margins of the political scene, and the argument about fighting the Nazis was hardly a central one.
But, although the NUS leadership was by now embarrassed by its no platform policy (removing its commitment to stopping the fascists ‘by any means necessary’ in the late seventies), the policy itself didn’t disappear, and in fact was extended by the early eighties to be not only against unspecified ‘racists’ but against ‘sexists’ as well.
This was the result of two things. Firstly, there was the growing awareness among a layer of young people of the racist and sexist nature of capitalist society. This meant that quite large groups of students could feel very strongly about the issues and want to take quite radical action against them.
Secondly, however, there was a growth in the level of tokenism about how to deal with the issues. By the early eighties, NUS conferences were riddled with points of order objecting to remarks supposedly discriminating against women, blacks, gays, disabled people and so on. Most of the objections were trivial and a few downright stupid. Nearly all could have been dealt with by argument, not no platform.
But the tokenism was a reflection of the tokenism towards the various movements that we have witnessed over recent years, and which even Kinnock is often happy to encourage. It went hand in hand with a general move to the right in the student movement and so has become even more meaningless. Despite the no platform policy, there are more college rags, with their racist and sexist magazines, than there were ten years ago.
So the policy often means little in confronting racism and sexism on more than an individual level. But what is more, it broadens the definition of no platform to an almost unworkable degree. The original no platform went for stopping organised fascists and racists, because their organisation was such a threat. That is not the case with individual members of the rugby club, however noxious they might be. Those people have to be defeated politically, in open and hopefully large union meetings.
To some extent the same is true of Tory ministers and MPs. They have horrible racist and sexist ideas, and are responsible for all sorts of anti-working class measures. But again, their ideas can be defeated politically, and many Tory students can be won to seeing that those ideas are wrong – if socialists know how to argue with them.
That is not at all to say we don’t organise protests against such people. These are often very successful. But a protest against Tory minister Waddington at Manchester, or Victoria Gillick in Sheffield, should not be graced with the title of ‘no platform’.
Racists and sexists should not go unchallenged in union meetings. But the way we challenge again has to be sensitive and not just a blanket ban.
Understanding this makes it easier for us to understand the tactics that have caused so much trouble in recent months. We have to make a distinction between the organised fascists and extreme racists – like Harrington at North London Poly, or the Tory MPs Harvey Proctor and John Carlisle (who have extreme-right links) – and mainstream Tory MPs. We deny the right of free speech to those who want to destroy free speech altogether.
There are of course situations where socialists might oppose the right of others to have a platform (for example where counter-revolutionaries are plotting to sabotage a revolution; or even where scabs are trying to mobilise a back to work movement). But those examples do not apply in the present situation.
Even with racists and fascists we have to adopt tactics which fit. There is no point in fifty students storming the stage where a right-winger is speaking if they are incapable of mobilising wider numbers. Socialists have to think in situations like this that many people will oppose these right-wingers – so how do we get them involved in the maximum activity?
This is important both in terms of the protest itself and in terms of the aftermath. At places where small numbers have taken direct action they have all too often found themselves threatened with victimisation. A large demonstration at the time is much greater protection against such threats.
With racist lecturers, students etc., the campaign has of necessity to be much longer and has to be as wide as possible. The Harrington campaign was successful both because it was based on very militant tactics and because it involved far wider numbers of students than simply the existing left, including the philosophy students on Harrington’s course.
Similar campaigns against a racist lecturer at Bristol university, and a fascist student at Plymouth need to get similar levels of support if they are to succeed. And they need to mobilise round specific aims – it is no good including a shopping list of demands, including the total abolition of racism in society, in a campaign to get rid of a racist lecturer. The wider issues should be taken up in Socialist Worker Student Society meetings, in Socialist Worker and Socialist Worker Review.
It is also worth remembering that the no platform policy has always been aimed at those who wanted to maintain oppression inside this society. We have always to distinguish between the racism of the oppressor and that of the oppressed. That is why the banning of the black society at South Bank is wrong. We have to argue that the ideas of Farrakhan are wrong, and often reactionary. He is totally misguided to see the oppression of blacks in America stemming even in part from another oppressed group, the Jews. American blacks are even more misguided to believe that Farrakhan has any answers to the problems of black workers.
But he cannot be equated with the racists inside the National Front, who want to deny the rights of all oppressed groups.
The argument about no platform is unlikely to go away in the next month or two. The NUS leadership are trying to reverse the present no platform policy. They are supported by those like the SDP who are already campaigning round the question in colleges like Lancaster.
Reversal of the policy would be a defeat for the left. It must fight to maintain the right of students to deny racists and fascists a platform. There are signs that the executive will not have an easy ride on the question. Even at Oxford University, which held a recent referendum on the subject, over 2,000 students voted to keep the no platform policy although it was defeated. Local campaigns have often been very successful, and show little sign of going away.
But the policy will only be defended successfully if its supporters avoid two things. The first is to widen the policy far too far, and therefore allow the right wing to make capital from particular issues. The second is to get trapped into allowing the right to pose as the defenders of free speech. Nothing could be further from the truth.
 



John Molyneux’s reply to Sheila McGregor claims to have ‘answered Sheila’s central theoretical argument’ by demonstrating at some length that there are major divisions inside the working class which are obstacles to class unity. With most of these examples, one can have little disagreement.
However, Sheila’s argument was never that the relationship between men and women is a totally equal one, or that men do not have any advantages over women in capitalist society. What she argued was firstly that it was against the class interests of both men and women for these divisions to exist, and therefore they could not in any serious sense be described as benefits. Secondly the nature of the family and the sexual division of labour inside the working class was such that it was wrong to look at the matter mainly in terms of antagonisms between the sexes. The family’s role and men’s and women’s role within it could only be seen in terms of its function for capital as a whole.
John doesn’t really address himself to these questions and therefore misses the point of much of what Sheila is arguing.
It is therefore worth stating once again what is really involved in the argument about whether working-class men benefit from women’s oppression. [1] It is not, as John seems to think, about whether working-class men have marginal advantages over their wives. After all, in my article on Theories of Patriarchy [2], I talk about the ‘marginal benefits’ which accrue to working-class men. Chris Harman quoted these comments favourably in his article Women’s liberation and revolutionary socialism. Yet it is precisely this article to which John Molyneux felt compelled to write his initial reply.
Neither is the argument about whether women’s oppression exists (although John at one point in his latest article seems to imply that if you deny the validity of his argument, then you are denying the existence of women’s oppression itself). Myself, Sheila and Chris Harman have all gone to some lengths to develop a theory of women’s oppression which roots it in class society and not in the individual relations between men and women.
Indeed, it is here that we all part company with John’s analysis, which all too often slips into the error of seeing women’s oppression as caused by the relations between individuals, rather than seeing those relations as in fact a product of the class nature of oppression.
The real issue at debate, therefore, is not at all whether there are marginal advantages, but whether these are the cause of women’s oppression, and what the political consequences are in terms of organising men and women workers.
Whatever advantages working-class men might have, their interests, just like those of working-class women, lie in joining the fight against women’s oppression. This is because the roots of women’s oppression lie in class society in general and capitalist society in particular.
The reason the argument between ourselves and John is a serious one is because the great divide between Marxists and patriarchy theorists is over precisely this point. Their ideas explain women’s oppression in terms of male domination – regardless of class or of the class nature of a particular society. We, in contrast, see it caused by the development of exploitation. The capitalist system rests on the exploitation of workers, both men and women. Women workers also suffer a specific oppression which is located in the continuing privatised reproduction of labour power. This points to a solution which involves collective working-class action.
The point of our argument has been to show that patriarchy theorists – especially those who claimed to be materialists like Heidi Hartmann – were wrong. She and others like her claimed that the material benefits which men gained from the oppression of women were such that they wedded men not to fighting this oppressive system, but to its maintenance instead. [3] The argument has been developed, in much less theoretical form, by many feminists inside the women’s movement. [4]
The argument, as I argued then, is complete nonsense. Even a cursory look at working-class history, or the pattern of class struggle, showed that. It was, however, this argument that led me to argue that you cannot talk about the ‘benefits’ accruing to men unless you talk about the system as a whole. Once you take the system as a whole it is much clearer that the real beneficiary of women’s oppression is the capitalist system itself. These arguments were repeated in Chris Harman’s article. [5]
This is the central point of Sheila’s reply to John. It is still the central point of the argument. Yet it is the very point that John refuses to confront in his reply. [6]
The appeal of the argument that men benefit from women’s oppression is a real one, and highly understandable. It appears to reflect reality. Most of the time under capitalism people only see fragmentary and superficial aspects of the system. As a result, if you only go by immediate, empirical impressions, you get quite a confused idea about what the system as a whole is about. When it comes to the problem of locating the source of women’s oppression, it is all too easy simply to take surface appearances and mistake them for reality. So people who take a superficial view only notice that working-class women suffer disadvantages compared with men, and therefore conclude it is the working-class man’s ‘benefits’ which maintain oppression. This is what patriarchy theory does.
That is why its talk about ‘male benefits’ can be so popular. It fits with the ‘common sense’ of those who live in capitalist society at a time when it is not being shaken to its root by massive class struggle. But that is precisely why Marxists have to disagree fundamentally with it. That is also why it is very important to argue strongly with those like John who are excellent Marxists when it comes to other issues, but who fall into the trap of feeling it is ‘unreasonable’ to dismiss such common sense arguments out of hand.
 
The family
Putting the stress on benefits, as John does, is mistaken because it diverts attention away from the central question of where oppression comes from. To see why, we have to start with what is fundamental to women’s oppression – the family. The family has always had an economic role, a role certainly obscured in late capitalist society (where we are led to believe that it is a voluntary and very private institution), but nonetheless that economic role is a real one.
Engels wrote about two spheres of production – social production and the production of life: ‘According to the materialist conception, the determining factor in history is, in the final instance, the production and reproduction of immediate life. This, again, is of a twofold character. On the one side, the production of the means of subsistence, of food, clothing and shelter and the tools necessary for that production; on the other side, the production of human beings themselves, the propagation of the species. The social institutions under which people of a particular historical epoch and a particular country live are conditioned by both kinds of production: by the stage of development of labour on the one hand and of the family on the other.’ [7]
To this much misinterpreted statement he added a rider – that as society develops so social production becomes increasingly dominant over the reproductive sphere. This is true of the working-class family today.
The family under capitalism is dominated by the needs of social production. Its role is straightforward: to maintain the existing generation and, more crucially, to reproduce the next generation of workers. The reproduction of labour power is the central role of the family, and women’s role in society is subordinated to that.
At different times under capitalism, it is true, women’s role within the family and within society as a whole has changed. For example, the early capitalist family in the industrial cities (on which Marx and Engels based many of their views on the subject) almost ceased to be a family in anything but name. The old feudal family, where women played a productive role within the household, was smashed by the rise of capitalism, and in its place arose a family composed almost entirely of wage labourers. Not only the men but the women – even during pregnancy and breastfeeding – worked long hours in the mills and factories. Children as young as four worked. There was no ‘family life’ or ‘home hearth’ to turn to in these conditions. But the changing needs of capital (for more skills, less labour intensity), plus the real fear among workers that the working-class family itself was dying out, led to a series of changes which placed women much more at the centre of the home and much less advantaged in terms of waged work.
These changes included the introduction of protective legislation covering women and children and the demand for a ‘family wage’ – in other words, a wage which would cover the cost of reproduction not only of the male worker himself, but that of his wife and children as well. [8]
The idea behind the family wage was a complete division of labour between the man in the sphere of paid work and the woman in the sphere of unpaid reproductive work. This is often regarded as the ‘typical’ family. Today that idea is palpably nonsensical. But it was never an accurate portrayal of working-class life, even in the second half of the 19th century when these ideas took root. Probably no more than 10 per cent of male workers received such a family wage. For the rest of the working class, paid work for women was a necessity if the family was to be maintained. But it was paid work for women in an unfavourable market. Low pay, exclusion from certain trades, casual or seasonal work were all features. So was the assumption that the ideal was the stay-at-home housewife and that the family was the woman’s domain. [9]
Today it is increasingly recognised that the ‘typical’ family doesn’t exist. Most married women work (although often part time). There is every sign of this trend maintaining itself and even increasing. [10] The pattern today is that the commodity of labour power is produced by the paid work of the man, and to a lesser extent the woman, outside the home – which keeps the family fed, clothed, housed etc. – plus the unpaid work of the woman in the home (what Sheila McGregor calls the partial negation of woman’s traditional role). [11] This is the central economic role of the family, and it is crucial to our understanding of women’s oppression.
It demonstrates that the family is not a voluntary institution at all. It is produced by class society, shaped and formed by capital to serve its needs. The family’s overwhelming function is the reproduction of labour power. To see this institution as one which benefits (or otherwise) individuals inside it, is to mistake surface appearances with the actual economic reality. In some ways the argument Marx puts forward about the wage paid to the worker is a useful analogy. The wage is not a gift from capital, nor is it even necessarily a monetary approximation of what value the worker produces. Rather it is only that amount of the value produced by the worker which is necessary to cover the cost of the reproduction of the worker [12] (and at least part of his family [13]).
The wage is essential to the worker in order to live – but it is also essential to the capitalist, to ensure that the worker is maintained for work in the future. Similarly with the family. Both men and women workers desire and want the family (the ‘heart of a heartless world’ as Marx wrote in another context). But that family is even more essential to the capitalist for the reproduction of labour power if he is to continue to accumulate.
So we have to start from the fact that the position of men and women within the family is of overwhelming benefit to capital itself – and this far outweighs any advantages and disadvantages between men and women (or to children) themselves in the family. The oppression of women is therefore rooted in the needs of the system to reproduce labour power – not in the needs of individual men to be waited on, or to exert power over women. The benefit to capital lies not just in the myriad unpaid functions of the wife and mother, including the education and socialisation of children as well as the more tangible forms of housework, but also in the fact that women’s role as housewives and workers structure them into low-paid, badly organised work.
 
What about within the family?
But, it will be argued, all this may be true. However there is still massive inequality within the family – and who benefits from that? That inequality is undeniable. But I would argue several points here: (i) the differences and advantages that men have are by no means massive; nor even are they the substantial benefits that John claims. [14] So there is no material basis for men being ‘bought off’ by these advantages, (ii) The key burden in the level of housework inside the family is not the service of men, but the labour-intensive care and upbringing of children – as befits a unit whose major task is the reproduction of labour power, (iii) The division of labour which exists is one which is accepted in existing society by both sexes – to a major degree at least. This is an argument put by Sheila McGregor [15] which John decries in his latest article. [16] But it is not the ludicrous argument that he suggests, (iv) Following from this, I believe it is quite wrong to talk as John does about men and women being ‘competitors in the labour market and competitors for free time in the home’, since this misunderstands the role of the division of labour in the working-class family.
Let us look first at the question of how substantial the benefits are. The most recent survey [17] shows that men have on average 75 minutes a day more leisure time than women. Not irrelevant, it is true, but given the increase in leisure time for both sexes over the last few decades, hardly the sort of privilege that would materially tie men to the system if it were threatened by women. Studies of housework show that there has been a change in recent years with the increase in women working. Domestic tasks are now done at least in part by men. This has probably increased with the high level of unemployment over the past decade. These changes are limited, it is true, but nonetheless the change has not all been one way – women going out to work. It also needs to be remembered that the converse of women working longer hours than men in the home is that men tend to work much longer hours outside the home. So families where women work full time in the home to care for young children are also those where men work the highest amount of overtime.
Secondly the key burden in housework comes when you consider the role of children. John Molyneux denies this. But he is falling for the illusion which capitalism creates, that privatised reproduction is there to make the lives of individuals more pleasant, rather than to meet the needs of the system. But this is simply not true. That is why it is an offence for mothers to neglect their children or for fathers to refuse to maintain their offspring. That is why the state increases the level of legislation governing the family – Family Law – constantly. The state can step in with fairly severe penalties to try to ensure the smooth reproduction of labour power. The man and woman inside the family are both compelled to put in a great deal of hard work, both in social production and the home, in order to ensure that the next generation of workers exists.
Of course, most people don’t look at it like that. Most are happy to work to achieve more for ‘their’ family and especially ‘their’ children. If they were not, capital would have a much tougher job persuading them. As it is, the system – like so much else under capitalism – works largely on consent, not on open coercion. And individuals get a great deal of satisfaction, happiness and recreation from their particular families. But that doesn’t alter the basic setup.
Even here, it is hard to see how the man benefits inside the family for the hard work put into childcare by the woman. John argues that men still get a ‘spin off from the work done for children (meals cooked, washing, shopping, etc.). Yet it seems to me that this is as misguided as suggesting that the wife gets a ‘spin off from the man’s higher wage (spending money, food, housing, etc). It totally misses the point of who housework is performed for – capital.
What about the argument that John so bluntly dismisses, that by and large women accept their oppression through acceptance of the division of labour? This is clearly overwhelmingly the case. Of course it is not a thing that socialists should welcome. But it shows – and this is the point Sheila was making – that although the divisions inside the working class on the grounds of gender and sex are very deep, they do not produce the sort of fundamental antagonisms that so many feminists seem to believe.
This mistake leads John into a number of errors about the family and the relationship between men and women workers. He says rightly, that we have to ‘state what is’ when describing the world. Yet he seems to be unable to accept that ‘what is’ inside the family, is that women all too often do accept their role as homemaker, that they will cook every night, that men should do less in the home.
John objects to these arguments on the grounds that to put them forward is comparable to arguing that workers accept degrees of enforcement from the policeman or foreman, but this doesn’t make the enforcement or its acceptance justified. The same is true, he says, of the woman accepting her oppression. He is of course right that there is nothing commendable about anyone accepting their oppression. But he is quite wrong to compare the foreman or policeman to the husband. The two former are in a clear relationship of authority. They can get you the sack and put you in jail, and each exert their authority over a fairly wide number of people. The relationship between the man and the woman is not like that. Firstly it is one to one. Secondly it is based at least initially on notions of ‘love’ and ‘romance’ which makes both partners willing to enter the contract. Even within the family there are a whole number of complexities which John doesn’t do justice to. Husbands can oppress wives by physical violence. They can also do so by trying to ‘protect’ them from the outside world. Parents can oppress their children both by authoritarian behaviour, and by stifling them with ‘love’. These latter are oppressive relationships alright – but they are not based on the coercion of the factory or the state and its paraphernalia of laws.
To simply treat the husband as ‘cop’ in this situation is to miss the way that working-class people themselves view the family and its dual, contradictory role. This is because he doesn’t see the family as a totality, either in its economic role, or in its role as haven in a heartless world. Because of this he is led always towards the appearance of things, rather than to the reality.
He makes the same mistake when he talks about the man and woman as ‘competitors’ – on the labour market for work, in the home for leisure time. Firstly, a fairly elementary study of work in Britain shows that the segregation of the labour market is such that there is relatively little competition between men and women workers. By and large the different sexes do different jobs. Unemployment has not altered this pattern – despite the claims of many feminists that the effect of unemployment would be to drive women back into the home. This has not happened at all. But if men and women were in competition on the labour market, one could expect the opposite to happen.
In his arguments over leisure in the home, John too reiterates some of the more insidious feminist arguments. If his argument were taken literally, then it comes painfully close to that put forward by the Anna Cootes and Bea Campbells of this world – men have to give up their privileges in order that women will gain. John falls perilously close to this argument, again because he sees the solutions in terms of individual change, rather than class struggle.
There is another aspect of women’s acceptance of their traditional role which John tends to dismiss. This is the attitude of women towards the socialising of other women and reinforcing their oppression. Mothers, female relatives and friends, are all some of the major encouragers of ‘femininity’ in girls. A survey of girls’ attitudes in West London in the 1970s puts it like this: ‘Girls grow towards the future as wives and mothers, and the increasing expectation that they should incline towards a career presents implicit contradictions to many of them. It is seen as particularly important that girls develop and believe in the female role and in preserving the established order, because they are the major agents in transmitting this ideology to their own children.’ And ‘They have a long-held understanding of the differences between themselves and boys, and the different work roles laid out before them. The ideology of marriage, husband, home and children as the most integral parts of the future has been passed on, usually through their own mothers.’ [18]
It is not just men who maintain women in this subservient position, but women themselves. It is in the home that the skills of housework and caring for a man are learnt. A woman who rejects this norm of wife and mother (leaving her children, sleeping around, not doing housework), may well find herself receiving as much approbation from fellow women as from men. [19] This is not simply an unfounded assertion, but can be borne out by a wide number of sociological and historical studies.
 
What is the importance of the argument?
Why bother to go into such details about the family? Because it is extremely relevant to John’s argument.
John himself doesn’t seem to accept this. All the articles that he criticises – including Sheila’s – had as their theoretical framework the analysis of the family which I have tried to reiterate briefly above. He doesn’t challenge this analysis at all, to the best of my knowledge.
But acceptance of the analysis leads to certain very firm conclusions. In short, it leads to the conclusions that oppression is rooted in capitalist society, that the family unit is an express instrument in maintaining that oppression and that the conclusion to the problems of women’s oppression can only lie in the socialisation of production and reproduction – in other words the abolition of class society. The solution to women’s oppression is therefore linked to the fight against exploitation.
John argues that he accepts all these conclusions. But all his theoretical arguments lead him away from them. He still hasn’t overcome this contradiction – nor is he likely to find this easy. At present, his arguments rest not on a coherent theory of where women’s oppression comes from, but in taking bits and pieces of empirical observation, points of disagreement with other writers and fragments of arguments in order to try to weld together a coherent whole.
It is not surprising that he doesn’t succeed, because he is trying to do the impossible. He denounces Sheila for posing questions in terms of ‘either/or’. But there are some questions which have to be posed in that way.
Locating the roots of women’s oppression is one of them. Fundamentally, women’s oppression is located either in class society or it is located in the actions of individual men. It cannot be located in both – unless of course you want to accept the argument put forward by certain patriarchy theorists that oppression results from an alliance of individual men and the ruling class. John obviously and rightly rejects this view as the ahistorical and un-Marxist nonsense that it is. But he has not rejected all the ideological baggage that goes with such a position, and this leads him to a whole number of errors. It is for this reason that John doesn’t refute our basic thesis. To do so would either lead him to accept some of the patriarchy theories, or else would lead him to conclude that the lessons he drew from the overall picture were the wrong ones. Instead, he tries to ignore the major thrust of the argument, while continuing to assert that men do benefit from women’s oppression.
 
How is oppression to be overcome?
Those who argue, like many feminists, that male benefits are fundamental, claim that the problem is getting men to give up their power. Men have to give up high wages and well-organised jobs so that women can get more. As Campbell and Coote put it: ‘The biggest obstacle is not finding the necessary resources, but persuading men to relinquish their privileges. Chiefly this means giving up their privileges to absent themselves from unpaid work and monopolise jobs that are skilled and higher paid.’ [20]
Clearly one section of the working class relinquishing the gains it has made can only benefit the capitalist class. Yet this sort of argument has wide currency. Even more popular are those arguments which believe men doing more in the home would diminish women’s oppression. Even John sometimes implies that this would be a partial solution. The unequal division of labour, he says, ‘is maintained by the system through male workers who refuse to do an equal share of the housework or worse, insist that their wives do all of it.’ [21]
But this implies that the real roots of women’s oppression lie in, relations between men and women. Yet as we have repeatedly shown, women’s oppression is structured into capitalism. Low wages and part-time work are a product of the hidden assumption that all women have a male ‘breadwinner’ (even though a quarter of all inner-city families are single parent). At the same time the low wages feed back into the family so that it is ‘natural’ for the woman to stay at home because her earning capacity is less. [22]
However, this brings me to perhaps the major point in the argument about women’s oppression, which John certainly doesn’t develop at all (although he accepts it at least in principle) and that is the impact of class struggle on the attitudes of men and women.
All the evidence suggests, when one looks at society in the process of upheaval, that as the level of class struggle rises the tendency is for the differences between men and women to diminish. The miners’ wives, our most recent example, showed the way that the action of the men spurred the women to act as part of the working class. The struggle to defend the community was after all the struggle to defend the working-class family. Of course there were massive contradictions: women were pressurised by men; marriages broke up. But that is beside the point. The argument is not whether struggle leads to divisions within the family, but whether men and women workers, acting together, had the potential to change the world for the better, including challenging women’s. oppression. Had the strike been successful, that potential would have been realised to a much greater extent.
This example (and the many others from history we can put forward) does much to challenge John’s original thesis, which was that there will be major problems in times of struggle, in forcing working-class men to acknowledge the political role of women in general, and their own wives, sisters and daughters in particular. In fact he is quite wrong to argue that this is the case; he can only do so by generalising from the relations between men and women in the present period of low class struggle and assuming that these relations will remain fundamentally the same in high levels of class struggle too.
In doing so, he runs counter both to Marx and to his own usually extremely high standard of Marxist thought. For Marx, as I have no need to teach John, the essence of class struggle is change – men and women changing the world and in the process changing themselves.
This is the overwhelming factor which can lead to women’s liberation – not individual consciousness-raising or getting a slightly bigger share of the reformist cake for women. Nor is it just a pipe dream. Where the divisions of society are laid bare, we begin to see a very different picture from the present ‘common sense’ that men are the beneficiaries of women’s oppression. That was why the Russian revolution did more for the liberation of women than any other event in world history. It is therefore a massive understatement for John to say as he does: ‘there is also a powerful, in the long run more powerful, factor working to unite men and women workers in opposition to women’s oppression and that is their own class interest.’ [23]
Of course there is, and it is a massive factor in favour of the argument I have put above. Everything we argue about in this journal accepts the centrality – and overwhelming centrality of class struggle and the class divide as the major division in capitalist society. Nor is class unity merely a long-term factor. Even in the short term, men don’t benefit from nurseries being shut down, or from women getting lower pay or any of the other features of women’s oppression – because these are attacks not just on individual women but on the, living standards of the whole working class.
Given women’s role in social production over the last forty or fifty years, the role of class struggle, of collective class action in fighting women’s oppression, becomes even more central. The fight against women’s oppression cannot be divorced from the fight to end class society; therefore the fight against oppression and the fight against capitalist exploitation become one and the same.
This again is missing from John’s analysis because of his fundamental error in approach to the argument – of seeing the family as simply relations between individuals.
None of this is to say that even in a revolutionary period there will not be massive problems in personal relations. Of course there will be, precisely because the family is made up of real individuals. Trotsky is witness to huge upheavals in post-1917 Russia: ‘In all our examples the tragedy is due to a collision between Communist and non-party elements. But the breaking up of the ... old type family is not confined to just the top of the class as the one most exposed to the influence of new conditions ... The Communist vanguard merely passes sooner and more violently through what is inevitable for the class as a whole. The censorious attitude towards old conditions, the new claims on the family, extend far beyond the border line between the Communist and the working class as a whole’. [24]
Such upheavals are essential if the old bourgeois family is to be transformed.
 
Conclusion
It is worth returning once again to what the argument on men benefiting is all about: whether men have a stake in maintaining the existing system because of the ‘benefits’ they have over women. I believe we can say categorically that working-class men have no such stake in the system. On the contrary, on every level, men and women workers both have an interest in creating a new world. Nor do workers hold back from revolution because somehow they believe that things are better for them today. Rather, the level of consciousness inside the working class is such that revolution doesn’t appear as a realistic item on the agenda for most workers most of the time. When, however, that situation changes, then we see – and will see – profound changes in workers’ ideas.
The argument about men benefiting continues to have some resonance precisely because we live in the sort of period that we do. It is a reflection of a low level of class struggle; of twelve years of deep recession throughout the world; and of the hold of deeply reactionary ideas about women which still exist. However, to explain why the argument is current now (in a way that it certainly wasn’t fifteen years ago) is not to justify or to concede to it. It does lead to reactionary conclusions, in the sense that it takes at least part of the blame away from the class enemy, and puts it at the door of individual men.
John argues that his intention is not to do this, and that he is as committed a revolutionary as anyone else in the debate. That is of course true. But his argument cannot point the way towards a successful struggle for women’s liberation, because it constantly blurs the crucial questions when it comes to locating that oppression and understanding how to fight it. It is also true that his argumentation coincides in large part with that of the Bea Campbells and Anna Cootes. That does not in itself damn it completely. But I would be very worried if I found myself in agreement with such people, both in terms of their reactionary conclusions on women, but also their whole analysis of the Labour Party, the unions, how to change society, etc.
Patriarchy theory (of which the idea of male benefits is an important part) fits very clearly with the other ideas of the reformist feminists. It does not fit at all with John’s theory – revolutionary Marxism. That is why John’s argument is wrong.
The danger in continuing to stress male benefits as the source of oppression is that it can lead to accepting much of the feminist terrain. This in turn can lead away from locating to the real barrier to our fight for women’s liberation – class society. To do so only hinders our task of developing a theory of women’s liberation and socialism.

Notes
1. I prefer the term advantage, since I believe the terms privilege or benefit almost automatically denote some major gain from the system. But I have at times used all three in the course of the discussion.
2. Theories of Patriarchy, International Socialism 2:12, 1981.
3. Heidi Hartmann, The unhappy marriage of Marxism and Feminism, Capital and Class, 8, 1979.
4. For example Anna Coote and Beatrix Campbell, Sweet Freedom, London 1982; Anne Phillips, Hidden Hands, London 1983.
5. Chris Harman, Women’s Liberation and revolutionary socialism, International Socialism 2:23, 1984.
6. For the earlier discussion see John Molyneux, Do working-class men benefit from women’s oppression?, International Socialism 2:25, 1984; and Sheila McGregor, A Reply to John Molyneux, International Socialism 2:30, 1985.
7. F. Engels, Origins of the family, private property and the state, Preface to the first edition, 1884.
8. See the discussion in Theories of Patriarchy (ibid.).
9. See, for example, Jane Lewis, Women in England 1870–1950, Wheatsheaf 1984.
10. Social Trends, no. 16, HMSO 1986. See also Ann Rogers’ article in this current issue of International Socialism.
11. Sheila McGregor, ibid.
12. Wage labour and capital, in Selected Works, Moscow 1968.
13. Ibid.
14. J. Molyneux, op. cit.
15. Sheila McGregor, op. cit.
16. J. Molyneux, International Socialism 2:32, 1986.
17. Social Trends, op. cit.
18. Sue Sharpe, Just like a girl – how girls learn to be women, Harmondworth 1976.
19. The common working-class sayings in relation to marriage – ‘you’ve made your bed’, ‘it’s not a bed of roses’, ‘you have to work at it’, tend to bear out this argument.
20. Coote and Campbell, op. cit.
21. J. Molyneux, op. cit.
22. It is interesting here to note that role reversals are almost entirely restricted to professional or middle-class couples, where the woman has access to real equal pay; or more recently to some unemployed couples.
23. J. Molyneux, International Socialism 2:32, 1986.
24. Leon Trotsky, From the old family to the new, in Women and the family, New York 1970.
 



DOES the Marxist tradition have anything to offer women? The argument has been debated hotly since the early days of the women’s movement. On balance, most feminists would answer no, or not much.
Their arguments range from the ridiculous and moralistic – that Marx was a patriarch who oppressed his wife – to sophisticated and serious analyses which either dismiss the Marxist tradition out of hand, along with all other socialist traditions, or which assert that other traditions like anarchism or utopianism have more relevance to the women’s movement today.
The argument has resurfaced in a number of writings over the past few years. Michele Barrett’s Women’s Oppression Today, Lise Vogel’s Marxism and the Oppression of Women and Barbara Taylor’s Eve and the New Jerusalem are all influential books which cover the subject in different ways. And a recent article in New Left Review by Elizabeth Wilson and Angela Weir also takes up the argument.
And while some writers, notably Wilson and Weir, are prepared to acknowledge the importance of Marxism in developing theories of women’s liberation, the general implication of most of the writing – and certainly the ‘common sense’ of the women’s movement – is that the ideas of Marx and Engels are at best outdated, at worst too immersed in patriarchy and an obsession with class to have any relevance to today’s women’s movement.
To test the truth of these various assertions we need to look at two areas. Firstly, at what Marx and Engels actually said on the question of women. Secondly, at concrete examples of how those standing in the Marxist tradition have tried to organise women.
Marx’s theory of revolution was based on the ideas of scientific socialism. His ideas contained similarities with many other socialist ideas of the time, but also one important and fundamental difference. The difference lay not so much in the aims of the socialist project, but in how it would be achieved.
The Communist Manifesto spelt out that: ‘The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggle.’ Capitalist society created – as did other class societies – fundamentally antagonistic classes. But, unlike in other class societies, in capitalism the exploited class, the ‘gravedigger of capitalism’, had the power and the organisation to overthrow the system which created it.
‘The proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry, the proletariat is its special and essential product.’
The working class could achieve socialism precisely because it was forced to act collectively.
‘The proletarian movement is the self-conscious independent movement of the immense majority, in the interests of the immense majority.’
Unlike the Utopian socialists, Marx believed that socialism would not come about by right-minded people simply getting together and changing their ideas. This was what Marx described as idealism, because it started with the ideas in people’s heads, not with material conditions which gave rise to those ideas. In order for the working class to change its ideas, it would have to struggle against its exploitation, and thereby create the conditions for the struggle for socialism.
That was why Marx referred to the proletariat as the revolutionary or universal class. And it is in this kernel of his theory that many of the initial confusions among feminists arise. The common and sometimes wilful misinterpretation is that Marx only talked about workers, that he wasn’t concerned with personal relations, or that he dismissed the notion that struggle could come from anywhere but the working class. All of these to a large extent miss the point.
When Marx placed the power of the proletariat at the centre of his theory of revolution, he wasn’t making a moral judgement that this class was the most exploited or oppressed. He was making a political judgement (and one which has been vindicated over and over from his lifetime to the present day).
He saw that the working class is the only class which has the revolutionary potential and organisational coherence not only to fight capitalism – many different sections of society can do that – but actually to beat it too.
 
WHAT then was Marx’s attitude to the oppression of women? He and Engels had very advanced ideas for their time. The Communist Manifesto, written in 1848, talks about a socialist future where women will not be treated as property, and where the family as we understand the term would be abolished in favour of free, collective relationships.
The family was an institution of class society, based on private property. The proletarian family was a complete mockery, with men, women and children living and working in horrendous conditions.
The bourgeois family too was a mockery of a different sort. It mirrored prostitution, where women were bought and sold as property, and was crucial to preserving the inheritance of the ruling class, ensuring the preservation of their property. Engels believed that the working class family would disappear because it was not based on property.
On this he was clearly wrong. He didn’t see how the family was to become for the working class the ‘heart of the heartless world’ – the area in which so many workers placed their aspirations.
Nevertheless, his Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State provided a materialist analysis which for the first time gave a coherent explanation of the oppression of women in class society. It located the rise of the family with the beginnings of private property, and it pointed the way to the abolition of women’s oppression through the ending of class society which had created their oppression in the first place.
The theories of Marx and Engels were not abstract schema. Both understood from close study the hideous reality of family life for working people in England. Capital and The Condition of the Working Class in England paint a picture of slum housing, infant mortality, crippling working hours and conditions.
The answer to the barbarity of a system based on accumulation was for Marx and Engels nothing short of proletarian revolution. They had no doubt that either the working class would emerge victorious, or it would be crushed by the capitalist class and its state. The answer to the problems of women’s oppression lay in women organised and fighting as part of the working class. This was in marked contrast to the Utopians. Although some Utopians shared many of the ideas of women’s equality, all too often their plans for a prefigurative future rested heavily on the labour of women in the home or commune.
This insistence both on the working class organising as a class and on the necessity of a revolutionary road has laid the ideas of Marx open to much criticism from feminists. The pull of the individual solution and the dominance of moralism are so strong in the women’s movement that talk of women organising as part of the class is all too frequently regarded with hostility. And the socialist feminists in the movement are clearly dominated by reformist ideas.
Michele Barrett in a New Statesman article written last year has indeed suggested that Marxism and feminism are mutually opposed because feminism is about ‘political emancipation’ – a fight for equality under capitalism – whereas Marx wanted to liberate the whole of humanity through socialist revolution.
There are two points about this argument. Firstly, it implies by sleight of hand that Marx and those who support him were never concerned with the everyday struggles of women – all they want to do is wait for the ‘big bang’ of revolution. This argument is current in the women’s movement as: ‘The revolution is all very well, but what about the here and now?’
Secondly, the argument shows how the women’s liberation movement is prepared to accept the ideas of reformism – and how the movement has changed. In the late sixties the term ‘women’s liberation’ denoted both a far reaching personal liberation for women and an identification with liberation struggles such as that in Vietnam. The idea of a total transformation of society was accepted by large numbers of women’s liberationists.
The fact that today Michele Barrett reduces women’s liberation – now called feminism – to legal equality under capitalism is a sign of the abandonment by her and others of the liberation of the vast majority of women – the working class.
In this sense, Marxism and feminism are opposed. Not because, as she puts it, Marxists aren’t interested in women’s equal rights. But because to limit the struggle for women’s equal rights is to simply fight for reform of the existing system.
Marx did not oppose such reform, or abstain on the struggle for political emancipation. As a later revolutionary, Rosa Luxemburg, put it, ‘Revolutionaries are the best fighters for reforms.’ And Marx clearly defended the rights of those unequal or discriminated against to be equal. But, unlike present day feminists, he saw that a fight for equality in bourgeois society would at best still only produce a sham equality.
 
HOW were Marx’s ideas on women put into practice? For much of his later life, the potential for class struggle was low. It was shortly after his death that his youngest daughter, Eleanor, tried to apply some of his ideas in her work as part of the socialist movement and in organising round the new unions of the unskilled – including many women.
Up until 1888, only a tiny percentage of British workers were in unions. These were restricted to the craft trades. The unskilled men, women, and Irish immigrants were excluded. A number of strikes changed that. The East End match girls struck against worsening conditions. The London dockers took action over pay. The gas-workers organised into a union (of which Eleanor Marx became president) and won the eight hour day. Workers in dozens of industries joined unions. Eleanor Marx, as well as being instrumental in forming the gasworkers’ union, also agitated among women and men in a variety of industries.
In this she was in marked contrast to many of the feminists agitating at the time. They tended to treat women workers as victims to be pitied and cared for, rather than people who could fight for themselves.
Annie Besant, the key agitator round the match girls’ strike, believed victory for the strike lay in winning respectable public opinion, such as the backing of The Times newspaper. There were, however, those even worse than Besant. Millicent Garrett Fawcett, a well-known feminist, actually had shares in the Bryant and May factory.
Union membership swelled dramatically. As Tony Cliff has noted, ‘The female membership of all trade unions increased from about 37,000 in 1886 to nearly 118,000 in 1896.’ Marx’s theories about the working class emancipating itself began to have a resonance. Unfortunately, however, the Marxist organisations which existed at the time were not able to take advantage of this upsurge in struggle. True, this was in part because they were tiny, but their size was a reflection of their sectarianism and inability to relate to day-to-day struggles of workers.
Even though a number of the leading figures who built the new unions considered themselves Marxists or were influenced by Marxism, they, like Eleanor Marx, tended to act as individuals, and not as part of a socialist organisation. That meant that, when the employers once again went on the offensive in the 1890s and the union movement ebbed dramatically, there was no organisation which could consolidate what gains had been made.
The Second (socialist) International, which Eleanor helped found in 1889, had more long term success in organising women.
The biggest party of the International was the German SPD. It organised women both into a party section and into the trade unions in very large numbers. By 1914, 175,000 women were members of the SPD. The leader of the German women, Clara Zetkin, saw her main job as agitating to get women into and active in the unions. The party produced a women’s daily, Die Gleichheit (Equality) and was committed to universal suffrage.
They were also committed to the idea of equality through the theoretical writings of Engels in The Origins of the Family and of their own theoretician on the question, August Bebel. Unfortunately, however, lots of the valuable work done by Zetkin and others meant very little. This was due to the nature of the SPD itself. The party was one which increasingly talked socialist revolution in the abstract, but acted in a reformist manner. This practice was enshrined in the notion of a minimum/maximum programme. Socialist rhetoric was wheeled out from time to time, but the day-to-day practice of the party had no real connection with the struggle for socialism.
Women’s liberation, like socialism, could safely be consigned to the far distant future, and divided from the idea of day to day struggle. The party’s true reformism was demonstrated in the crisis of 1914, when the bulk of its leaders supported the imperialist war.
Along with the abandonment of revolutionary politics went an abandonment of women’s liberation. In the aftermath of the war, after the SPD had been instrumental in drowning the revolutionary movement in blood, the SPD backed a policy of women being thrown out of work before men. In the 1930s, it was the Communists who campaigned for free abortion, not the SPD.
Such policies were not a consequence of Marxism – but a sign of the complete abandonment of Marxism. Yet at least the SPD had attempted in the years before 1914 to organise women as part of the working class to fight both for socialism and for political equality under capitalism.
Whatever its faults, it had a much more impressive record than its non-Marxist count parts. This is true if one looks at the British movement – a movement where Marxism never had a toehold and which was dominated by the ideas of Labourism.
The biggest women’s movement Britain – the suffragettes – was dominated by upper class and upper middle class women. Although many of these women were under the influence of left Labour ideas, they tended to lose these ideas as the movement progressed. Even the best of them, Sylvia Pankhurst, regarded campaigning for the suffrage and the other activities she took up as a left wing form of social work.
Not only that. The suffragettes campaigned for votes for women on the same basis as that of men – in other words on the basis of property. This would have excluded the bulk of the working class. Such an idea was anathema to the German and Russian socialists, who always fought for universal suffrage.
 
THE best known example of Marxism and women’s liberation in practice is the experience of Russia in the years following the Russian Revolution. The Russian Marxists – the Bolsheviks – had been committed to organising women before revolution. In 1913 they established the paper Rabotnitsa (Woman Worker) in response to the large number of women workers taking action. After the revolution, equality at least at a formal level was on the agenda. Marriage and divorce became simple, non-religious affairs. Childcare was deemed the responsibility of society. Nurseries were provided. Communal restaurants and laundries were introduced. The right to work and to control over their own bodies was for women enshrined in law.
In short, the Russian revolution heralded the most important step forward for women’s liberation ever seen.
There was no part of the world where anything like these reforms had been achieved. Indeed most of them are still not freely available today even in countries like Britain, where the functions of the family remain almost totally privatised.
But the reforms could not survive in isolation from the rest of the revolution. As it deteriorated, so the gains that women had won were destroyed or hampered. One of the most telling ironies of the Stalin period is that not only were these reforms rolled back, but the old image of woman as wife and mother was glorified in order to serve the needs of Russian accumulation.
Why were the Bolsheviks able to achieve so much in such a backward country, while far more advanced capitalist countries achieved nothing? Because they attempted to put into practice ideas developed by Marx. The workers did make their revolution, took over their industry and seized power. In the process their ideas changed drastically. The old ideas about women being in the home and not having the right to equality began to disappear as women took an active part in the revolutionary process. The examples of Russia and Germany, and others which vindicate the Marxist tradition, are either ignored by feminists or are dismissed as inadequate. They do not fit in with the idea that the only way women can struggle is separately.
 
WHAT does all this mean in terms of a Marxist theory of women’s liberation? The key factors which Marx located still exist. The unit of reproduction under capitalism is still the privatised family. Women still suffer oppression in class society. Even some of the most basic demands for women’s equality – like free childcare – cannot be met by a crisis-ridden capitalism. That same capitalism tries to place ever more burdens on the working class family.
Late capitalism has seen a huge increase in women workers. Despite the recession, there seems no sign of this trend being reversed. Women are joining trade unions at a faster rate than men. They are now much more centrally part of the working class – and therefore much more capable of fighting to change the world – than ever before.
At the same time, capitalism itself has developed and has changed women’s personal lives. Advances in technology mean that housework is much less the heavy manual work it used to be. Contraception has led to a constantly declining birth rate in the advanced capitalist
countries. These factors have freed women from the old drudgery. True, they have freed them to be exploited by the capitalist class. But this at least gives women the potential to fight back together, rather than remain atomised in the home.
The theories which Marx began to develop nearly 150 years ago are, if anything, even more relevant when 46 percent of workers in Britain are women.
There is much to deal with today that Marx and Engels did not deal with. Arguments about abortion and contraception have moved on since their time. Women’s patterns of work have changed beyond recognition. Women have had the vote for over 50 years and have nowhere near won political equality.
But Marx and Engels were products of their time. They could no more have dealt adequately with them than they could have theorised the trade union bureaucracy or imperialist war – developments which only became fully apparent after their deaths.
It is their method, and their general theory of revolution which can be applied to understanding how the present day world works and how it can be changed. And that theory has far more to contribute to ending women’s oppression – through ending class society – than all the theories of feminism.
That is why the key to fighting for women’s liberation lies in fighting to implement the socialist ideas which Marx and Engels developed.
 



Leon Trotsky’s writings for the last fifteen years of his life were dominated by trying to come to terms with the rise of Stalinism and by one theoretical concept – that of the united front. He wrote against a background of the rise of fascism in Germany and Spain, and of the world moving closer to the barbarism of a second imperialist war. His writings were aimed at the millions of workers who looked to the Communist Parties and the Communist International, and who had the power, even at this stage, to change the course of history, to defeat fascism and to unite to take on the capitalist class.
But the theory of the united front wasn’t just about fighting fascism. It was an attempt to try to bridge the gap between the revolutionary party and the working class. It was a recognition that conscious, organised revolutionaries are a minority inside capitalist society. Yet if workers are to make a revolution they need revolutionary Marxist ideas and organisation. If that contradiction is to be overcome, the minority of revolutionaries need to find ways of getting their ideas across to, and organising with much larger groups of workers.
It was also a recognition that revolutionaries attempt to do two things at the same time. They aim to break workers from the old ideas and organisations and win them towards a revolutionary party. At the same time, they try to involve themselves in the day to day class struggle. This means working with people who have a range of different political ideas, many of whom may be hostile to revolutionary ideas but who are willing to unite round specific, often defensive demands. The theory of the united front was in response to these problems.
The theory was first developed by the Communist International in the years after the Russian Revolution. The Theses on Comintern Tactics of 1922 described it as follows:
‘The united front tactic is simply an initiative, whereby the Communists propose to join with all workers belonging to other parties and groups, and all unaligned workers in a common struggle to defend the immediate, basic interests of the working class against the bourgeoisie. Every action, for even the most trivial everyday demand, can lead to revolutionary awareness and revolutionary education; it is the experience of struggle that will convince workers of the inevitability of revolution and the historic importance of communism.’
To understand why this tactic was adopted, and why Trotsky put such emphasis on it in the 1920s and 1930s, we need to look at the background against which it was proposed.
The events of the previous ten years had rent apart any idea of a united socialist movement. The outbreak of the first world war in 1914 brought to the surface the massive crisis which had been bubbling for a few years. The support of the overwhelming majority of socialist party leaders for their own ruling classes and for the carnage of war smashed the illusion of a mass Socialist International. The principled revolutionaries who opposed the war amounted to only a handful in most countries.
Gradually that changed. The suffering of the war itself – whether you were a worker in the munitions factory, a soldier at the front, families trying to cope with price increases – meant that dissatisfaction grew. It developed in all countries into massive protests, and in some into full blooded revolutions.
These revolutionary battles – although unsuccessful for more than a short period everywhere but Russia – demonstrated to hundreds of thousands of workers in practice the need to break with the old reformist leaders and their parties. These workers joined the new Communist Parties, which sprang up in the wake of the Russian Revolution and which were clearly committed to workers’ power as the road to revolutionary socialism.
They consciously rejected the old politics and the old political organisations. They split from these parties not on minor tactical questions but on questions of principle: could the old capitalist state be reformed out of the crisis? Could parliament be used to bring workers’ power, or did workers councils need to be built as separate organs of power?
But although the questions of principle remained valid, it became clear that the revolutionary onslaught of the early post war years had not been successful in establishing workers’ states anywhere but Russia. Not only had the workers’ offensives not been successful, the ruling classes now felt confident in many situations to go onto the offensive themselves. As the Comintern theses on the united front put it in 1921:
‘The world economic crisis is worsening; unemployment is growing; in almost every country international capital has gone over to a systematic offensive against the workers, the main evidence of which is the capitalists’ cynical and open attempts to reduce wages and lower the workers’ general standard of living.’
The capitalist class had managed to re-establish itself intact. The task of making socialist revolution clearly wasn’t going to be one of a sharp, rapid offensive. Workers would have to engage in defensive struggles, think out tactical manoeuvres, regroup their forces and so on. This would require united action, which many workers were in any case looking for. As Trotsky put it:
‘Under the influence of the mounting capitalist attack, there is a new mood among the workers – a spontaneous striving towards unity’.
Trotsky repeatedly stressed that the united front stemmed from that objective need of the working class to unite in order to fight capitalism.
‘The proletariat moves towards revolutionary consciousness not by passing grades in school but by passing through the class struggle, which abhors interruptions. To fight, the proletariat must have unity in its ranks. This holds true for partial economic conflicts, within the walls of a single factory, as well as for such “national” political battles as the one to repel fascism. Consequently the tactic of the united front is not something accidental and artificial – a cunning manouevre – not at all; it originates, entirely and wholly, in the objective conditions governing the development of the proletariat.’
A second factor was also clear to those who discussed the united front tactic. The new revolutionary Communist Parties usually had the allegiance of a minority of the working classes in the various countries. Often they were mass parties nonetheless. But millions of workers still looked to the old reformist parties, or to the newer centrist formations (those who vacillated between reform and revolution), rather than to the revolutionaries.
The Communists recognised that for the most part the mass of these workers would only break from their old leaders through their own experience in other words through activity and struggle which in practice would show what was the correct way of fighting and which political parties were prepared to organise that struggle rather than just talk about it. This argument could not be won by preaching to those workers, but by constantly trying to propose action which could lead to that activity.
The united front tactic therefore recognised the objective need for a workers’ movement which could unite to defend its gains in the face of the employers’ offensive. This corresponded to a genuine feeling for unity among the most militant workers, and so helped the revolutionaries to work with others, to overcome their isolation and thereby to begin to bridge the gap between the revolutionary party and the class.
The united front was conceived of as a way of organising round a demand or demands – however limited or small – which could unite workers in struggle and thereby do two things. Firstly, mount a campaign (usually defensive) over a particular issue which, because it involved more forces than those of a single party, had a better chance of success. Secondly, because the united front was based on activity, it could show in practice that the revolutionaries’ arguments were correct, and that the reformists (or at least their leaders) weren’t serious about fighting round the particular issue.
‘The reformists dread the revolutionary potential of the mass movement; their beloved arena is the parliamentary tribune, the trade union bureaus ... On the contrary, we are ... interested in dragging the reformists from their asylums and placing them alongside ourselves before the eyes of the struggling masses. With a correct tactic we can only stand to gain from this.’ (Trotsky in the First Five Years of the Comintern)
The theory seems a straightforward one. Yet its application was much more complicated. There were all sorts of problems – and a few pitfalls – in implementing the tactic. And despite the fact that the 1920s and 1930s provided major and urgent opportunities for this sort of unity – in particular the rise of fascism – the policy of the Communist Parties increasingly moved away from the sort of united front that Trotsky advocated.
So of necessity, Trotsky spent a great deal of time spelling out exactly what was – and what wasn’t – meant by the united front. In particular at first he talked of the dangers involved from the old reformist parties. One obvious danger of unity was that far from breaking workers from the old leaders it could foster illusions in them. That could have disastrous consequences for the workers’ movement. After all, the revolutionaries had broken from the reformists for very good reasons only a few years before. The reformist leaders certainly hadn’t changed their counter-revolutionary colours. How was this problem to be avoided? Trotsky stressed a number of guidelines.
He talked at some length about the need of revolutionaries to maintain their political independence. They must have the freedom to criticise at all times those they were uniting with, to produce their own publications and propaganda, and if necessary to act independently of them. To Trotsky the relationship between party and class could be demonstrated with great effect through the united front. But this obviously demanded party organisation in the first place. In the First Five Years of the Comintern, he explains:
‘If the Communist Party had not broken drastically and irrevocably with the Social Democrats ... it could not have taken the first steps on the road to revolution. It would have forever remained a parliamentary safety valve attached to the bourgeois state.
‘Whoever does not understand this, does not know the first letter of the ABC of Communism.
‘If the Communist Party did not seek for organisational avenues to ... joint, coordinated action ... it would have thereby laid bare its own incapacity to win over – on the basis of mass action – the majority of the working class. It would degenerate into a Communist propaganda society but never develop into a party for the conquest of power.
‘It is not enough to possess the sword, one must give it an edge; it is not enough to give the sword an edge, one must know how to wield it.
‘After separating the Communists from the reformists, it is not enough to fuse the Communists together by means of organisational discipline; it is necessary that this organisation should learn how to guide all the collective activities of the proletariat in all spheres of its living struggle.
‘This is the second letter of the alphabet of Communism.’
In other words the point of a revolutionary party is to develop its own theories and activities, but not as an end in itself. These then need to be used to try to win others who have the same goal but who are trying to approach it through other paths.
A second point about the united front was that it was to be organised round specifics. This follows on from the need to maintain organisational independence and political clarity. The different parties could not have unity around the whole of their political programmes without submerging their differences. For the minority of revolutionaries, the likelihood would be that their politics would be submerged to the more dominant ones of the reformists. This was exactly what Trotsky and the leaders of the Communist International wanted to avoid. In fact they wanted the opposite. The revolutionaries had to be quite open about their differences so that they could unite around areas where they did agree.
 
So unity had to be round very specific and limited areas. This had another side to it as well. It meant that the revolutionaries did not demand full political agreement from those workers who wanted to fight. Trotsky explained the danger of ultimatism in What Next:
‘Instead of issuing a one-sided ultimatum, which irritates and insults the workers, the party should submit a definite programme for joint action: that is the surest way of achieving leadership in reality.
‘Ultimatism is an attempt to rape the working class after failing to convince it.’
By ‘ultimatism’, Trotsky meant the tendency of revolutionaries simply to demand that the working class should adhere to its programme, without trying to win workers through struggle to these ideas.
It is the unity around specific demands and action which enables the revolutionaries to avoid the danger of ultimatism. In proposing unity you are by definition proposing a demand or demands around which many workers can agree. For example, many workers are against the Tory anti-union laws. If we propose action against these laws, we should propose the sort of action, not that sets us apart from them, but that they will agree with. The key is not in this situation how we differentiate but how we lead action which can implement the demands which unite large groups of workers.
The third point Trotsky stressed was the need for the united front to be between organisations of comparable size. Why was this? Not because Trotsky was in principle against tiny organisations linking up with giant ones, but because the united front is not a trick or a manoeuvre. That means it has to contain real forces who are able to deliver at least something, however small.
So for example, there would be no point in an organisation like the SWP going into a united front with an organisation of 200 or so members, because there would be no real new forces involved. That means both that no real campaign can be built, nor are there any people who can be won in practice through struggle. Again, the reverse is true. The SWP’s 4,000 members could not try to engage in a united front with the whole of the Labour Party. The disparity in size is so great as to make the tactic meaningless. Most Labour Party members would not notice it. We could only have a united front with a minority of the Labour Party – for example certain sections of the Labour left.
Trotsky time and again refers to a situation where the Communists are a third or a quarter of the organised working class in a particular country. Today in Britain we are talking about much smaller and less significant forces all round. But the same sort of idea applies. The tactic can only work if both sides have something they can bring to it.
None of these guidelines meant very much, of course, unless the united front could be put into practice. Here it is important to understand that the agreement for the united front is not simply an agreement between the leaderships of different organisations.
‘The question of the united front is not at all a question of the reciprocal relations between the Communist parliamentary fraction and that of the Socialists or between the Central Committee of the two parties.’
The united front is a united front on the ground. The tactic springs from the needs of the class struggle, from the need of workers to unite to defeat fascism, unemployment or whatever. Therefore it has to be built in individual workplaces, to take on concrete organisational forms and has to be about workers uniting in struggle. Trotsky refers to the Soviets, the workers’ councils established in Russia in 1917, as the highest forms of united front.
That doesn’t mean at all that those proposing the united front can ignore the question of the reformist leaders:
‘All talk to the effect that we should accept a united front with the masses but not with the leaders is sheer scholasticism. It is impossible to summon the organised masses to a united struggle without entering into negotiations with those whom a particular section of the mass has made its plenipotentiaries.’
Trotsky’s aim is not to win over or re-educate the old leaders – a task he believes impossible – but to expose them in the eyes of the mass of workers. The united front is proposed to the leaders because the workers look to them in any case:
‘If we were able simply to unite the working masses around our own banner or around our practical immediate slogans, and skip over reformist organisations, whether party or trade union, that would of course be the best thing in the world. But then the very question of the united front would not exist in its present form.’
For Trotsky all these points were important if the united front was to be implemented correctly. He argued that within these guidelines there had to be a great deal of flexibility, depending on local circumstances. He also didn’t believe that the united front tactic was applicable at all times, in all conditions.
The united front is usually connected with defensive struggles. It makes sense where because of the ruling class offensive the reformist leaders are under pressure to fight, however minimally and however reluctantly. In such a situation – for example in defending union rights – the minimum demands of revolutionaries can coincide with the maximum demands of the reformist leaders, thus creating the possibility of united action.
To judge when united action is possible revolutionaries had to weigh up the balance of class forces, to decide the issues around which workers could unite, to decide whether indeed it was possible to build a united front on an issue. But perhaps the most important thing that runs through all Trotsky’s writings is the need to avoid two dangers, when using the united front. The dangers are of a sectarian abstention from workers’ struggles on the one hand, and of liquidationism on the other. Tragically the history of the Communist movement in the late 1920s and 1930s was repeatedly one of an abandonment of the genuine united front and a zigzagging between these two dangers.
The German Communist Party refused to unite around the very important specific of fighting Hitler and fascism. Instead they demanded that the SPD (the German socialists) rank and file break politically from their old leaders. In other words they virtually said: if you want to fight fascism you can only do so under the leadership of the Communist Party. They refused to approach the SPD leadership for unity, arguing that rank and file members had to accept Communist Party leadership to fight fascism. They adopted precisely the ultimatist approach that Trotsky had warned against.
All this had the effect of creating a barrier between the revolutionaries – who, however misdirected, wanted to smash capitalism – and the rank and file of the reformist organisations, many of whom could have been won to a similar perspective if they could have been broken in practice from their leaders. The lack of unity in this situation had disastrous consequences. When the fascists came to power, they made no distinction between revolutionary organisations and reformist ones, or between left and right union leaders.
 
Today the theory of the united front can often seem remote. It seems to deal with such massive historic events – the defeat of revolutions, the growth of fascism, the rise of Stalinism. Yet the lessons that Trotsky drew out in his writings are ones which are central to those trying to build in the revolutionary tradition today. The united front is about strategy and tactics, about how socialists operate not according to their political principles alone, but according to the sorts of numbers they can influence, to the balance of class forces and to many other factors.
Our circumstances are very different today from those that Trotsky faced. Socialists in Britain are not in a position to build genuine, united fronts of the sorts that he described. We do not at present have the decisive influence on the class struggle that many of the Communist Parties had in the 1920s and 1930s.
Much of the time, in fact, it is not possible to even begin to raise the united front. The tactic is only applicable in certain circumstances. Obviously when workers are on the offensive and revolutionaries are able to lead mass struggles, a defensive united front may not be needed.
Equally there are times when workers are on the defensive, but such is the nature of the period that neither they nor their leaders see the need for, or the possibility of unity. The situation of -the past few years was like that. It was not in general possible for revolutionaries to build round defensive campaigns and struggles because they barely existed for the most part. When the political situation is stagnant, there are few opportunities for united work. The past year has seen important changes in that respect. The generalised offensive by the ruling class has provoked a number of defensive but nonetheless very large responses. These range from the NGA at Warrington to the fight against the union ban at GCHQ to the present miners’ strike. Such issues give revolutionaries far more opportunities to get their ideas across to those outside the party.
In that situation, the guidelines put forward by Trotsky are very useful, even though the level of these campaigns is far lower than that of a genuine united front.
The importance of uniting round specifics, the importance of uniting with those of a comparable size and the importance of maintaining political independence while involved in campaigns, can all be useful lessons to us when we operate in the trade unions, in miners’ support committees or in local campaigns.
But although there is a much larger audience for socialist ideas than there was a couple of years ago, the gap between, for example passive support for the miners and the much smaller number who are willing to collect money on the street or go on a demonstration is still very great.
There can still be a massive gap between calls for unity from the left union leaders and what happens on the ground. Socialists should not sit back and bemoan this gap. Instead we should use some of the lessons from Trotsky to work with those other socialists and trade union militants already active in support of the miners, and on other issues, to try to draw more people into activity and hopefully into struggle – even if we’re not talking about united fronts on the scale that Trotsky did.
 



‘The history of the Manifesto reflects to a great extent the history of the modern working class movement; at present it is undoubtedly the most widespread, the most international production of all socialist literature, the common platform acknowledged by millions of workingmen from Siberia to California’. [1] So wrote Frederick Engels towards the end of his life of the impact of The Communist Manifesto. The statement remains as true today, 150 years later. The impact of The Communist Manifesto has been remarkable. This small book has been translated into all the major languages and has remained an inspiration for generations of socialists. It has entered into working class consciousness in a way that few other political works have been able to do. It is often the first and perhaps even the only piece of writing by Marx and Engels that many workers read. It also has a dramatic and literary quality which makes it one of the great pieces of political writing. Its powerful arguments and its sense of providing a complete picture still overshadow most modern political work. The Manifesto must rank as one of the few pieces of writing whose opening and closing lines are well known in their own right. ‘A spectre is haunting Europe, the spectre of communism,’ and, ‘The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win,’ are phrases which have entered the language of international socialism. But reading The Communist Manifesto it is impossible not to recognise a number of other well known phrases which encapsulate some key Marxist formulations. ‘All that is solid melts into air’, the capitalists produce their ‘own gravediggers’, ‘the workingmen have no country’, ‘the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all.’
The success of The Communist Manifesto lies in two huge strengths which the book possesses. It is the clearest short exposition of the ideas of revolutionary Marxism, and alongside its clarity of thought and language it is also a guide to action.
Marx and Engels had a sense of tremendous upheaval in the world around them during the 1840s. They viewed the capitalist development which had taken hold in England, Belgium and to a certain extent France as revolutionary. It could destroy the old feudal societies which still dominated much of Europe and it could lead to major social and economic advances for the mass of humanity. This new order with its completely new ways of organising production would come into conflict with the old. Marx and Engels saw revolutionary upheaval as an inevitable outcome of these clashes, especially in their native Germany, which was still made up of a large number of small states and principalities, although increasingly dominated by the militarised eastern state of Prussia.
The coming revolutions would be ‘bourgeois revolutions’, necessary to pave the way for full capitalist development by sweeping away the old political autocracies, which still based themselves on the feudal methods of production. But Marx and Engels recognised that they would have a significant working class component. Key to their theory was their understanding that the working class was the most powerful revolutionary class. Engels had direct experience of the English working class – he had gone to England at the end of 1842 in the aftermath of the general strike of that year and he was familiar with the politics of the Chartists. His experiences, on which he based his book The Condition of the Working Class in England, were of a capitalism which could create immense wealth and revolutionise work, but which also created immense human misery. The potential of the working class to change the world was a key part of the polemic in which both Marx and Engels engaged with those involved in socialist or democratic politics. The Manifesto summarised their analysis: the big battles between the feudal order and the bourgeoisie were imminent, but these would soon be replaced by the battles between the now powerful capitalist class and the emerging revolutionary working class.
In 1847 Marx and his family were living in Brussels and Engels in Paris. They were politically active mainly among other German émigrés in the Communist Correspondence Committees which existed in Paris, Brussels and London. They were also in contact with socialists organised in the League of the Just, a body which based its political support on German artisans living in London. Although the League’s politics harked back to a world based on workshop rather than factory production, many of its members were also undergoing a period of ideological upheaval. In the summer of 1847 the League changed its name to the Communist League. Even before this date Marx and Engels were asked by one of its leaders, the watchmaker Joseph Moll, to join the League and to write its founding principles.
Engels first embarked on the project, writing his little book Principles of Communism which is sometimes described as a first draft of the Manifesto and which he called a communist catechism. In this book Engels attempted to answer many of the basic questions about communist ideas raised by potential supporters. [2] Principles of Communism starts with the development of the factory system and how this imposes a division of labour upon work, so that the labour needed for a particular task is broken down into a series of repetitive tasks capable of being performed by a machine. Thus the spread of machinery and the factory to every branch of industry led to the increased polarisation of society into two major classes: the bourgeoisie which owns the factories and raw materials; and the proletariat which is forced to sell its labour power as a commodity in order to live. However, the anarchy of the system means that the spread of capitalism into every area of life, without any plan or any thought about what should be produced, leads to a crisis of overproduction, where goods are left unsold, factories lie idle and workers are made unemployed. The capitalist organisation of industry and production is a barrier to further development and thus society can only advance when ownership of production becomes social and therefore fitted to the needs of the producers. This means the abolition of private property – something only possible under socialism – and with it the abolition of class society.
So long as it is not possible to produce so much that not only is there enough for all, but also a surplus ... So long must there always be a ruling class, disposing of the productive forces of society, and a poor, oppressed class. How these classes are composed will depend upon the stage of the development of production. In the Middle Ages which were dependent on agriculture, we find the lord and the serf; the towns of the later Middle Ages show us the master guildsman and the journeyman and day-labourer; the 17th century has the manufacturer and the manufacturing worker; the 19th century has the big factory owner and the proletarian. It is obvious that hitherto the productive forces had not yet been developed so far that enough could be produced for all or to make private property a fetter, a barrier to these productive forces.
With capitalism, however, the massive increase in the productive forces and the development of the two main contending classes meant that ‘only now ... has the abolition of private property become not only possible but even absolutely necessary’. [3]
The question and answer form of Principles of Communism was a starting point for a statement of aims, but it was only the bare bones of what became the Manifesto. Marx took some of its structure and arguments but built a much more substantial and engaging piece of writing from them. He did this because towards the end of 1847 a conference of the Communist League in London, which Marx attended, commissioned him to write a manifesto for the organisation which he set about doing after a number of disagreements over political issues. Marx’s failure to produce a draft led to an irate letter at the end of January 1848 from the central committee of the League saying that, ‘if the “Manifesto of the C Party”, the writing of which he undertook at the last congress, has not arrived in London by Tuesday 1 February of this year, further measures will be taken against him’. [4] The warning did the trick and the draft was completed by early February and sent to London where it was published in February 1848.
 
What The Communist Manifesto says
’The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.’ The starting point of the Manifesto is also the starting point of the Marxist theory of history. In all previous societies there have been struggles between the classes which eventually proved decisive and which led either to the creation of a new way of organising work and living, a revolutionary change in society as a whole, or to the ‘common ruin of the contending classes’. [5] If the outcome of the struggle between the classes was not decisive, if neither side could effectively break through, then rather than going forward, the whole of society could be pushed backwards. Such crucial struggles had marked the development of society in particular historical periods as it moved from one mode of production to another. Most recently, the great battles in England in the 1640s and France in the 1780s and 1790s represented the successful struggle of the bourgeoisie over the forces of feudalism. The bourgeois revolutions which would, Marx and Engels assumed, spread throughout other parts of Europe would usher in a period of rapid development of the forces of production which in turn would lead quite rapidly to working class or proletarian revolution. The Manifesto therefore starts its analysis by looking at the progress which capitalism represents compared to previous societies, and looks initially not at the emerging working class but at the revolutionary nature of the capitalist class itself.
The Manifesto creates a powerful and striking image of capitalism as a constantly changing and dynamic system which is altering almost before the authors’ eyes. Perhaps unexpectedly it also conveys Marx and Engels’ admiration for many of the achievements of capitalist development. If this is perhaps hard for us to imagine 150 years later – when in living memory there have been two world wars, numerous slumps, the Holocaust, and when genocide, famine and acute poverty are all facts of modern capitalist life – we have to bear in mind the background against which Marx and Engels wrote. The development of capitalism was for them a tremendous advance on what had gone before. German society in particular was held back by political and regional divisions, autocratic political systems, archaic laws and restrictive trading conditions. The dynamic elements of German society were hindered by these social relations which acted as fetters to prevent society from moving forward. By the 1840s there was already a clear division between the dynamism of some societies, driven forward on the basis of rapid capitalist development, and the stagnation of others.
Capitalism was in the process of destroying the old feudal order and establishing its own rule. This in turn, Marx and Engels argued, would create the preconditions for the struggle for socialism – in particular, it would create mass industrial production and a new revolutionary working class. The Manifesto gives a brilliant short portrait of the development of capitalism: the growth of the towns in the Middle Ages, the voyages of discovery which led to merchant capitalism, the growth of manufacture to meet the demands of the new markets:
The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production was monopolised by closed guilds, no longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took its place. The guildmasters were pushed on one side by the manufacturing middle class; division of labour between the different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of labour in each single workshop. Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising. Even manufacture no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionised industrial production. The place of manufacture was taken by the giant modern industry, the place of the industrial middle class by industrial millionaires, the leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois. [6]
The system developed into a world system with the search for markets taking it into the corners of the globe and bringing with it cities, railways, modern communications. The bourgeoisie was a revolutionary class because it transformed production and destroyed ways of living and working which had often been in existence for hundreds of years:
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them, the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modes of production … was ... the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting certainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. [7]
This revolutionising of production has the same effect in every area of life. Old religions, beliefs or customs disappear, and men and women begin to think in dramatically different ways because they are living and working in different ways: ‘All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their chain of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober sense, his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind’. [8]
The development of commodity production – where all goods can be bought and sold on the market – also led to a market in wage labour. Old crafts and professions found that they could not compete with large scale industry. Jobs were transformed and performed by wage labourers. Artisans were propelled towards the proletariat. Capitalism, sweeping all before it, destroyed old societies, old jobs, whole communities, and established new ones. The dynamism of the system meant that, once it began to spread throughout the world, it had devastating effects: for example, destroying traditional ways of life such as those of the Native Americans, who found their methods of agriculture, nomadic life or even warfare no match for the machinery, railroads and telegraphs, and rifles which conquered a continent in a matter of decades. In India the indigenous cotton industry was destroyed by the import of cheap Lancashire cloth.
This spread of capitalist production spelt the end of many industries and societies, yet the awesome advances of the bourgeoisie are praised in the Manifesto: ‘The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. It has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban population as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural life.’ Marx and Engels list achievements made by the capitalists in the space of around a century: ‘Subjection of nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?’ [9]
However, there is a fundamental failing in the system which leads Marx and Engels to compare capitalist society with the sorcerer who can no longer control the forces he has conjured up. The system is not logical or planned – its whole motor is capital accumulation for its own sake. It is therefore periodically prone to what the Manifesto describes as crises of overproduction which its authors describe in the most graphic terms: ‘There is too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce’. [10] The overproduction results from the unplanned nature of the system: production based on blind accumulation becomes an end in itself, the means of maintaining the capitalist’s profit, rather than having any relationship to whether goods produced are needed.
Capitalist society – based on private commodity production and on the exploitation of wage labour – becomes a barrier to further production rather than a spur. Private property prevents the productive forces from being developed as they could be to supply the needs of the whole humanity. Instead capitalism’s answer to the crisis is to destroy wealth. Factories close, workers are left unemployed, and those who could benefit from the goods produced in those factories have to go without.
So precisely the people who produce the wealth for the capitalists are not only denied any share in the riches of capitalism, they are also the victims in times of crisis when they lose their means to a livelihood. The solution to this deprivation, however, lies in their own hands.
 
The working class
The working class or the proletariat – meaning literally those without property – is the unique product of capitalism, which creates a class of wage labourers who have no means of subsistence other than to sell their labour power. The workers become slaves to machinery, their lives dominated by the process of exploitation. Marx and Engels describe the early development of the working class as a conscious class. Workers’ struggles tend to be directed against the machinery which is destroying their old livelihoods. Their first political protests are not directed at the capitalists themselves but at the old order – ‘at this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies, but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty-bourgeoisie’. [11] But as industry grows this tendency changes. The working class is organised in larger and larger numbers, the wages and conditions of different trades become more similar and the experience of factory work leads them towards collective organisation, trade unions and political organisations. The constant struggle between the classes, centred on production in the workplace, leads workers to co-operate and act together, and to develop ideas of collectivity and solidarity.
Marx and Engels describe the working class as the only really revolutionary class: workers’ position as a class makes them uniquely placed to overthrow capitalist society. It does not matter, in the first instance, that they do not think of themselves as revolutionary. Their position in the workplace is key. Here they potentially have the power to run society because they produce the wealth and they are forced through their work experience to organise collectively. This means that they are the only class capable of leading a revolution. Whereas previous revolutions, even when they were victorious, resulted in one ruling class being replaced by another minority ruling class, acting in its own interests, such an outcome is not possible in a successful proletarian revolution. The working class can only make a revolution by abolishing the class society which creates its exploitation, thus emancipating all the dispossessed: ‘All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in the interests of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority’. [12] The development of industry itself therefore creates the weapon for the destruction of the capitalist class and the establishment of a class whose collective power enables it to run society on an equitable basis – in the famous phrase, it creates the ‘gravedigger’ of capitalism.
Capitalism is marked by the increasing dominance of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, the two major contending classes. The old classes tend to disappear in the face of capitalist development, the vast majority of their members being pushed towards the proletariat. ‘The lower strata of the middle class – the small tradespeople, shopkeepers and retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and peasants – all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which modern industry is carried on. They are swamped in the competition with the large capitalists, partly because their specialised skill is rendered worthless by new methods of production’. [13] Greater numbers of people are forced to sell their labour power in order to make a living – a process which is still continuing at the end of the 20th century. Over recent decades, for example, peasants have moved from the land to the cities, migrants have crossed the world to work in the advanced industrial countries, and women in these countries have been drawn into the labour market in unprecedented numbers.
When workers do begin to organise collectively their struggles, if successful, usually lead to advances in society as a whole. Whereas the old classes when they fought tended to do so on a conservative basis, trying to preserve their threatened position inside capitalist society, the workers’ struggle against the capitalists tended to lead to improvements in society and in the conditions of working people. In most capitalist societies today where workers have relatively high living standards and benefits, there is likely to be a relationship with high working class expectations, and often resulting from high levels of workers’ organisation in the past or present.
 
Questions and answers
This first section of the Manifesto stands in opposition to those who claim that Marxism cannot address the modern world. It anticipates the speed and direction of actual capitalist development in countries such as the US and Germany by decades and explains a lot about 20th century capitalism, especially in many of the so called ‘Third World’ countries. The description of the growth of the proletariat, of capital accumulation and of the onset of crisis could all apply to the recent history of the Asian ‘Tigers’. It is unsurprising therefore that a growing number of people are looking once again at the ideas of Marxism and socialism in trying to explain what is wrong with the world.
Marx and Engels were active revolutionaries who found an audience of potential socialists bitterly unhappy about what capitalism was doing to workers’ lives and looking for an alternative. The second section of the Manifesto tries to deal with their arguments. It is in effect a series of questions and answers about socialism and communism and what it will achieve. Many are familiar to socialists today who find themselves faced with questions from those who are attracted to ideas of revolution but believe it will never take place. Take for example the question of private property. Central to Marx and Engels’ view of communism is the need to abolish private property, since this is based on the exploitation of the vast majority. Yet they met an objection still commonly raised today – doesn’t this mean you want to take away someone’s personal possessions, and that you are denying them their personal means of choosing how to express themselves? What will be the incentive to work if people have no property of their own? The Manifesto explains that capital – or property – is not a personal but a social power: ‘to be a capitalist is to have not only a purely personal but a social status in production’. [14]
Abolition of private property would not therefore result in every small item owned by a worker being taken away. Instead the social aspect of property would change: it would not be controlled by a tiny minority class and it would not form the basis of the oppression of everyone else. In fact ‘communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the products of society: all that it does is to deprive him of the power to subjugate the labour of others by means of such appropriation’. [15]
Complaints about property are in any case hypocritical coming from the capitalists. Capitalism has destroyed the property of the small peasantry, the artisans and small businessmen. Many of them have been forced to sell their labour power on the market; the wages of the labourers, which barely cover the costs of reproduction for them and their families, hardly allow the possession of very much individual property:
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property. But in your existing society, private property is already done away with for nine-tenths of the population; its existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence in the hands of those nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore, with intending to do away with a form of property, the necessary condition for whose existence is, the non-existence of any property for the immense majority of society. In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your property. Precisely so: that is just what we intend. [16]
Despite talk of property-owning democracies in modern capitalism, the concentration of property among a tiny minority is still staggering, especially when housing – or debt in the form of mortgages – is excluded. For example, in Britain in the 1980s the share of marketable wealth for the richest 1 percent was 28 percent, while that of the richest 5 percent was 53 percent. [17] Another common objection to communism is that no one would work if there were no private property. Marx and Engels answer that if this were the case society would long ago have collapsed since ‘those of its members who work acquire nothing, and those who acquire anything, do not work’. [18]
The Manifesto also points to a contradiction that while the forces of capitalism are turning the world upside down, destroying much of the fabric of the old societies, the capitalists themselves cling to the old customs, habits and ideas as though they spring from an eternal human nature. The capitalists can see clearly what was wrong with ancient or feudal society but not what is wrong with their own. They can see no other way of living and working. ‘The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternal laws of nature and of reason, the social forms springing from your present mode of production and form of property, historical relations that rise and disappear in the progress of production – this misconception you share with every ruling class that has preceded you’. [19]
The Manifesto is completely scathing about some of the bourgeois horror stories of communism which arise from such attitudes. To accusations that they are out to abolish the family, Marx and Engels reply that the capitalist system has already destroyed communities, ripped working class families apart, enforced migration and pushed every member of the family, including small children, onto the labour market. This explains ‘the practical absence of the family among the proletarians, and prostitution’. [20] The attitude of the bourgeoisie towards its own family and the sanctity of family life is hypocritical in the extreme. It bases its family on property, and its views on monogamy and sexual morality are based on inheritance and the idea of women as the property of men, to be bought and sold, either as wives or as prostitutes. Instead communism would free women from loveless and enforced sexual relations by taking away the economic constraints which dominated love and marriage under capitalism.
Underpinning these ideas – and Marx and Engels’ equally radical ideas on nationality and religion – was the understanding that in the process of changing society and of moving from one mode of production (capitalism) to another (socialism) all the old ideas would be thrown into ferment and replaced with new forms of consciousness:
Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man’s ideas, views, and conceptions, in one word, man’s consciousness, changes with every change in the conditions of his material existence, in his social relations and in his social life?
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual production changes its character in proportion as material production is changed? The ruling ideas have ever been the ideas of its ruling class. [21]
Any society based on the exploitation of one group by another, as class societies are, will develop ideas which justify the rule of its exploiters. It is not surprising that the ideas of the capitalists sanctify and protect property. The struggle for a new form of society which overcomes those class antagonisms means not just a material struggle against exploitation but an alternative ideological explanation of the world. The history of ideas has to be understood not as a series of disparate religions and thinkers, but as themselves being tied to the development of particular modes of production. The notion that there can be ‘eternal truths’ which transcend different societies and even different epochs does not stand up to historical scrutiny.
The radical social changes which Marx and Engels set out and the establishment of communism itself could only be achieved by sweeping away the old system of production, based on private property, which allowed a minority to accumulate wealth while the majority suffered. Only by ridding itself of these conditions can the working class begin to end the class antagonisms which the conditions produce. Eventually production for need based on workers themselves running society would lead to a classless society – communism – where ‘the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all’. [22]
 
What sort of socialism?
The analysis of scientific socialism spelt out in the Manifesto was the first simple attempt by the authors to define their form of socialism and communism in relation to the various other sorts of socialism which had sprung up in England, France and Germany during the 1840s. They had direct experience of a number of these tendencies. Engels had been in contact both with the followers of Robert Owen and then with the Chartist movement when he first came to England in the early part of the decade. Marx had written his work The Poverty of Philosophy in response to the ideas of the French socialist Pierre Joseph Proudhon. Many of the German exiles in Paris, Brussels and London during the 1840s were influenced by the ideas of the German ‘true socialists’.
The various forms of socialism on offer at the time tended to be backwards looking, towards a supposedly better society before the excesses of capitalism. Their proponents lacked any strategy for changing society except for appeals to representatives of the old classes themselves under attack from capitalism, or to the more liberal minded capitalists themselves, or to general but abstract appeals to ‘truth’ or ‘justice’. Marx and Engels were fiercely critical of these various strands of socialism, as the final sections of the Manifesto explain in some detail. Having spelt out their theory of socialism, they engage in a polemic against those competing to win workers to different ideas. They consider the various sorts of socialism popularised in the years before the Manifesto was written, and start with a material analysis of why these sorts of socialism have found an audience. The different socialist theories express the various attempts by different classes and social forces to come to terms with the phenomenon of capitalism.
Many of the early forms of socialism were inspired, led and articulated by the representatives of those classes who had lost out the most in the transition from feudalism to capitalism and whose critique of the new system was based on the desire to preserve its old place in the social order. Even the aristocracy was prepared to attack the emerging bourgeoisie in words, although it was compromising with it in deeds and in sharing the spoils of wealth. The ‘Young England’ movement was not really a socialist movement at all but it had some following in the early 1840s. Disraeli, later to be a Tory prime minister, wrote two novels, Sybil and Coningsby, which ‘can be read as textbooks of the [Young England] school ... These Tory scions of the aristocracy had an idealistic aim: to counteract the rising bourgeoisie and regenerate the power of the aristocracy by appealing to the working classes of the factories and farms, not simply by social demagogy but by real amelioration of the workers’ lot – exclusively at the expense of the rival ruling classes’. [23] These forces therefore represented divisions inside the ranks of the rulers and a real conflict of interests between different sections of the ruling class. However, they had no desire to see the working class acting in its own interests, since this would threaten the property and position of the landowners and the church as much as it would the factory owners. Their critique of capitalism, therefore, attracted the most compliant and least class conscious of the workers, those most likely to be deferential to their ‘betters’.
The ‘petty bourgeois’ socialists also based their ideas on a class whose time had passed and which found its existence threatened by the creation of modern industry and the growth of the proletariat. Their social base lay among the peasantry, which was substantial in France and Germany, and the remnants of the old medieval producers. ‘In its positive aims ... this form of socialism aspires either to restoring the old means of production and of exchange, and with them the old property relations, and the old society, or to cramping the modern means of production and of exchange, within the framework of the old property relations that have been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means. In either case, it is both reactionary and utopian’. [24] An example of ‘petty bourgeois’ socialism was the German ‘true socialism’ which was influential before 1848. The ‘true socialists’ drew on the socialist ideas which had first come out of France but formulated them in such a way that they became totally distorted. They did not take into account the differences between the countries in terms of capitalist development and reduced socialist ideas to abstract philosophising rather than the product of a real struggle between the classes. ‘True socialism’ tried to straddle the basic conflict between the classes, and therefore identified with the status quo. It was popular in Germany in so far as it represented a rejection of the horrors of industrial capitalism, but ‘true socialism’ also stood for the preservation of petty bourgeois values and ideas against the rise of a new revolutionary working class. It placed store in eternal values such as ‘truth’ which supposedly transcended the limits of class society but in reality tried to ignore the fundamental class divisions. Put to the test by real events, ‘true socialism’ failed:
German socialism forgot in the nick of time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposed the existence of modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic conditions of existence, and the political constitution adapted there, to the very things whose attainment was the object of the pending struggle in Germany. To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, professors, country squires and officials, it served as a welcome scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie. [25]
The ‘true socialists’ epitomised reactionary interests in the German context and this came from their petty bourgeois class base; their attempts to preserve this class meant opposing revolution in Germany, since they feared the dominance of both the industrial bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Capitalist development in Germany would mean the petty bourgeoisie being completely squeezed, which is why despite the high sounding rhetoric of the ‘true socialists’ they presented no real challenge to the existing order.
Socialist and communist ideas had been in existence long before Marx and Engels started writing. However, all previous such theories started from a completely justified sense of moral revulsion at the outrages of the system but could not explain how these ‘excesses’ could be stopped and how society could be changed. Marx and Engels divided such socialists into two sorts: first were the conservative or bourgeois socialists, represented above all by Proudhon. These socialists denied the fundamental class antagonism of capitalist society and tried to appeal to ‘progressive’ sections of the bourgeoisie over ‘humanitarian’ issues. Some sections of the bourgeoisie did want limited reforms of the system because they felt that untrammelled capitalism was less likely to survive, its own existence being threatened by its excesses. They aimed to reform away the worst aspects of capitalism, thereby preserving the system. The Manifesto was completely scathing about such aims, which it classed as follows: ‘To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole and corner reformers of every imaginable kind’. [26] Proudhon offered a 19th century version of market socialism – it’s not the market itself which is the problem, but the market distorted by banks and monopolies.
The ‘utopian socialists’ were the other group considered by the Manifesto. Their ideas had heavily influenced Marx and Engels and they retained a degree of respect for the individuals and their ideas. But even the best of them, the French socialists Claude Henri de St Simon and Charles Fourier, and the English socialist Robert Owen, were subject to criticism in the Manifesto. A short while after 1848 Engels wrote of the ‘three men who, in spite of all their fantastic notions and all their utopianism, have their place among the most eminent thinkers of all times, and whose genius anticipated innumerable things the correctness of which is now being scientifically proved by us’. [27] Years later Engels continued to repay the theoretical debt he owed to the utopian socialists when he praised them in Socialism, Utopian and Scientific.
The utopians developed their theories of socialism when the working class was in its infancy. This affected their view both of how capitalism could be changed and which forces could be the agency of change. Rather than seeing the working class in this role, they looked instead to great plans and schemes for building the new society. Their theories crystallised into some speculative and some actual social experiments – Fourier’s ‘phalansteries’ or societal palaces or Owen’s model workers’ settlement in New Lanark – but there was a huge gulf between their visions of society and the means of achieving it. The utopians saw the working class as passive victims of exploitation, not agents of change in their own right. The grand visions of the utopians did not extend to the working class; instead they saw ‘the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any independent political movement’. [28] So for the utopian socialists ‘only from the point of view of being the most suffering class does the proletariat exist for them’ and this led them, like all the other socialists whose methods Marx and Engels dismissed, to look to forces other than the working class to achieve socialism:
The undeveloped state of the class struggle...causes socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition of every member of society, even that of the most favoured. Hence, they habitually appeal to society at large, without distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people, when once they understand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the best possible state of society? [29]
The value of the utopian socialists’ critique of capitalism was further diminished by the growth of capitalist development and the corresponding growth of the working class. The followers of the great utopian socialist thinkers were incapable of relating to the real struggles of workers when they broke out. Marx and Engels pointed out that ‘the Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively oppose the Chartists and the “Reformistes”.’ [30] The latter day utopians became irrelevant sects who dreamed of setting up socialist colonies financed by the wealthy, of course. They had no impact on the class struggle and no relevance for workers. Indeed their politics led them in the opposite direction: forced to rely on the (limited) goodwill of the wealthy, they tried to smooth over class antagonisms and were opposed to independent workers’ action. ‘To realise all these castles in the air they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By degrees they sink into the category of the reactionary conservative socialists’. [31]
The failure to recognise and act on the class antagonisms which formed the basis of capitalism led to a practice which has many parallels in the socialist movement today. The emphasis on ‘humanism’ and on appealing to ‘the whole of society’ is widespread in the ecological and Green movements, where appeals to moral decency are supposed to be enough to save the environment and where major capitalists such as Anita Roddick (owner of the Body Shop and the seventh richest woman in Britain) can pose as eco-friendly. Parallels are also apparent in movements against nuclear weapons such as CND in the early 1980s, which consciously downplayed the class interests which led to the deployment of nuclear weapons in the first place. The history of the working class movement contains numerous examples of sects who have a formally socialist or even revolutionary programme but who refuse to engage in the day to day struggles of working people and who have found themselves doomed to extinction.
The final section of The Communist Manifesto disproves any idea that Marx and Engels played down building revolutionary organisation. In it they spell out their attitudes to existing organisations in various countries – for example, their support for the Chartists in England. They support all revolutionary movements against the existing order, but add two provisos: they always bring to the fore the question of property as the key class dividing line; and they publicly support revolution to overthrow all existing social conditions. [32] Earlier in the Manifesto they state, ‘In what relation do the communists stand to the proletarians as a whole? The communists do not form a separate party opposed to other working class parties. They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole’. [33] Does this mean that Marx and Engels were against building specific working class revolutionary organisation? Any brief acquaintance with their lives will show that is not the case. Although there were long periods when they were not members of any organisation or party, whenever the level of struggle or the needs of the working class movement enabled them to build organisation they were in the thick of it. This was true of the early communist organisations in the 1840s, and of Marx’s central role in the building of the First International in the 1860s. Although Engels was not himself directly involved in the parties built around the Second International towards the end of the 19th century, he was central in discussing tactical and political questions relating to those parties with some of their leading participants.
The use of the word ‘party’ has to be seen in a different light from its meaning today. Its meaning in 1848 was much closer to the idea of a political current or to a set of ideas. When Marx and Engels argued that the communists do not form a separate party, they meant that their ideas and the interests of the proletariat coincided and they did not put up artificial barriers between the two. At the same time, their fierce criticism of the other forms of socialism are not simply an academic exercise: they are part of a polemic in favour of building the Communist League. They also emphasise the importance of theoretical clarity: ‘The communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most advanced and resolute section of the working class parties of every country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement’. [34] This description of the role of the communists suggests a commitment to building an active and politically developed body of people united by a set of ideas and a commitment to activity – very close to the modern version of a party.
 
Background to revolution
The Manifesto’s publication in February 1848 coincided almost exactly with the outbreak of revolution throughout Europe. Signs of discontent had been there much earlier. The old rulers throughout Europe were incapable of delivering the most basic democratic reforms or of guaranteeing decent living standards. In Italy and Germany, still not unified as nations but comprising numbers of small states, and in much of the Austrian Empire which included dozens of nationalities, the feeling for national liberation was paramount, as it was in Poland and the Russian Empire. Everywhere there were calls for an end to autocracy and the absolute powers of monarchs and princes. Political protests reflected the mood for constituent assemblies, for parliaments and for legal reforms. Demands for reform reflected the clash between the old way of organising the world and the new. As Marx and Engels had already predicted, the spread of capitalist development was making its impact felt socially and politically as well as economically. The new towns and cities and the new industries and professions tended to form centres of opposition to feudalism, which was based on the Catholic church, the monarchy and aristocracy, and the landowners. Pitted against these conservative forces were the emerging capitalist class of factory owners, the small businessmen, the lawyers, students, the poor peasants and the growing numbers of workers. The authors of the Manifesto believed that a coalition of these various classes and groups would form the basis of the democratic revolution which was to come.
Enthusiasm for revolution in Europe could only be enhanced by the terrible social and economic conditions in which many found themselves in the late 1840s. There was famine in Europe, most notoriously in Ireland but also in Belgium. In spring 1847 there were disorders relating to food shortages in Scotland, south west England, Brussels, Berlin, Ulm, Vienna and in the Italian areas of Genoa, Tuscany, Romagna and Lombardy. [35] The depression of 1847 exacerbated the problems with millions suffering wage cuts, unemployment and business failures.
Revolution first broke out in a leading bastion of reaction in Europe, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, which incorporated Sicily and most of present day southern Italy. A revolt against the monarchy in the Sicilian capital of Palermo led to the king in Naples granting a constitution on 10 February 1848. The big explosion took place in France, however. In the second half of 1847 discontent had been growing with the regime of the ‘bourgeois monarch’ Louis Philippe and there was clamour for electoral and parliamentary reform. Thousands took part in ‘reform banquets’ around the country. The aim of much of the middle class opposition was to win moderate reforms without having to take to the streets. A huge reform banquet was planned for 22 February 1848 in Paris. This would have been the 71st such banquet but it was banned by the government. Crowds gathered and over the next two days there were demonstrations and barricades were thrown up. Louis Philippe abdicated and the Second Republic was declared. The new government included radicals and socialists and its programme was influenced by the radicalism which had swept the monarchy from power. ‘From 25 February to 2 March the government lived in constant fear of being swept away, either by the crowds massed before the Hotel de Ville which, according to the latest rumours, either acclaimed or booed it, or by the delegations which invested it and demanded an immediate hearing’. [36]
The year 1848 was one of the great years when revolution seems both desirable and possible. It spread throughout Europe, affecting both Austria and Germany by March. As uprisings broke out clashes between the feudal order and the emerging capitalist class were played out in the streets of Vienna and Berlin. The sense of euphoria was everywhere in the early months of 1848. It seemed that the old world of a tiny parasitic and dictatorial class ruling over a poor peasantry was coming to an end. Nowhere was this more true than in Germany. Its fragmentation was a significant political and economic barrier to capitalist development. The demand for national unification was therefore central for many of the democrats. Marx and Engels took the view that they were on the extreme left of the democracy movement and that they supported demands which they felt would lead inevitably to unification. Bourgeois revolution in Germany would, they believed, lead very rapidly to working class revolution. ‘The communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution, that is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions of European civilisation, and with a much more developed proletariat than that of England was in the 17th, and of France in the 18th century, and because the bourgeois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution’. [37]
The bourgeois revolution was necessary in order to free German society from the fetters of feudalism, thereby allowing the development of capitalism and the creation of a working class which in turn had the potential to make its own revolution. However, the commitment of Marx and Engels to the democratic movement went far beyond calls for the suffrage or the establishment of parliaments. These very important demands were preconditions for political organisation in many countries but political democracy on its own meant little without economic freedom. Most sections of society in Germany wanted to achieve the freedoms which had been won in revolutionary France after 1789. The middle classes and the intelligentsia were acutely conscious that over half a century later most German states had still not achieved the legal, social and political freedoms taken for granted in France. At the same time, however, there was a crucial difference between the revolutionary movements of 1789 and 1848: by the middle of the 19th century the working class was a real force in a number of European countries – in Britain especially but also in Belgium and France – and even in the countries with a less developed capitalism, the growing importance of the working class was clear. In Germany the working class was fully behind the demands of the bourgeois revolution. But it also increasingly wanted to go further and raise its own economic and social demands.
In France the bourgeois revolution had taken place long before 1848 and the working class was relatively well developed, so it was here that class polarisation was most acute – and the fate of the French Revolution of 1848 determined the outcome of revolution throughout Europe. The dramatic nature of France’s February Revolution led the new radical and republican government to make a number of concessions to working class demands, most notably that of the right to work, with the establishment of national workshops to ensure work for the unemployed. However, these were soon vociferously opposed by some of those who had initially supported the February Revolution. Once the questions of economics and who controlled wealth came to the fore, the tensions between the different classes which had made the revolution became apparent. By April the left and the revolutionaries had lost the initiative. By June the class divisions had come into the open and the workers were once again forced to the barricades to defend themselves, this time not against the monarchy but against the bourgeois forces which ruled the new republic. After four days of street fighting in Paris the workers were cruelly defeated by the National Guard and the process of counter-revolution began in France – a process which was to lead within a few years to the dictatorship of Louis Napoleon.
Marx and Engels, along with many other exiled revolutionaries, decided to return to Germany once the revolution had broken out. Marx went to Cologne, part of the most progressive region of Germany, the Rhineland, which was still under the legal code enacted during French rule under Napoleon. This constitution allowed more possibilities for agitation and political discussion than were available in Prussia. Although the members of the Communist League returned to different parts of Germany merely as individuals, their impact was substantial in the months of upheaval during the spring and summer of 1848. As Marx’s biographer Franz Mehring put it, ‘Wherever the revolutionary movement in Germany showed any signs of vigorous development the members of the League were seen to be the driving force behind it: Schapper in Nassau, Wolff in Breslau, Stephan Born in Berlin and other members elsewhere. Born hit the nail on the head when he wrote to Marx: “The League has ceased to exist and yet it exists everywhere”.’ [38]
In Cologne Marx and Engels raised the money to launch a newspaper which Marx edited. The first edition of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared on 1 June. It was devoted to spreading the revolution and to arguing the case for the most left wing revolutionary course. Almost immediately Marx was faced with the task of analysing the June days in France: ‘The plebeians are tortured with hunger, reviled by the press, abandoned by doctors, abused by honest men as thieves, incendiaries, galley-slaves, their women and children thrown into still deeper misery, their best sons deported overseas: it is the privilege, it is the right of the democratic press to wind the laurels around their stern and threatening brows’. [39]
The paper had already lost a number of its well heeled backers who found the first issue too left wing for their tastes. Now, Mehring pointed out, this article ‘cost the Neue Rheinische Zeitung the greater number of those shareholders who still remained’. [40] The dilemma which Marx and Engels faced was symbolic of the German Revolution itself. The backwardness of economic development in Germany meant that the bourgeoisie was from the outset hesitant and timid in making the revolution. At every stage it would rather compromise with the old order than align itself with more radical forces to take the revolution forward. This was particularly true in Berlin where ‘on 18 March the revolution overthrew the Prussian government, but in the given historical situation the fruits of victory fell first into the lap of the bourgeoisie, and the latter hurried to betray the revolution,’ according to Mehring. [41] The new Prussian government decided in April that a constitution would be drawn up in agreement with the crown. The national assembly held in Frankfurt in May, supposedly the prelude to unification, remained nothing more than a talking shop.
The old order was therefore able to survive the wave of revolutions in Germany, if not in every respect then in all the fundamentals. The June events in France made the bourgeoisie even more scared and ineffective and after the defeat of the Austrian Revolution in October 1848, counter-revolution was on the agenda everywhere. The revolutionary movement was destroyed within the next few months and the revolutionaries were forced into exile, Marx and Engels among them. Writing in December 1848 Marx summed up the nature of the German capitalists:
Whereas 1648 and 1789 had the infinite self confidence that springs from standing at the summit of creativity, it was Berlin’s ambition in 1848 to form an anachronism. Its light was like the light of those stars which first reaches the earth when the bodies which radiated it have been extinct for a hundred thousand years. The Prussian March Revolution was such a star for Europe – only on a small scale, just as it was everything on a small scale. Its light was light from the corpse of a society long since putrefied.
The German bourgeoisie had developed so sluggishly, so pusillanimously and so slowly, that it saw itself threateningly confronted by the proletariat, and all those sections of the urban population related to the proletariat in interests and ideas, at the very moment of its own threatening confrontation with feudalism and absolutism. And as well as having this class behind it, it saw in front of it the enmity of all Europe. [42]
So the great revolutionary year ended in defeat for those who wanted a working class revolution. It was also a defeat for those who wanted the complete overthrow of feudalism. In Germany reaction triumphed and unification was completed not by a bourgeois government but by the conservative Bismarck. Both there and in Italy it took over 20 more years until this process was complete. The revolutions were the first major tests of Marx and Engels’ political ideas. So how did the analysis put forward in the Manifesto measure up to the events of 1848 and how far did it provide an explanation for the development of capitalism in Europe after their defeat?
 
The impact of the Manifesto after 1848
The Manifesto had little direct impact on the revolutions themselves in 1848. They had already effectively broken out when the book was published and events in France had a much greater impact in spreading the revolution to Germany the following month than any single publication could have done. However, the revolutionaries did their utmost to ensure a wide readership for the Manifesto which was into its second edition by April. So 100 copies were shipped to German workers in Amsterdam in March, then 1,000 were sent to Paris. Early in April the communists in Paris gave Manifestos to 3,000 or 4,000 German émigrés returning home to join the revolution. In March 1848 the émigré newspaper the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung serialised the book. When Marx and his allies returned to Cologne they distributed the Manifesto there, and in early 1849 it was serialised in the left wing paper Die Hornisse. Plans for translations into other languages were ambitious and not quickly realised. Despite claims in the Manifesto itself there was no published French translation until after the Paris Commune of 1871. The only certain translation in 1848 was into Swedish. [43] The first English translation was serialised in the left Chartist paper Red Republican in November 1850 and was translated by the Burnley socialist Helen Macfarlane; its opening line (later translated as, ‘A spectre is haunting Europe’) stated, ‘A frightful hobgoblin stalks throughout Europe’. [44] The decline of the left wing and radical movement following the defeat of the 1848 revolutions did not create the conditions for further translations. As Engels put it, ‘The manifesto has had a history of its own ... it was soon forced into the background by the reaction that began with the defeat of the Paris workers in June 1848 ... With the disappearance from the public scene of the workers’ movement that had begun with the February Revolution, the manifesto too passed into the background’. [45] It was only with the revival of the socialist movement internationally from the 1880s onwards hat significant translations were undertaken, including the French one by Marx’s daughter Laura Lafargue and the ‘authorised’ English translation by Sam Moore, which clearly had Engels’ hand in it. [46]
The fate of the Manifesto was bound up with the political situation. It was ahead of its time in, for example, the description of the development of industry. ‘Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory, are organised like soldiers ... they are daily and hourly enslaved by the machine, by the overlookers, and, above all, by the individual bourgeois manufacturer himself’. [47] This was still not the picture in most parts of the world when they wrote it; it became the reality within the next half century, and then only in Germany, the US and France as well as in Britain.
The revolutions of 1848 taught Marx and Engels a great deal. Lenin wrote in 1907:
In the activities of Marx and Engels themselves, the period of their participation in the mass revolutionary struggle of 1848–1849 stands out as the central point. This was their point of departure when determining the future pattern of the workers’ movement and democracy in different countries. It was to this point that they always returned in order to determine the essential nature of the different classes and their tendencies in the most striking and purest form. It was from the standpoint of the revolutionary period of that time that they always judged the later, lesser, political formations and organisations, political aims and political conflicts. [48]
In addition to serving as a school of revolutionary tactics and strategy, the experience of 1848 also showed them the real nature of the capitalist class. The Manifesto based its revolutionary scenario on previous bourgeois revolutions, notably the English and French, which had produced leaders in Cromwell and Robespierre who understood the need to act decisively and courageously to further the aims of the revolution and destroy the old order. The bourgeoisie in 1848 had shown itself incapable of providing such decisive leadership. Only the embryonic workers’ movement – led in parts of Germany by the communists – was capable of doing so. The root of the cowardice of the bourgeoisie was fear of raising a serious political challenge which might threaten property itself. So from the beginning it compromised and wheedled round the old absolutist forces and joined with them in defence of law, order and property against fundamental change. Before the revolution Marx and Engels had feared this would happen. Engels wrote just before the events of 1848 erupted that the bourgeoisie would only have a short period of rule following a successful bourgeois revolution. ‘The hangman stands at the door,’ he said, quoting the poet Heinrich Heine – the working class would soon usurp the rule of the capitalists. [49]
However, in the Manifesto it appears also that in spite of itself the bourgeoisie would be forced to act much more decisively than it might want. But in the course of 1848 it became increasingly obvious just how little could be expected. The June Days in Paris when the working class was defeated marked, as Marx wrote afterwards, ‘the first great battle ... between the two great classes which divide modern society. It was a fight for the preservation or destruction of the bourgeois order’. [50] The implications were not lost on anyone engaged in the revolution in Germany. By autumn the situation became increasingly polarised when insurrection in Frankfurt and the threat of it in Cologne were met by state repression, including the temporary banning of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. In Vienna in October there was an insurrection in protest at military intervention against Hungary. It was successful for three weeks but was put down by the generals Jellacic and Windischgratz. Marx had already warned that the Vienna Revolution was ‘in danger, if not of being wrecked, at least of being obstructed in its development, by the bourgeoisie’s mistrust of the working class’. [51]
The Prussian monarchy took advantage of this counter-revolutionary move to appoint the reactionary Brandenburg ministry in Berlin. Marx’s response to this was increasing bitterness against the bourgeoisie. By December he was absolutely clear that the bourgeoisie lacked the strength of purpose or inclination to make the revolution and that any revolution would have to be made without it. However much the working class held back its demands or tried to compromise, its very existence was enough to terrify the bourgeoisie into compromise with absolutism. So it is no surprise that Marx put more and more emphasis in his writings in the aftermath of the defeated revolutions of 1848–1849 on the independent role of the working class. He repeatedly refers to the ‘revolution in permanence’ or ‘permanent revolution’ meaning revolution which continues or is ongoing. This was a shift of politics from the ‘springtime of revolution’ to the stark reality of class warfare under capitalism – 1848 marked a real turning point in this respect.
Marx did not make the mistake of believing that a relatively weak working class could have made a proletarian revolution immediately in the backward Germany of 1848, but he understood that any revolutionary role in leading mass struggles against the oppressive structures in society could no longer be expected from the bourgeoisie and would pass increasingly to the working class. Writing to the central committee of the Communist League from London in 1850 he stressed that German workers would have to go through a period of development as a revolutionary class before they could make a revolution but also argued that they could not put their trust in the ‘democracy’ as was possible before 1848: ‘They themselves must contribute most to their final victory, by informing themselves of their own class interests, by taking up their independent political position as soon as possible, by not allowing themselves to be misled by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeoisie into doubting for one minute the necessity of an independently organised party of the proletariat. Their battle cry must be: The Permanent Revolution’. [52]
The defeat of the revolution meant coming to terms with other questions. Marx and Engels were forced to leave Germany and ended up in England. London was full of German émigrés most of whom, including Marx and Engels, believed that the resurgence of revolution in Europe was imminent. Marx’s eventual conclusion was that it was not, and that revolutionaries would have to operate under the difficult circumstances of capitalist stability and expansion against a background of working class defeats. This led him to breaking politically with many of his colleagues from 1848 and Marx remained in political isolation for many years. Engels was based in Manchester where he worked in the family firm and supported Marx morally and financially. Marx spent his time studying for his eventual writing of Capital. The popular assessment of Marx as an academic, a dry student of socialism, dates from this period. The direct revolutionary experience which both Marx and Engels gained in 1848 belies this view, as do many of Marx’s later actions. His assessment of the likelihood of political upheaval was cautious but his enthusiasm for left wing causes was undiminished. For example, he supported the continued battle for Polish independence. He also followed the American Civil War, which broke out in 1861, very closely and was a strong partisan of Northern victory and the abolition of slavery. He saw the outcome of this struggle as central to the future of capitalism and therefore to future prospects of revolution.
There are, of course, many issues of contemporary politics which The Communist Manifesto does not address. Some of these became much clearer during the remainder of Marx’s lifetime. This is most obviously true of Marx’s views following the defeat of the Paris Commune, which demonstrated that any attempt to win democracy and control of society by the working class will be crushed by the bourgeoisie because it threatens private property. His conclusion from this experience was that workers have to smash the state machine of the bourgeoisie and create their own democratic instruments of working class rule. Just as he had nailed his revolutionary colours to the mast in 1848, so Marx in 1871 was openly supportive of the Communards, even though this meant a political break with some of those he had worked with previously in the First International.
However, there were many issues that only arose after Marx’s death in 1883. The growth of reformism as a current within the working class movement, the role of the large working class parties and of the trade unions with their bureaucracies were only just becoming apparent around the time of Engels’ death in 1895. The full nature of imperialism and capitalism’s tendency towards monopoly were also only apparent after Marx’s death. So it was left to the generation of socialists involved in the revolutionary upheavals which emerged from the First World War to build on the experience and ideas of Marx. The Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky developed the theory of permanent revolution. The failure of the 1905 Russian Revolution, whose defeat left Tsarism weakened but still intact, led him to argue that in the Russian situation the bourgeoisie was so weak and cowardly that it was utterly incapable of leading any kind of revolution. The revolution against Tsarism would have to be a working class revolution, despite the relative weakness numerically and organisationally of the Russian working class, and despite the economic backwardness of Russian society. This scenario proved to be the case in 1917. Similarly, events from 1914 through to 1919 clarified a number of vital issues: the need to build soviets or workers’ councils rather than rely on changing society through parliament, the necessity of building independent working class parties based on working class power, the impossibility of taking over and running the existing state machine. In developing these theories socialists like Lenin, Trotsky and Luxemburg built on the ideas of Marx and Engels but also had to apply the actual experience of the growing workers’ movement to new circumstances.
 
The relevance of the Manifesto today
A cheap paperback edition of the Manifesto published in 1996 sold tens of thousands of copies. Articles towards the end of 1997 in magazines as diverse as the New Yorker and the Modern Review have praised the insights of Marx. A new generation is beginning to look to Marxist ideas again and the Manifesto is often the first port of call. The Manifesto’s durability is partly due to its sweeping style. It provides a broad brush picture of capitalist development and of the nature of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. It extrapolated from trends in the mid-19th century to present a clear and definite view of the future and because it pointed to tendencies in capitalism it is still able to help us comprehend a global system where capital’s tentacles stretch into every corner of the world, and where the traditional ways of doing things are destroyed by the impact of commodity production. The spread of global capital and the revolution in technology have made this analysis even more relevant. People now buy exotic fruits from all over the world by just going to Sainsbury’s. Clothes come from the Philippines or Malaysia, electrical goods from Korea. Migrant labour travels the world and international communications are instantaneous. Events taking place around the world can be beamed onto our television screens via satellite as they happen. But this global spread of capital has done little to overcome the inequalities of capitalism. Indeed industrial production or agricultural products designed for supermarkets in the advanced capitalist countries have often destroyed livelihoods, not enhanced them. Millions are denied the benefits of global production, and agricultural innovations have not touched many parts of the world. In China textile mills operate similarly to those Engels wrote of in Manchester in the 1840s. The combined and uneven development of capitalism portrays capitalism’s strength and power but also its fundamental failings. In many parts of the world ox carts can exist alongside designer trainers, washing ells beside mobile phones.
Nor is global capital free from crisis, as recent events in the Far East have shown. The crisis of overproduction has hit countries such as South Korea, Indonesia and China, leading to waste and misery for millions who had expected the supposedly new era of ‘crisis free’ capitalism to deliver for them. Ruling classes everywhere have used the latest period of global expansion to attack jobs, hold down wages and generally increase the rate of exploitation. Even in the richest countries workers have found their lives becoming more miserable and constrained. The welfare cushion which was introduced in these countries during the long post-war boom is under sustained attack, with further devastating consequences to the social wage. Those who argued that capitalism could slowly and gradually reform and improve itself have been shown to be wrong.
Meanwhile, the Manifesto’s predictions about the growth of the working class have been borne out beyond any expectation. Everywhere in the world the gravedigger of capitalism, the working class, is bigger, more organised and more powerful than at any time before. Clerical workers, nurses, teachers, bank workers, have all joined transport workers and post office workers as part of the new working class. Countries from Brazil to South Africa have seen the development of new generations of workers with more power than ever before.
The whole point of the Manifesto was to make the case for working class revolution. It even states that the fall of the bourgeoisie and the victory of the proletariat are both equally inevitable. [53] Subsequent events have shown this to be wrong. Capitalism is still with us 150 years later and the working class has not permanently and successfully conquered power – even the most successful workers’ revolution lasted barely ten years before the rise of Stalinism. Many critics take this phrase to mean that Marx and Engels based their materialist theory of revolution on a historical inevitability, that they believed socialism would come automatically. However, the refutation for this idea exists within The Communist Manifesto itself, when it argues that there is no guaranteed transition from one mode of production to another. Either society can go forward or the failure of one side to win decisively can lead to the ‘common ruin of the contending classes’. [54] There was nothing preordained about revolution happening or being successful: the wheels of history did not move automatically. Changes in history depended on the objective clash between the different social forces but also on the subjective actions of men and women.
With the benefit of hindsight we can see that the role of the capitalist state, of the reformist working class parties, and the refusal by a number of those parties to engage in united work against the common capitalist enemy, have all been crucial at certain times in defusing or defeating revolutionary upsurges. The need to learn from and understand the lessons of history, and to organise around the strategy and tactics of an independent revolutionary workers’ party was one of the crucial developments of revolutionary Marxism contributed after Marx and Engels’ deaths, most notably by Lenin. In developing these ideas, however, the groundwork provided by The Communist Manifesto was invaluable in providing a unique introduction to Marxist politics and to the theory of revolution. It remains one of the great political texts which still inspires new generations of socialists and it can still serve as a guide to action.

Notes
1. Engels’ preface to the English edition of 1888, quoted in H. Draper, The Adventures of the Communist Manifesto (Berkeley 1994), pp. 79–80.
2. F. Engels, Principles of Communism, in Collected Works, vol. 6 (London 1976), pp. 341–357.
3. Ibid., p. 349.
4. See H. Draper, op. cit., p. 10.
5. The Communist Manifesto, in H. Draper, op. cit., p. 107.
6. Ibid., p. 109.
7. Ibid., p. 113.
8. Ibid., p. 113.
9. Ibid., p. 117.
10. Ibid., p. 121.
11. Ibid., p. 127.
12. Ibid., p. 133.
13. Ibid., p. 125.
14. Ibid., p. 141.
15. Ibid., p. 145.
16. Ibid., p. 143.
17. J. Westergaard, Who Gets What? (Cambridge 1995), p. 124.
18. The Communist Manifesto, in H. Draper, op. cit., p. 145.
19. Ibid., p. 147.
20. Ibid., p. 147.
21. Ibid., p. 151.
22. Ibid., p. 157.
23. H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. IV (New York 1990), p. 183.
24. The Communist Manifesto, in H. Draper, The Adventures …, op. cit., p. 165.
25. Ibid., pp. 169–171.
26. Ibid., p. 173.
27. Quoted in H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory ..., vol. iv, op. cit., p. 3.
28. The Communist Manifesto, in H. Draper, The Adventures ..., op. cit., p. 177.
29. Ibid., p. 179.
30. Ibid., p. 181.
31. Ibid., p. 181.
32. Ibid., p. 185.
33. Ibid., p. 137.
34. Ibid., p. 137.
35. See J. Sigmann, 1848 (London 1970), p. 183.
36. Ibid., p. 219.
37. See H. Draper, The Adventures ..., op. cit., p. 185.
38. F. Mehring, Karl Marx (Harvester 1981), p. 155.
39. K. Marx, The Revolutions of 1848, (ed.) D. Fernbach (Harmondsworth 1973), p. 134.
40. F. Mehring, op. cit., p. 159.
41. Ibid., p. 157.
42. K. Marx, The Revolutions ..., op. cit. , p. 193.
43. H. Draper, The Adventures ..., op. cit., pp. 21–22.
44. Ibid., p. 104.
45. F. Engels, Preface to German edition, 1890, quoted ibid, p. 32.
46. H. Draper, The Adventures ..., op. cit., pp. 75–80.
47. Ibid., p. 123.
48. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 13 (Moscow ??), p. 37.
49. K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works (London 1976), vol. 6, p. 529.
50. K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, in D. Fernbach (ed.), Surveys from Exile (Harmondsworth 1973), pp. 58–59.
51. K. Marx, The Revolutions ..., op. cit., p. 165.
52. Ibid., p. 330.
53. H. Draper, The Adventures ..., op. cit., p. 135.
54. Ibid., p. 107.
 



R. McKibbin
Classes and Cultures: England 1918–1951
Oxford 1998, £25
The cover of Ross McKibbin’s book has a photograph of two obviously rich people (he in top hat and tails, she in furs) contentedly walking along a street while ignoring the plight of a homeless man lying on a bench. Like Thomas Dugdale’s famous painting of a glittering couple in evening dress who gaze from their Mayfair window as the Jarrow unemployed march passes by, the image encapsulates the popular view of the inter-war period, where the rich got richer and the poor suffered. The information provided by McKibbin produces all the evidence that could be needed to demonstrate the truth of this view, and shows that only by plunging into its second world war in a generation could the world begin to reverse these priorities, end unemployment and start to create a more equal society.
This work is part social history – looking at how different classes behaved in relation to sex, sport, cinema and reading – and part an analysis of class, from the very top with the monarchy down to the working class. All this is interesting enough, but the period covered gives the book a further dimension: its social history has to be set against a British ruling class whose fortunes were declining both sharply and rapidly, and a working class which underwent a process of change in these years which was very dramatic and far reaching. In 1918 Britain emerged victorious from a war which saw its major European rival defeated and faced with revolution. With the exception of Ireland, Britain’s colonial empire was still intact. Its transatlantic rival was becoming all powerful but this was still not apparent to many people. By 1951 there was no such ambiguity. The US dominated the Western world economically, politically and increasingly culturally. Britain had been forced to borrow from the US to finance its war effort, and its post-war austerity was in part due to the US calling in the debt. Meanwhile the empire’s greatest prize, India, had won independence, and Britain’s other colonies were heading the same way.
The traditional working class of the ‘workshop of the world’ had been in decline throughout the period: mining, shipbuilding and textiles were for much of the inter-war years ‘depressed’ and economic growth occurred increasingly in new areas – the south and Midlands of England – and in new industries such as motors, aircraft, electrical goods and food processing. For all workers these three decades signalled great change: for example many had access to domestic electricity for the first time, opening up communications such as radio; cinema became the most popular pastime; and the changing world of work meant that women increasingly sought employment in new industries and in clerical jobs which had hardly existed before the First World War.
Britain was (and still is) often described as a very class ridden society. This is not meant in the Marxist sense, that there is an exploited and an exploiter class which defines the whole of society, since this would be equally true of, say, Germany or the US, whatever the superficial differences of politics or culture. Rather it is meant in the sense that the class divisions in Britain seem particularly acute and obvious. They are underlined by, on the one hand, a hereditary peerage and monarchy and by an education system which entrenches archaic privilege both in public schools and in the Oxbridge system; on the other hand, the working class is the oldest and in some ways most ingrained and traditional in the world, and has famously built up layers of defensive networks in order to protect its interests. It is beyond McKibbin’s remit to analyse why the class structure in England turned out this way, but he develops a number of important and interesting insights. His view of the monarchy, for example, shows how a combination of luck and opportunism (plus, no doubt, access to great quantities of wealth) allowed the Windsors to maintain their hold through this period. The dullness of George V, his preoccupation with the minutiae of etiquette and country house living and his lack of interest in any wider intellectual or cultural questions, did not prevent him from very astutely preventing his cousin the Russian Tsar Nicholas, who had been deposed by the Russian Revolution, from coming to live in England. The king’s private secretary wrote to the foreign secretary in April 1917 that ‘the residence of the ex-Emperor and Empress would be strongly resented by the public, and would undoubtedly compromise the position of the King and Queen’. [1] The monarchy was careful never to openly alienate workers or the labour movement, according to the author, even though the royal family’s instincts were Tory to the last and even though they were part of a wider ruling class which, in the 1920s particularly, was engaged in open class war.
What of the working class? It was the first developed working class in the world. The size of the working class and its relative social weight were unique in a country where the peasantry had been destroyed by industrial development and modern agriculture. The working class had also developed a fairly distinctive lifestyle and cultural life; industrial villages such as those around coal mining or the industrial areas of the big cities typified this lifestyle with their terraced housing, pubs and working men’s clubs, keenness on sports and (except in the textile areas) a rigid sexual division of labour. This ‘traditional’ working class life changed in the period described by McKibbin. Of course, it was never as ‘traditional’ as all that: roughly it dated from the last quarter of the 19th century to the first quarter of the 20th. But the pressures of war, slump and capitalist competition were to destroy it forever and to change the ideas and attitudes of the working class. Even in the inter-war period those ideas and attitudes were very contradictory. English workers are often thought of as insular and xenophobic, but in many respects their industrial background, with its lack of religious or conservative family ties (compared to most of continental Europe, for example), made them outward looking, adventurous and open to new cultural influences. The English were, for example, the greatest cinema goers per head in the world in the 1930s and 1940s, and this attendance was heavily concentrated in the working class and lower middle classes:
In 1950 the average Englishman and woman went to the pictures 28 times per year, more than 10 percent of total world cinema attendance, a per capita figure not even exceeded in the United States. Throughout the 1930s there were 18–19 million weekly attendances ... By 1945 it was 30 million. In 1946, the year when cinema attendance was at its highest, one-third of the whole population went to the pictures at least once a week, and there were a total of 1,635 million attendances. [2]
The dominant influence in cinema along with music and dancing was heavily Americanised and this was generally welcomed by working people. They took to various forms of American popular music from 1918 onwards, including jazz influenced black music; the dances which became staples of English ballroom dancing (itself a worldwide cultural phenomenon) such as the quickstep and foxtrot were derived from American ‘rag’ dances. The huge dance halls such as the Hammersmith Palais and the Streatham Locarno came into their own in the 1920s and 1930s. The English often preferred American films to the indigenous variety, especially in the 1930s, because they were thought ‘vigorous, materialist and democratic. Those who disliked British films disliked them because they were none of these. Most widely disliked was the accent of the actors and, even more, the actresses’. McKibbin continues: ‘The working class part of the audience was also unsympathetic to the extreme emotional restraint of many British films – even the most widely admired, like Brief Encounter (1945), which was by almost universal consent a “classic” British movie, yet not really popular in England outside the suburbs. People were offended by Celia Johnson’s “prissiness” and found her moral dilemma incomprehensible.’ [3]
That English workers could accept much of American culture without accepting some of the worst aspects of US society was demonstrated during the Second World War when, despite the British authorities trying to maintain US army segregation between black and white soldiers, this was repeatedly opposed by ordinary people:
There were several well-publicised cases, some violent, where English civilians took the side of black GIs against white American servicemen. Both the British government and the American authorities were compelled to recognise indigenous attitudes: on arrival white Americans were warned that segregation did not operate in Britain and urged to accept that. The issue of segregation was not marginal to Anglo-American relations: it was widely discussed, widely disliked and, outside official circles, did not enhance the appearance of America in English eyes. [4]
English people – again in contrast to many other nationalities – had relatively weak adherence to religion. This adherence went into steady decline during the inter-war years, and much of the supposed commitment, especially to the Anglican church, was only nominal. Women adhered instead to various forms of spiritualism, astrology or other forms of mysticism:
The social anthropologist Geoffrey Gorer thought a substantial proportion of the population ‘holds a view of the universe which can most properly be designated as magical’ – a passive cosmology where there was no perceived connection between effort and outcome. That so many more women than men – especially married working class women – held to such a cosmology suggests among many of them a real social powerlessness, a feeling that they had little control over their lives. [5]
Working class women certainly lacked control over their sexuality. Indeed contradictory and often hypocritical attitudes to sexuality in England seem to characterise this period. English people seemed very keen on chastity outside marriage (in the early 1950s, 52 percent were opposed to men and 63 percent opposed to women having any premarital sex) but themselves did not follow such strictures, so in 1938–1939 some 30 percent of all women conceived their first child before marriage. At the same time many women clearly felt that sex was something they had to endure reluctantly rather than to enjoy – ‘working class women repeatedly expressed either hostility or indifference to marital sexuality’. [6] Although this changed between 1918 and 1951, and probably changed even more dramatically in the two decades afterwards, it was clearly a widespread view. The other side of the coin, however, was a more open attitude to non-sexual relationships between men and women. McKibbin describes how what was often called the ‘puritanical’ attitude to sex had this positive effect: ‘in the early 1950s more than half the English thought it possible for people of the opposite sex to have non-sexual friendships, a proportion unlikely to be found in many other European countries.’ But he goes on, ‘The negative consequence of puritanism was a sexual prurience and a delight in pornography famous throughout Europe’. [7]
The contrast between the attitudes of the various classes is shown most dramatically in relation to sport. This section is one of the strongest in the book, perhaps reflecting the overwhelming importance of sport in this period. McKibbin writes:
The English were a sports loving people, and that was one of their characteristics which outsiders immediately identified. But they loved different sports; only cricket is a possible exception. At the extremes some sports were so socially specific as to be undefinable except by those who played them. And at all levels the sport people played or followed was, like what they read, determined by class, modified, though not by much, by place of birth or residence. [8]
Yet the history of sport in these years can also be seen as a microcosm of British capitalism. A country which led the world in inventing and developing sports in the 19th and early 20th centuries suddenly found other nations catching up and overtaking it. The extremely popular football clubs made money for directors but nothing was invested in new or improved grounds. England began to win much less:
Throughout this period one of the striking features of English sport was the decline in its international competitiveness. Since every major international sport, with the exception of basketball, was English (or, in the case of golf, British) in origin; since, therefore, England had enormous advantages in experience and tradition, such decline was for the English surprising and depressing. [9]
Much of this decline can be attributed to the systems of amateur and professional players in games such as cricket and golf, which were both incredibly snobbish in their disdain for any sort of ‘professionalism’ – working people trying to make a living from their sporting skill – and terribly wasteful of talent as a result. It is also clear, however, that this system, coupled with a reluctance of the state to spend large amounts of money training and promoting sportsmen and women, meant that England was increasingly at a disadvantage competitively against countries such as the US and pre-war Germany which provided far more resources. The British relied on the traditional structures of sport, the public schools and universities, and sport sponsored by private industry.
The same piecemeal approach could be seen with education, where McKibbin describes how the grammar school system between the wars was quite inefficient in terms of the needs of British capitalism. The schools were beyond the reach of most working class children, but even those who attended them found them quite unsuitable training for later life – they left both underqualified and overqualified, as the author puts it. They were underqualified because the schools refused to teach any practical skills, such as shorthand typing, which might be useful in gaining work. They were overqualified because they were trained for the matriculation system, needed for university entrance – but before 1945 hardly any grammar school children went to university.
The structures of life in Britain were, in virtually every respect, different for members of different classes and very heavily influenced by class considerations. If these seemed particularly archaic this was perhaps to do with Britain’s original pre-eminence as a capitalist power; by the 1920s and 30s the ruling class felt its decline but was hampered by many of its institutions from changing rapidly. The Second World War altered some of that, but the previous decades also saw substantial change. The growth of a salaried middle class and of a clerical workforce, the advent of mass media, communications such as cars, aircraft and telephones can all date their mass use from towards the end of the period studied here. The effect of mass unemployment and migration to find work – ‘not dead but gone to Slough’, as the Welsh used to say – also broke up the old traditional working class communities around mining and shipbuilding.
It is here that McKibbin’s analysis is flawed in a way which, by and large, does not detract from his study but which makes for an unsatisfactory conclusion. His assumption is certainly that the working class can and does change during the period he studies, but he always assumes that this working class is composed of manual workers. He states quite explicitly that clerical workers, even the low paid shop workers or clerks, were middle class: ‘What mattered was occupation and the social aspirations and manners which occupation demanded. On this ground, and one other – their very strong sense of not being working class – those in clerical work must be regarded as middle class’. [10] Now it is true that probably the majority of clerical workers thought of themselves as in some way ‘a cut above’ manual workers in the inter-war years. It is also true that they very often worked in proximity to but segregated from manual workers, in offices attached to factories, much more than their equivalents would now. But that was already beginning to change in McKibbin’s period. There were typing pools and large accounts offices, telephone exchanges, American style shops such as Woolworth’s. The employees in such work were in most respects becoming more like manual workers in terms of wages, conditions and control over their work (McKibbin himself mentions the bedaux system or ‘time and motion’ studies). With the benefit of hindsight we can see this process of ‘proletarianisation’ has become much greater advanced to include bank clerks, many finance and insurance workers, health and education workers as part of a class which is exploited and which has no fundamental difference in interests, income or lifestyles from its manual counterparts.
A failure to understand white collar workers as part of the working class might not appear to matter but its weakness is revealed in McKibbin’s conclusions. He sees the working class as a declining class (which it is if we simply judge it by manual workers) and therefore sees 1951 as its high point. Manual workers had come out of the war in employment, better off and having elected a government which supposedly represented them. The middle class, having done very well during the early 1930s, was now relatively worse off, according to this view. McKibbin talks of the traditional working class having been recreated in the 1940s and this leading to the Labour landslide. Its decline led to the decline of Labourism.
Since then, however, we have seen the biggest rise in trade unionism ever (reaching its high point in 1979), a wave of strikes in the early 1970s involving both ‘traditional’ and ‘new’ working class militants, and more recently the beginning of reorganisation following the major defeats of the 1980s. In 1997 Labour won its biggest landslide ever, largely from working class votes. The history of that modern working class and, hopefully, its future struggles is still to be written.
However, that is outside the range of this book. Its conceptual weakness in its definition of class does not prevent it covering a whole range of issues about how people lived and worked in these years, how women coped with pregnancy or debt, how workers distrusted the union leaders, how working class children’s talent in writing or expressing themselves was ignored or marginalised. It also demonstrates the elitist, patronising and authoritarian way in which the ruling class tried to maintain its rule and how ordinary people found many ways to avoid or circumvent such restrictions. Some things don’t change. This book is a valuable history of the specific period; it is also there at the birth of a working class we can recognise today.

Notes
1. Ross McKibbin, Classes and Cultures: England 1918–1951 (Oxford 1998), p. 7.
2. Ibid., p. 419.
3. Ibid., pp. 433–434.
4. Ibid., p. 525.
5. Ibid., pp. 291–292.
6. Ibid., pp. 296–297.
7. Ibid., p. 327.
8. Ibid., p. 528.
9. Ibid., p. 377.
10. Ibid., p. 45.
 



Whatever Labour supporters thought they were voting for on 1 May 1997, they believed they were rejecting Tory policies. They wanted no more privatisation, better public services, greater job security. They wanted an end to the influence of sleazy businessmen, a halt to the MPs who listened to professional lobbyists rather than their constituents, and a greater say in decision making. They wanted to stop the vested interests, from country landowners to giant supermarkets, dictating what working people should do. Nearly half way through the term of a landslide Labour government, none of these wishes has been achieved. Tony Blair’s Labour government is noted more for its conservatism than its radicalism. All those who most identified with Labour’s aspirations – for greater equality and fairness, for a curbing of the bosses’ worst excesses, for ending the worst poverty in generations – now find themselves disappointed at the lack of change. Those traditionally most hostile to Labour – big business, the press, the champions of free enterprise – are pleasantly surprised that their wealth and power have been left untouched and that New Labour will do anything to appease ‘enterprise’ and the ‘free market’.
The contradiction between what people expected and what they have received has led to a political and ideological crisis among Labour supporters. Some of it takes the form of bitter humour, as in the letter to The Guardian which suggested that the campaign song for the next election should be Things Can Only Get Better. But increasingly it takes the form of protest and argument. People are leaving Labour, not joining it. Many longstanding activists are saying they will not stand as councillors or canvass for the party in this year’s elections. Some are even tearing up their cards. The enthusiasm which greeted Blair’s election only two years ago seems a distant memory. No one plays the best selling election night video any more and few remember the excitement of seeing the old sleaze ridden, arrogant Tories thrown out by an electorate which had been waiting impatiently for the chance. Even Marxism Today, the champion of Thatcherism on the left during the 1980s, has found Blair too much to stand. [1] The reasons are not hard to see. Under Tony Blair’s government it has increasingly been like the old days under the Tories. In the few months since December 1998 alone there has been a severe NHS crisis, with patients lying on trolleys or travelling across country to find beds, a war in the Gulf, with Britain playing the role of uncritical supporter of the US, and a sleaze scandal which went to the heart of government and forced two ministers to resign. This was presided over by a Labour government whose prime minister staked his reputation on being untainted with the old political scandals and incompetence of the previous 18 years of Tory rule.
On the eve of election day, 1 May 1997, Tony Blair told his Sedgefield constituents that people had to use the next 24 hours to ensure that when they woke up on 2 May they were not confronted with another five years of the ‘most discredited and sleazy government ... it is 24 hours to save our NHS, 24 hours to give our children the education that they need, 24 hours to give hope to our young people, security to our elderly’. [2]
Many of those who voted for him could be forgiven for thinking that little has changed. There have been no perceptible improvements in hospitals, schools or public transport. In many areas they have deteriorated. The public sector workforce suffers widespread demoralisation through low pay and worsening conditions. Teachers have been subject to an ideological assault as vicious as anything under the Tories. Blamed for ‘failing schools’ and ‘low standards’, they are now facing business intervention in schools and still have to suffer under the hated Ofsted inspection regime headed by Chris Woodhead, reappointed under Labour on a much higher salary. Privatisation is being introduced into hospitals. The privatised rail bosses can ignore a crescendo of complaints with impunity, safe in the knowledge that their profits will never be seriously threatened by the government.
Some of the poorest people in Britain have found themselves under threat: old people are expected to live on the lowest pensions of any advanced capitalist country, while single parents have been the victims of scapegoating and planned benefit cuts. Council houses are being sold off to private landlords, leaving tenants with less security of tenure and higher rents. Students are faced with fees of £1,000 a year to go through higher education; the disabled and sick are having to undertake more stringent tests to qualify for benefit; and all workers are being told they will have to pay more for their future pensions. Those who want to join a trade union to improve their conditions will find that they have won far fewer concessions than the bosses from Labour’s proposed employment law.
Labour has shown itself unwilling or unable to stand up to the rich and powerful. There has been no freedom of information act, food regulation proposals have been toned down to appease the big supermarkets, green traffic laws to restrict car usage have been delayed until the next parliament, and the ban on foxhunting has been abandoned. The ‘right to roam’ law has been subject to a similar fate under pressure from some of the most right wing people in Britain, the country landowners.
Blair justifies his policies by reference to a Third Way between right and left in politics. Both traditional poles have failed – state socialism was a disaster and neo-liberalism in economics has also brought the excesses of the market. Now Labour can position itself to the right of traditional social democracy (as represented by Old Labour) and to the right of the social democratic leaders in Europe, such as Lionel Jospin in France and Gerhard Schröder in Germany. In a recent speech Blair spelt out what the Third Way meant in terms of a centre-left consensus: that human capital matters more to economic success than money or equipment; that markets work best but need regulation; that the foundation of the modern welfare state is work for those who can and security for those who cannot; that how a government spends money and what it funds are as important as how much it spends; that a strong civic society rests on responsibilities as well as rights; and that political power should be devolved to the lowest possible level. [3] The theory of the Third Way underpins the policies which his government is pushing through and which are bringing Blair and New Labour into repeated collisions with its own members, its voters and many trade unionists. That is why, in every major area of government policy, the contradictions are becoming sharper and more problematic for Blair.
 
The legacy
The stock response of the Blair government to any criticism is that it takes time to repair the damage caused by 18 years of Thatcher rule. Labour voters will have to wait patiently while there are small incremental improvements in areas such as schools and hospitals and nothing can be promised until the economy is in sufficiently good shape to allow it. But the legacy of cuts and devastation caused by 18 years of Tory rule (and the Callaghan Labour government which preceded the Tories from 1976 to 1979) have left many areas of society in a terrible state. Indeed, Britain has become a land of extremes, statistically speaking. Both poverty and inequality have grown dramatically. Tax changes between 1985 and 1995 have led directly to the poorest tenth of the population being 4 percent worse off, while the richest tenth are 6 percent better off. [4] Direct tax rates as a percentage of gross domestic product in Britain are lower than in any other EU country except Portugal. [5] Between 1979 and 1995 in Britain the gap between top and bottom earnings widened by more than one third. This mirrored the growing gap in the US and New Zealand, while Japan and most Western European countries saw the differential remain more or less the same. [6] Whereas for most of the postwar period the incomes of those at different levels rose at more or less the same rate, between 1979 and 1995 this changed. Higher incomes rose much faster, with that of the richest tenth rising by 68 percent and that of the poorest tenth actually falling by 8 percent. [7] No wonder that by the early 1990s there were two and a half times as many people in poverty as there were in 1979. [8]
This stark worsening of inequality and poverty has been matched with a deterioration of public services in virtually every area. The percentage of GDP spent on health is one of the lowest in the advanced capitalist world. [9] Public transport has less money devoted to it in terms of population than virtually anywhere else in Western Europe. Expenditure on rail infrastructure per head is lower than Portugal or Spain; public transport fares in London are the highest of any European capital; fewer people use public transport than in other European countries. [10] Creeping privatisation in areas such as care of the elderly means that places in council residential homes and NHS hospitals have been cut by more than a third since the late 1970s; at the same time the number of private residential homes trebled and those in private hospitals and nursing homes have increased by five times. [11]
It is obvious that radical remedies rather than gradual reforms are needed in order to make a significant impact on these problems. Instead, Labour imitates the previous Tory policies which have proved disastrous. There is no commitment to renationalisation; public spending is being kept to previous Tory limits for the first two years of government; projects such as the modernisation of the London tube or building new hospitals are to rely on private finance; and higher taxes are not even contemplated as a means of rectifying the situation. The Blair government has prided itself on the levels of approval received from big business and the caution it has shown in altering previous government policies. The reason lies in its determination to avoid what it sees as the mistakes of past Labour governments and to follow a precise plan of government action. In practice, however, Labour has bowed to its traditional enemies in the media, big business and the middle classes. It has appointed Tories to many public positions, including overseeing reform of the House of Lords. In the process it has assured such people – many of whom would never have voted Labour – that they have nothing to fear.
At the same time Blair has alienated many of his traditional supporters by attacking all the beliefs that ‘Old Labour’ held dear – from comprehensive education to an NHS free at the point of use. Blair’s central assumption, that getting the economy right and allowing free rein to businessmen to ‘create wealth’ will solve all his other problems, is increasingly prone to criticism.
 
Beyond boom and bust?
The Blairites always had a model for how they would run government. Drawing heavily on the successful Clinton election campaign in the US in 1992, New Labour believed it could build a successful government, running for at least two terms, which would move Labour firmly onto the centre ground of British politics and finish the Labour left (the main Blairite enemy) forever. Some of the strategy for this was frankly ridiculous. Blair’s election campaign was, following Clinton, based on the profound messages: ‘time for change; the failure of Bush (Major); Clinton (Blair) is young and dynamic; we offer a partnership between government and people’. [12] But the most enduring message that the Clinton campaign gave to the Blairites was its famous catchphrase, ‘It’s the economy, stupid’ – once you get the economy right then everything else follows. Blair and his chancellor, Gordon Brown, have always taken economic success as their touchstone. Every policy proposed by Labour was ‘costed’ before the election; every proposal for spending has been accompanied with the proviso that it can only be achieved when the money is there. But Blair and Brown have proved themselves to be much more than simply careful keepers of the Treasury purse; their ideological commitments dictate that they embrace such methods, extend them into as many areas of public spending as they can, and make sure that they obey the wishes of the businessmen whom they admire so much.
Some of this is very Old Labour indeed – it goes back to the days of Ramsay MacDonald and his chancellor Philip Snowden in 1931, when the Labour government’s commitment to following orthodox economic policies led to wage and benefit cuts and a split inside Labour as MacDonald formed a government with the Tories. But Blair and Brown’s strategy is dressed up in a rejection of Old Labour ‘Keynesian’ methods, which in turn is justified by the increasingly global nature of capitalism. Capital is no longer anchored down or tied to nation states, the argument runs, and so there can be no regulation of capital by governments or other forms of state intervention. All that governments can do is create skilled and educated workforces, prepared to work flexibly to suit the demands of global capital, which can only be subject to minimal controls or regulation – for example, a minimum wage, but one set at a sufficiently low rate so as not to deter capital. Tax and wage rates have to be ‘competitive’ in order to attract investment; hence the boast that corporation tax is one of the lowest in the world and the refusal to consider raising the very low rates of tax on higher earners. Wages and conditions for British workers are some of the lowest of the Western European countries, and the Blair government has consistently refused to raise them to match those of German or French workers.
This strategy demands an almost total acceptance of the workings of the free market. If workers accept low enough wages they will see unemployment falling. The only way to prevent factory closures is for the workforce to be sufficiently flexible that the company does not move abroad. The excessively long working hours of most British workers, which became commonplace under Thatcher and Major, have to be accepted in the name of flexibility. [13] The answer to those forced to exist on low benefits is that they should go back to work. Since he became Labour leader, Blair has consistently followed this line of argument. Indeed, as his leadership progressed he increasingly came to publicly favour the ‘Anglo-American’ completely deregulated model of capitalism against the ‘Rhineland’ model with its greater employers’ costs and more regulated system of employment. The logic of following the markets meant heaping praise on the Asian Tigers, seen until the economic crisis there during 1997 as the fastest growing and most successful economies in the world, and praising the epitome of deregulated capitalism, Rupert Murdoch. Blair even travelled to Australia to address a conference of NewsCorp Murdoch executives in 1995.
During his election campaign, Blair went out of his way to appease big business – an opening election broadcast featured Terence Conran, Gerry Robinson and Anita Roddick. [14] He spoke at the Corn Exchange in the City of London on 7 April 1997 where, although he called for a Third Way between laissez faire capitalism and state control, in practice this meant tax cuts, flexible labour markets and an assumption that ‘economic activity is best left to the private sector’ and the ‘postwar Keynesian dream is well and truly buried.’ Days later he stressed, in a business manifesto, an inflation target of 2.5 percent, tough rules on borrowing and spending, public-private finance for transport, and education improvement to increase skills. A letter to The Times by 84 businessmen stated that business could ‘look forward with confidence to a profitable future with a Labour government’. [15]
The economic rectitude continued after the election, with Gordon Brown promising that public spending would remain within the narrow limits laid down by the Tories for the next two years. Spending could not be financed through higher taxation but only through real growth and expansion of the economy, which alone would allow better health, education and transport. There was one fatal flaw in the argument: if the economy failed to expand then public spending would be slashed further, more people would become unemployed and would have to exist on inadequate benefits, there would be no room for improvement in living standards. Brown dealt with this by boasting that Britain would be able to turn its back on boom and bust – an easy boast since Labour took office when the economy was growing, unemployment was relatively low and expansion of public spending looked a possibility after the two years of strict Tory spending controls. However, it became clear throughout 1998 and in early 1999 that avoidance of bust would be no easy matter.
There was, first of all, the recession and economic crisis already hitting so much of the world economy. At first it was commonplace among Western economists and politicians to assume that the severe financial, economic and social crises which devastated several of the Asian Tigers from mid-1997 onwards would not affect the Western economies. They saw huge devaluations in countries such as Thailand and Indonesia, and the collapse of banks and financial institutions in countries as important economically as Japan, but believed that ‘the contagion’ could be contained. This changed in August 1998 with the collapse of the Russian economy, which led to massive losses against a devalued rouble, when even the billionaire speculator George Soros could see that all was not rosy for the future of capitalism. [16] Catastrophe beckoned again following the near demise of the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management, which nearly caused a collapse on Wall Street and did for a time herald a ‘flight to cash’ as investors even shied away from government bonds, believing that the markets were going haywire. The devaluation of the Brazilian currency, the real, in early 1999 upset temporarily stabilised money markets and once again raised prospects of world recession. There is still debate about whether the whole world will enter recession, or whether the US and parts of Western Europe will escape it. But already between a third and two fifths of the world are in recession; the world’s second largest economy, Japan, is in deep and seemingly intractable crisis and there are signs of slowdown in the US economy. [17]
There is general agreement that the British economy, for once in a favourable situation when a Labour government took office, is heading towards recession. There is still disagreement about how bad this will be. [18] Towards the end of 1998 there was much anecdotal evidence of a serious recession: decline of manufacturing output, the beginning of signs of recession in services, and an apparently catastrophic slump in many areas of consumer spending. Although the fall in levels of unemployment recorded early in 1999 led some to believe that a recession could be avoided, this seems unlikely. Economic growth is slowing down: ‘The economy has slowed to a crawl. Government statisticians say that the economy grew by only 0.2 percent in the last quarter of 1998 ... some economists expect it to be revised to an even lower figure later. Most forecasters expect paltry growth in the first half of this year’. [19] The article continues, ‘Most economists think Mr Brown’s forecast of 1 percent growth this year is too rosy’. [20] Whether the economy manages a ‘soft landing’ or whether the recession is much harder, the squeeze on delivering the public services which Gordon Brown insists can only be achieved by getting the economy right will be much more severe. Brown is committed to a golden rule that current spending cannot exceed tax revenues over the business cycle. With a recession, more will be spent in areas such as welfare benefits and less will be received in tax revenues. Although the Treasury hopes that this will even itself out over the cycle – that downturn in the economy will be followed relatively quickly by upturn which will reverse this process – there is no certainty that this will happen, thus leading to the Blair government holding down or cutting public spending further.
Blair also faces a dilemma over entry into the euro. He is caught between pressure from the majority of the capitalist class who clearly want Britain to enter sooner rather than later, and the Murdoch press which is opposed and which so far Blair has avoided antagonising. The pressure on him to hold a referendum quickly will grow, since he is now being criticised by big business for not joining straight after the election. Either way, he risks unpopularity since public opinion is still against the single currency and Blair may find himself under much greater attack from both sides.
 
New Labour, new means tests
While Labour refuses to intervene to regulate the economy or to curb the excesses of big business, it has no such qualms about intervening to direct the lives of individuals. Blair and Brown’s determination to abide by a degree of financial rectitude is matched by a level of social authoritarianism with regard to welfare which apes the policies of their Tory predecessors but manages a degree of sanctimoniousness which goes beyond what even many Tories would have dared. Whether in praise of adoption for children born outside marriage or opposing parents who take their children on holiday in term time, Labour ministers are never short of a quote about parental responsibility. There are constant attempts to police the family, council estates and schools. This attitude marks a move away from society taking collective responsibility for social problems and towards individuals themselves carrying a much greater burden. It is not a new development: the long term trend since the Callaghan government of the late 1970s has been to shift the burden of care away from the state and towards individuals. There has been a huge shift away from state and towards private care for the elderly; council housing has been progressively privatised, at first piecemeal, but now in huge blocks of housing stock, and in the process the subsidy on housing has moved from bricks and mortar to effectively paying private landlords; the costs of education and healthcare have been stealthily pushed onto the individual through payment for ‘extra curricular’ activities in schools, tuition fees and loans for students, and charges for eye tests, dentistry and prescriptions. But now working people suffering from these cuts in public services are also blamed for their problems.
The accompanying talk of ‘rights and responsibilities’ claims that rewards in society come from taking a responsible part in society. Blair draws heavily on the ideas of community and social justice but his use of the terms do not imply an egalitarian philosophy. Rather they suggest one where the solutions to problems rest very much with the individual rather than with society as a whole. In this, they represent a return to Victorian liberalism: if, despite the state’s efforts, people remain unemployed, then this is their own fault and reflects their own inadequacies. Since individuals are therefore responsible for their own unemployment, punitive measures are justified. The attempt at an ideological justification for such policies involves a rejection of the principles of the universal welfare state established after the Second World War. The principle was that everyone in a position to do so paid tax and national insurance contributions and in return received benefits when they were sick, old or in need of education. In practice this has worked as a ‘savings bank’ – the money paid in tends to be received in benefits by the same people (so the young and healthy pay contributions and receive them back when they are old or sick), the majority of welfare benefits therefore being self-financed. Nonetheless, there is an element of redistribution from the richest to the poorest involved in this principle as the richer tend to pay more tax while the poorer tend to receive more benefits. A recent study concludes that if public services were paid for by user charges rather than through taxation, losses to the poorest households would average £5,000 a year while gains to the richest households would average £11,000 a year. The introduction of means tested benefits would only increase benefits traps and disincentives to work. [21]
Far from helping redistribution the Blairite project on welfare requires abandoning the whole idea. Instead, he wants a system where the vast majority in work pay more, often for private provision, while state benefits remain an inadequate safety net. The tax cuts for the rich instituted under the Tories have been upheld by Labour, on the grounds that people will not pay more taxes (even though there is overwhelming poll evidence to the contrary). Instead a lower tax regime is supposed to be accompanied by higher individual spending on private pensions, on higher education, and if individuals ‘choose’ to do so on private education and healthcare. The element of compulsion suggested in the plan for second pensions for all British workers is effectively the further partial privatisation of taxation and benefits. Blair rejects the Thatcherite notion that ‘there is no such thing as society’, but his view of society rests heavily on the individual within it and has a profoundly conservative tinge: ‘The only way to rebuild social order and stability is through strong values, socially shared, inculcated through individuals, family, government and the institutions of civil society’. [22]
The role of individual effort in the context of the family is also stressed in his view that social justice is about effort to improve one’s situation rather than changing society so that everyone can be levelled up, summed up in the phrase that Labour should strive not for equality of outcome but for equality of opportunity. This idea puts the burden on individuals not to fail rather than on society not to fail them. It also reinforces the notion that society is made up of a majority of discerning consumers whose lives are one happy round of choosing how to spend their money and who want to pick and choose education or healthcare in the same way as buying a pair of shoes. These public services therefore have to be geared to a series of costly and time wasting tables and standards, rather than seriously trying to raise the standards of public services in all areas and for everyone regardless of ‘consumer demand’. And for those unfortunates who do not fit into this model of consumer society, then New Labour has shown itself to be as arrogant, unsympathetic and authoritarian as any previous government.
Neil Kinnock once said of the Tory government: ‘I warn you not to get sick. I warn you not to be old.’ One could equally warn under this Labour government not to be young and unemployed, or living on a sink estate, or to be old and poor, or to get into trouble with the police. If you are a single mother or sick or disabled and on benefits, then the government pressurises you to get a job. If you live on a poor estate, then the government pressurises you to allow a private landlord to take over. If you are an asylum seeker you will be denied benefits and any means of earning a living, and threatened with harassment and deportation. If you break the law then you can expect zero tolerance. Yet there is no sign that these policies work. Many of them are taken from Blair’s hero, Bill Clinton. Yet the US’s low levels of unemployment are based on a low wage, deregulated economy which has already created widespread discontent among workers even in a boom. It also contains the highest prison population in the world – a costly way, both financially and socially, of avoiding welfare. And the abolition of many social welfare benefits there, plus the restriction of many more, will have devastating consequences for millions when unemployment rises.
The centrepiece of government welfare policy is Welfare to Work. In 1994 Gordon Brown spelt out the thinking behind it:
We must look hard at our own welfare system to ensure that it provides pathways out of unemployment and poverty rather than trapping people in persistent dependency. For the risks and insecurities that the welfare state was set up to combat have changed dramatically over 50 years and the welfare state has to keep up with the times. The welfare state must be about supporting people as they respond to these challenges – extending their choices and opportunities: acting as a trampoline rather than as a safety net. [23]
The idea of giving people who are at present ‘socially excluded’ the skills and the motivation to earn a wage and therefore to stop their dependency on the state is central to Welfare to Work. Yet it begs a number of questions. Many people cannot work for reasons of age, health or disability: these people are now condemned to a miserable existence on benefits which barely cover the essentials of life. Many others who are at present on benefits will almost certainly work in the future. This is true statistically of both the young unemployed and of single parents on benefit. Yet Labour is insisting that such people are pressurised or even forced to take work at very low wages which, far from developing their skills, is often the most routine work which cannot attract a stable workforce at normal pay rates. Education is likely to be further disbarred to such people since it now carries very high costs up front in the form of fees and loans, which many people on benefits will see no way of repaying and so will be deterred from such a course. In addition, Welfare to Work has not been an unqualified success in the US or Australia, where it has already been tried. The Australian JET programme cost taxpayers more after five years than it had saved because it involved a subsidy to employers. Existing workers are often displaced by these subsidised workers who have to accept lower wages, so the number of new jobs created has not been particularly high. There are also worries that such schemes do not represent the first rung on a ladder to well paid work, but a revolving door between low skill, low reward jobs and the dole queue. Most importantly, there is no guarantee; the scheme is predicated on an expanding economy – what if there are no jobs? [24]
There is no doubt that the government wants to increase the level of compulsion in Welfare to Work. In 1997 Gordon Brown introduced the scheme in his budget by stressing the responsibilities of young unemployed people: ‘With these new opportunities for young people come new responsibilities. There will be no fifth option – to stay at home on full benefit. So when they sign on for benefit they will be signing up for work.’ In effect there is little difference between this and the ‘Workfare’ schemes which Labour has traditionally rejected – as recently as in 1994 in the Commission on Social Justice – because of the element of compulsion. But ‘if Workfare means certain categories of the unemployed having to work for their benefits, then Welfare to Work is a form of Workfare’. [25]
Yet this level of authoritarianism has already created a backlash, especially in terms of the proposed compulsion towards single parents or the disabled to find work. Although the government was forced to retreat on its plans to slash benefits in such areas in the wake of major disagreement and protest around the ‘welfare roadshows’, and although the unpopularity of these measures led directly to the departure of the ministers responsible, Harriet Harman and Frank Field, in July 1998, there are repeated attempts to try to introduce an element of compulsion. This, plus the holding down of benefits to extremely low levels which have a demoralising and harmful effect on claimants, has led to a general sense that New Labour is not prepared to do anything to help some of the poorest and most needy. Indeed, it is more likely to blame them for their problems. This feeling has led to a level of militancy among groups such as pensioners and the disabled which has only grown under Blair’s government and which is unlikely to be appeased by any minor changes in policy. Welfare to Work has bred discontent and a degree of cynicism about Labour’s shabby treatment of the unemployed, but has yet to generate significant organised protests. The advent of a recession and higher levels of unemployment might change that; it would certainly expose both the harshness and the inadequacy of Labour’s welfare policy which relies on market provision. [26]
 
Democracy and constitutional change
The manifesto on which Labour was elected in 1997 contained a profound commitment to constitutional change. Scotland and Wales would be allowed a degree of devolution; regions in England would receive more power; there would be elected mayors in London and other cities. Labour was pledged to abolition of voting rights for hereditary peers in the House of Lords, a referendum on electoral reform and a freedom of information law. Government would be more in the control of the people, less corrupt and sleazy, and more locally accessible. Blair sees this area of constitutional politics as very important in delivering what he regards as true democracy and in modernising the British state. While he has introduced legislation to achieve many of these changes, and constitutional change is heralded as a Blairite success story, in reality there have been a number of setbacks and reverses for those wanting such reform. Freedom of information legislation has been put on hold, much to the disgruntlement of many Labour supporters, as has some local government reform. House of Lords reform has become bogged down in compromise. A referendum on changing the voting system to a form of proportional representation has been deferred. Most importantly, the supposed benefits to Labour of Scottish and Welsh devolution and of a London mayor have turned into their opposite, as Blair increasingly acts as someone who believes in democracy as long as everyone agrees with him.
This is most obvious in Scotland and Wales. The theory behind devolution was that it would allow more local accountability. It would also pre-empt calls from the nationalists for complete independence by allowing a degree of local decision making. Despite the failure of the devolution referenda in the late 1970s, this time Labour would organise devolution votes based on a simple voting majority and would be strongly placed to dominate the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Assembly. At first there was little doubt that Labour would benefit electorally from these changes. The Tories were completely wiped out in May 1997, retaining no seats in either Scotland or Wales. In both, the nationalists were in second place electorally at the general election but neither the Scottish National Party nor Plaid Cymru made an electoral breakthrough: the SNP had around 22 percent share of the vote, only half a percent up on the previous election. In Wales Plaid received just under 10 percent of the vote (an increase of 1 percent) and this was heavily concentrated in the Welsh speaking and rural areas. [27]
The referenda took place just months after the election, showing a clear majority for a Scottish Parliament and an extremely narrow one – 0.6 percent – for the Welsh Assembly. However, far from the referenda satisfying demands for greater control in Scotland and Wales, the political result was an increase in support for independence. This was fuelled in Scotland even before the referendum when the Blairites hedged over the question of tax raising powers for the parliament. In the 18 months or so since, however, the Labour Party in Scotland has been under repeated attack and has seen its support fall to the benefit of the SNP. Arguments over the blatant selection of Blairites as candidates for the parliament, while many respected Labour figures were passed over, has led to divisions in the party and a number of defections to the SNP locally. Blairite MP Rosemary McKenna, chair of the selection board, claimed that ‘we could not stuff our lists full of second rate hacks and expect Labour voters to express blind loyalty to the party.’ In fact the second raters include two MPs, the former secretary to the Scottish party and the former leader of Edinburgh City Council. [28]
There are already signs of a backlash against this behaviour. Labour has lost a number of council by-elections to the SNP. The veteran Westminster MP Dennis Canavan has been denied a Labour nomination for a Scottish Parliament seat and is now standing as an independent. Labour’s continuation of Tory policies has alienated many of its supporters. For example, it has used openly Tory arguments to accuse the SNP of preparing a ‘tax bombshell’ for Scottish voters. The journalist John Lloyd has complained that devolution has been ‘an anti-English project’. But, as Joyce McMillan, writing in The Scotsman, said, the feeling for greater independence has little to do with anti-English sentiment and a lot to do with Blair’s policies – the ‘over-enthusiastic endorsement of Margaret Thatcher’s “no alternative” approach to market economics, which once again has left Scots of the left with no utopia to dream of except a Scottish one’. [29]
Although there appeared to be less concern over devolution in Wales, with the very narrow yes vote and the fewer powers devolved to the Welsh Assembly, the rows involving Labour over the assembly have become as sharp as those in Scotland in the run up to elections in May 1999. There was pressure from the Blairites to ensure that Ron Davies, the Secretary of State for Wales, won the nomination as Labour leader of the assembly against the strong challenge of Rhodri Morgan. Morgan, although far from being a left winger, was regarded as unreliable by Blair and with the help of the union block vote was eventually defeated. The nightmare scenario arose after Davies was forced to resign following the ‘Clapham Common incident’. Blair’s replacement as Welsh secretary was Alun Michael and he insisted that Michael should also lead the assembly. This was seen as the imposition of a London Blairite candidate on Wales and came on top of a series of events which had alienated many Labour voters from Blair. By-elections in council seats earlier in 1998 demonstrated a shift away from Labour in one of its strongest heartlands towards Plaid Cymru, which appeared a more left wing alternative. In summer 1998 Plaid took its first seat on Swansea council for over 20 years and Plaid won a ‘safe’ Labour seat near Bridgend. [30] Support appears to be growing for Plaid not just in its traditional areas but in the industrial valleys of south Wales where Labour is dominant.
Rhodri Morgan’s challenge to Alun Michael has led to civil war inside Labour. There is near universal discontent with Michael and with Blair. Had the election been based on one member one vote of the Welsh Labour Party membership, then Morgan would have won hands down. But Blair had to abandon his supposedly favoured method of election and insisted on an electoral college with only one third of the votes going to individual members; trade unions made up another third, and MPs plus some assembly candidates the final third. Even so, the vote was very close and Michael won thanks to the union block vote which delivered for Blair against the wishes of many union members. Blair breathed a sigh of relief when Michael won, but his relief is won at the cost of delivering more votes to Plaid in May and of uproar in the Welsh party. The forced imposition of Michael resulted in an own goal for Blair.
New Labour faces a similar dilemma in London. The idea of an elected mayor and a partly elected quango to run London was a compromise. Abolition of the old Greater London Council under Ken Livingstone was very unpopular, but Blair had no desire to restore a similar body. He would like the mayor to be business friendly and firmly New Labour. Unfortunately for him most Londoners both in and outside the Labour Party think differently. Ken Livingstone is by far the most popular figure for mayor and would be the obvious choice – except that Blair opposes him. Labour’s intention is therefore to exclude him from any shortlist. Yet it is obvious that Livingstone is popular precisely because he represents something to the left of Blair in a city where many local issues such as transport and environment are highly politicised, where the swing to Labour in the 1997 election was higher than the average nationally and where even many of the suburban outer London seats returned Labour MPs. There have been a series of desperate attempts to find Blair-friendly alternatives to Livingstone, so far with little success. The latest signs are that Blair will try to persuade health minister Frank Dobson to stand, on the grounds that he could beat Livingstone in a shortlist election of London party members. But this is a risky strategy – as in south Wales, it depends on party members voting as Blair wants, and there is no guarantee of this. The alternative is to exclude Livingstone from the shortlist altogether – the favoured Blair method, but one which contradicts his professions of democracy.
Labour’s policy on the House of Lords has undergone progressive erosion under Blair. When he became leader, party policy was the abolition of the existing institution and its replacement with a second elected chamber. This began to change in 1996, when Blair’s John Smith Memorial Lecture substituted instead the abolition of the hereditary principle: ‘Surely we should first make the House of Lords a genuine body of the distinguished and meritorious – with a better, more open and independent means of establishing membership – and then debate how we incorporate democratic accountability’. [31] Consequently Labour’s manifesto promised to abolish the voting rights of hereditary peers in the House of Lords as ‘the first stage in a process of reform to make the House of Lords more democratic and representative’. However, since the revolt of the Tory peers even this has been abandoned. Blair has compromised, allowing 91 hereditaries to remain. Labour ministers now claim that a fully elected second house is impossible because it would clash with the Commons and the whole question has been left to a royal commission. The likelihood of any change in this parliament is becoming more remote and Labour’s policy, far from being radical or threatening the status quo, ‘is open to the accusation that what is proposed is a giant quango in the sense that all members will be appointed’. [32]
A similar fate has befallen the campaigns for a change in the voting system to a form of proportional representation (PR). This is an issue which deeply divides the Labour Party right up to cabinet level. Several of the most powerful ministers such as Gordon Brown and Jack Straw are opposed to any change in the electoral system. Blair is claiming that he has not made up his mind on the issue; but his appointment of the Liberal peer Lord Jenkins to head the ‘independent’ commission on what form the new voting system should take gives some idea of his real sympathies. The Jenkins commission which reported in October 1998 recommended the ‘alternative vote plus’ system of PR, a system which would benefit the Liberal Democrats probably more than any other party. Indeed, the various forms of PR being implemented already in Scotland and Wales and proposed for the Westminster parliament are all aimed at strengthening the centre parties (and the Tory party which has no seats in Scotland and Wales) rather than allowing real minority voices. Electoral reform is therefore central to the policies of the Liberal Democrats but many Labour MPs have greater doubts. The Welsh Office minister Peter Hain has come out publicly against the Jenkins proposals, saying that only the alternative vote should be implemented without the ‘plus’ element of MPs elected by a top up system across the regions, which should be delayed for ten years. ‘I ... doubt whether MPs would vote themselves out of their seats just like that,’ said Hain. [33] Although there are many who support various forms of PR on the basis that there would be MPs from all main parties sitting in every area, and who therefore see it as enhancing democracy, the proposals on offer seem likely to strengthen the centre based coalition politics of which Blair is so fond. [34] He knows that he is in a minority on this question inside his party and that it can become one of Labour’s major divisions – in a way which, so far, economic policy has not been – and therefore the referendum on voting reform has again been pushed into a second term.
There must be ruling class worries about the piecemeal way in which Blair is approaching reform. The deal with the Tories over the hereditary peers meant that the reformed second chamber suddenly became a much more immediate prospect, but without any real thought about the political or constitutional implications. This is an example of how Blair is casually restructuring the state in ways which can create all sorts of problems of coherence and co-ordination.
 
Tony’s friends
When considering the factors which have led to the growth in cynicism about Blair’s government, it is impossible to ignore the individuals chosen by him to help implement his policies. Blair’s appointees and their behaviour speak volumes about the values and priorities of the government and of Blair himself. Despite the fine talk of May 1997, the Labour government has been noted for a level of high living, sleaze and corruption affecting Labour ministers in the way which has been traditionally true of the Tories. In addition, an astonishing number of those hostile to traditional Labour values have been rewarded with often highly lucrative posts in and around government.
By far the most serious case of sleaze involved that of the two ministers forced to resign at Christmas 1998. Peter Mandelson had received a secret loan of £373,000 from another minister, the Paymaster General Geoffrey Robinson. The loan had been kept secret, allegedly even from Blair, until it was leaked to The Guardian newspaper. Mandelson rapidly resigned when the press turned against him. The implications of the case were clear to Labour supporters. Mandelson is the architect of the whole New Labour project, was the closest to Blair in the cabinet (to which he was only promoted last summer), and was the most keen to cultivate new friends among the rich, powerful and right wing – these ranged from Rupert Murdoch’s daughter Elisabeth to Camilla Parker Bowles and Carla Powell, the right wing Tory socialite. It was to entertain such people that he used the loan to buy himself a half million pound house in London’s Notting Hill.
As a consequence of these qualities, Mandelson is the most hated man inside the Labour Party. He failed to win a place on Labour’s National Executive Committee (NEC) in 1997, despite Blair’s backing, and was instead beaten by the left winger Ken Livingstone. When it was suggested soon after his resignation that he would return to cabinet within the current parliament there was uproar in the Parliamentary Labour Party. There has still been no adequate explanation of how Mandelson has financed his expensive lifestyle on an MP’s salary.
His departure is damaging for Blair who relied on him as a loyal and determined ally. His departure also raises further questions of sleaze. The most serious previous allegation was about the Formula One racing boss Bernie Ecclestone, who donated £1 million to Labour before the election and was coincidentally exempted from the ban on tobacco advertising. Other notorious cases of New Labour’s dubious connections include that of Derek Draper, the lobbyist and friend of Mandelson who boasted of his unique access to government: ‘There are 17 people who count. To say that I am intimate with every one of them is the understatement of the century’. [35] Draper has since been publicly shunned by his former intimates, although he is confident enough to appear in the media. Others have been more fortunate. Tim Allan, former Blair press adviser in Downing Street, is now a boss of Murdoch’s BSkyB. Benjamin Wegg-Prosser, adviser to Peter Mandelson, rapidly found new employment as assistant to the editor of Murdoch’s Sun.
It is hardly news that Blair is friendly to big business. Long before the election he said:
I think one of the great changes that has happened in the whole Labour culture is to recognise that we need entrepreneurs and people who are going to go out and be wealth creators and who are going to become wealthy by their own efforts. I support that, I want that, a successful economy needs that. [36]
But the scale of businessmen’s involvement in government and its entourage and Blair’s sheer enthusiasm for businessmen surprised many people. Far from these people showing entrepreneurship or obtaining effective results, several of the most prominent have been dismal failures. Many of them have also become tarnished. Geoffrey Robinson, a multi-millionaire businessman who was supposed to bring his acumen to government, has been forced out of office by the Mandelson loan scandal, but was already subject to other sleaze allegations. Martin Taylor, brought in as a government adviser on low pay and benefits, was last year forced out as head of Barclays Bank. Bob Ayling, boss of British Airways and a Blairite, is under increasing criticism over BA’s loss of market share and for his abortive attack on workers who went on strike in the summer of 1997. Richard Branson, filmed with Blair just before the election on a Virgin train, has presided over an ever worsening train service and a similar decline in his reputation.
It is also noticeable how many Tories have gained jobs through Blair’s appointments, from David Mellor to Lord Wakeham. But the most revealing of Blair’s new found friends, however, lie within the ranks of his advisers and policymakers – where former members of the Social Democratic Party and the Liberal Party have found a new and comfortable home advising New Labour. These include Roger Liddle, founder member of the SDP and friend of Peter Mandelson (co-authoring The Blair Revolution). Liddle is an adviser to Blair on Europe and defence. Former SDP founder member Derek Scott advises Blair on economics at 10 Downing Street; former Liberal Democrat councillor and parliamentary candidate Andrew Adonis is also at Number Ten advising Blair on education. Liddle’s wife, Caroline Thomson, is the daughter of Liberal peer Lord Thomson of Monifieth, a former Labour cabinet minister. She is also the former PA to Lord Jenkins of Hillhead, founder of the SDP and now a Liberal Democrat peer.
There are further connections between several of these individuals and the disgraced lobbyist Derek Draper through the lobbying consultant GPC Market Access (formerly Prima Europe). Prima Europe was founded by SDP founder Lord Taverne, chaired by former SDP founder Sir Ian Wrigglesworth and directed by Roger Liddle. Draper himself became a director of the company, pocketing £250,000 when it was bought out by GPC. Mandelson was a former consultant to Prima Europe. [37]
The SDP was constituted in 1981 with the express purpose of wrecking the Labour Party. Labour’s especially disastrous vote in the 1983 election occurred because the SDP split the vote of traditional Labour supporters. The effect was Thatcher’s continued rule throughout the 1980s on a minority of the vote. Despite the SDP talking about ‘breaking the mould’ and ‘new’ politics, as Labour recovered politically it collapsed, merging into the Liberal Democrats. It is a final irony that many of its luminaries seem to be some of those closest to Tony Blair politically, and that they have more influence on government than they could ever have done under their own banner. The same is true of the Liberal Democrats. The party’s share of the vote fell in 1997 for the third election in a row: ‘at 17.2 percent it was the party’s second worst performance since it started fighting elections on a nationwide basis in February 1974’. [38]
This has not stopped Tony Blair urging closer links with the Liberal Democrats. Indeed, it has emerged that Blair was ready to offer Paddy Ashdown and other Liberal Democrats seats in the cabinet; he was only prevented from doing so by the scale of Labour’s landslide which made it politically impossible for him to pursue any type of coalition. Following the announcement of his resignation in January this year, Ashdown revealed that Blair was ready to do a deal: ‘a closer election [result] would have made it more possible’. [39] Peter Mandelson’s close friend, the millionaire author Robert Harris, who spent election night with Blair, confirmed this when he said, ‘It does appear to have been Mr Blair’s intention, on the eve of Labour’s election victory, to offer Mr Ashdown a cabinet seat; and it does appear to have been Mr Ashdown’s intention, on the morning after, following a hasty consultation with his senior colleagues, to accept it’. [40]
If the political realities of 2 May 1997 prevented Blair and Ashdown from taking this step, Blair has remained a fervent advocate of closer links and possible unity between the two parties. Speaking to the Labour Party conference only months after his landslide victory, he made clear that not only did he want to continue his courtship of the Liberal Democrats, but that he rejected the very basis on which the Labour Party was formed at the beginning of the 20th century. When Blair listed his heroes in his conference speech, he stressed:
[they] aren’t just Ernie Bevin, Nye Bevan and Attlee. They are also Keynes, Beveridge, Lloyd George. Division among radicals almost 100 years ago resulted in a 20th century dominated by Conservatives. I want the 21st century to be the century of the radicals. [41]
There is little wonder that this approach is so isolated inside the Labour Party. Labour’s roots as a party which would represent the trade unions – or rather the trade union bureaucracy – in parliament developed from a rejection of the Liberal Party (traditionally looked to by many workers in the second half of the 19th century) as simply being a bosses’ party. The whole history of the struggle for working people’s representation in parliament and the eventual election of the first Labour government in 1924 was one of rejection of coalition with the Liberals. Even when Ramsay MacDonald and Keir Hardie did make an election deal with the Liberals, they were forced to do so secretly. [42] For Blair to want to return to open alliances with the Liberals as part of his ‘project’ is effectively to wipe out any independent history of Labour throughout the 20th century – something which even many right wing Labour politicians cannot stomach.
Blair’s isolation following the demise of Mandelson and Ashdown has been reinforced by the obviously strong reaction to further links with the Liberal Democrats inside the Parliamentary Labour Party and the cabinet itself. While Ashdown claimed that the Liberal Democrats would be in government after the next election, this was rebutted by the deputy prime minister John Prescott when he said, ‘I don’t think I need anybody else ... The Labour Party carrying out its promises with a majority of 170 can well do that’. [43] Minutes of an internal Labour Party meeting between Blair and six representatives of the Parliamentary Labour Party in early January revealed that he was subject to a stormy attack because of failure to consult over closer Lib-Lab co-operation. Blair was forced to admit that ‘if there were ever any plans to extend the nature of the relationship into new territory, he would discuss these matters first with colleagues’. [44] There is clearly a split over these issues at the top of the Labour Party between Blair and his acolytes who want to destroy Labour and replace it with a party incorporating the mainstream Liberal Democrats and right wing Labourites, and the majority of the cabinet, who may accept modernising policies but who are still Labourist politically. This line up is potentially highly destabilising.
It is hard to see where Blair is going over his planned closer links with the Liberal Democrats. He has lost his main ally in the cabinet, Mandelson; the Liberal Democrats’ new leader after Ashdown is likely to be less amenable; there is widespread opposition among the grassroots of both parties to closer ties. Elections this year are likely to sharpen divisions between the parties. Finally there is no objective necessity with such a huge Labour majority. Therefore Blair’s hands are likely to be tied until the next election. This puts a hole in his ‘project’ of moving to the centre ground in politics. It is unnecessary to fully agree with the ultra-Blairite Robert Harris who says ‘it may well be the greatest mistake of Tony Blair’s premiership – maybe even his entire career – will turn out to be his failure to keep his nerve and make Paddy Ashdown a member of his cabinet two years ago’, [45] to accept that Blair’s isolation in this respect is a bitter blow to him and serves to increasingly demonstrate how little support he has for these policies within his own party.
A further recent speech by Ashdown shed more light on Blair’s intentions when Ashdown claimed that the prime minister’s secret ambition was to see Labour split in two with left wing MPs breaking away to form their own party. Ashdown said that under the existing voting system ‘a breakaway of the left is not impossible. They could be pushed into it, for Mr Blair would not miss them. But it could only come from desperation as it would be electorally doomed.’ On the other hand, under PR the left would have a better electoral chance and so would split. ‘New Labour would be liberated and the left would have a voice again. No more internal appeasement, no more loveless marriage’. [46] This is no doubt the authentic voice of Blair’s ‘project’ but one which will have little resonance among Labour MPs or the wider membership, and shows how far Blair’s interests diverge from mainstream Labour.
 
Where’s the opposition?
Blair’s political isolation from his party is in many ways quite marked. Very few leading Labour Party members subscribe to the ‘project’, and on the ground among Labour activists it has even less support. The New Labour ideologues are very small in number: they comprise the large number of Blair advisers, a minority of MPs, especially concentrated among the new intake, councillors in areas such as the London boroughs of Lambeth and Islington who are implementing major attacks on local people (and whose unpopularity denotes the massive class polarisation in these and similar boroughs), and the substantial penumbra of Westminster, Whitehall and Millbank lobbyists, advisers and researchers. The bulk of Labour MPs and activists have welcomed Blair as the first successful leader for decades, but would probably be happier with more ‘Old Labour’ policies and less rabid commitment to the market. Yet it is remarkable how little opposition there is to Labour from within its ranks or within the trade union leadership.
Firstly, there is the weakness of Old Labour itself. Its ethos is identified most strongly with the 1945–1951 Labour governments. At least for the first three years of that government Labour did deliver substantial reforms. This was the era of the NHS, established in 1948 despite opposition; the welfare state, which brought in a range of benefits for the old, sick and unemployed; and the nationalisation of key industries such as coal and rail, already under government control in wartime. The radical impetus of the war led to the Labour victory in 1945 and a sense that much had to change – there could be no return to the days of unemployment in the 1930s. Even during this government, however, change was very slow and often the government backed down before vested interests. So, for example, the government backed down when blocked by the House of Lords over the abolition of capital punishment, despite a narrow Commons majority. [47] And the plans for building a new society were thwarted, abandoned and curtailed as the government went on. So a survey of building on new London housing estates carried out in 1952 showed that only one nursery school out of a planned 46 had been built, only six infant welfare clinics out of a planned 26 and no health centres out of a planned 33 had been built. [48]
Nonetheless, most Labour voters believed that great changes were being achieved. Labour’s 1945 manifesto said, ‘The Labour Party is a socialist party, and proud of it’, although it warned that ‘socialism cannot come overnight, as the product of a weekend revolution’. [49] Labour supporters believed that their path to reform was on course and they were part of a mass party. Although the Labour government effectively ran out of steam by the late 1940s, and 13 years of Tory rule began in 1951 (despite Labour winning more votes in that election), the 1945 government ushered in an era of consensus politics, made possible by the expansion of the economy during the long boom of the 1950s and early 1960s. Harold Wilson’s governments from 1964 to 1970 were much weaker in terms of reform than the 1945 government. However, they did preside over various changes in the law on employment such as equal pay for women. They also allowed parliamentary time for private member’s bills such as the legalisation of abortion and homosexuality which brought substantial advances. There was race relations legislation, although this was extremely weak.
However, the limited reforms available to Labour in a boom were running out, as the Wilson government faced economic slowdown and industrial unrest. The nadir of Old Labour came in 1976 under James Callaghan when Labour abandoned any pretence at maintaining the post-war consensus in the face of economic crisis. The IMF demanded huge cuts in response to a bailout for the falling pound. As Gregory Elliott says, ‘The day the pound nearly died portended the day British post-war social democracy, already terminally ill, did die – by its own hand’. [50] Anthony Crosland, leading right wing intellectual of post-war Labourism, was moved to say, ‘Even if the government survives, does it make such a difference if Labour measures can’t be implemented?’ [51]
Since then the demise of Old Labour has accompanied the demise of all it stood for; it has made repeated and regular concessions and capitulations to Thatcherism and now to Blairism on the ground that the only important question was getting a Labour government elected. It now accepts privatisation, attacks on welfare and high levels of unemployment – exactly the reverse of what it once believed. Yet this desperation to make concessions to the right has only led to further concessions and to widespread demoralisation among Old Labour supporters. It is this which contributes to the crisis of Labourism at the grassroots. While Old Labour MPs take seats in the House of Lords, those in the Old Labour heartlands who have spent time, sometimes decades, canvassing and working for the Labour Party now find themselves marginalised and ignored by the government for which they spent 18 years waiting. This is why the crisis of Labourism is at its most acute in those Old Labour areas such as south Wales, central Scotland, the north of England and inner London, and why many Labour supporters now find themselves pushed to the left.
Yet the left has not been immune from the crisis. The Labour left has never been weaker than it is now. The series of witch hunts, defeats and retreats which marked the 1980s and early 1990s under the leadership first of Neil Kinnock and then John Smith were continued under Blair. The abolition of Clause Four of the party’s constitution, which contained the commitment to nationalisation, provoked little opposition. The emasculation of the left’s traditional strongholds, such as the annual conference and the National Executive Committee, has occurred with little organised resistance. Local government, the stronghold of the Bennite Labour left, has been progressively weakened by legal and financial restrictions under the Tories, which are being continued under Labour. This is a policy which in effect amounts to ratecapping and includes further government and private sector intervention in areas such as education. Labour’s left has been dramatically weakened organisationally. However, it has also been weakened politically and ideologically. The basis of Labour’s traditional ideology was that a mixed economy with high public spending and government intervention was the most effective way of winning change and creating a fairer society with full employment and a decent welfare system. The failure of old style social democracy led to an increasing embrace of the market under successive leaders which reached its peak with Blair. However critical most Labour Party members might be of this strategy, they see no alternative. They accept the logic of electoralism which means they will agree to compromise and retreat in order to win. They argue that this then allows them to make real changes when in power. But of course being in power only leads to further retreat – in the name of electoralism. So today even many left wingers accept the need for private investment in areas such as public transport or health. When the arch-Blairite minister (and former Labour left councillor) Stephen Byers said in February that the most important thing was not wealth redistribution but wealth creation, many Labour MPs grumbled, but there was no open attack on him. The demise of the East European regimes and the collapse of the Communist Party has also had an effect, since the Labour left historically has relied heavily on the CP for its ideas. The collapse of state ‘socialism’ left many former Communists and Labour lefts turning towards an acceptance of the market and, therefore, many of Blair’s concepts. As Paul Anderson and Nyta Mann have pointed out:
The parliamentary left’s organisational weakness is not, however, its only problem or its biggest one. For some years, it has lacked anything like the confidence, drive or sense of direction of the Labour modernisers. The disagreements over tactics that were the original cause of the Tribune-Campaign split have been overlaid by deeper differences as the parliamentary left has grappled with – or failed to grapple with – the myriad economic, political and social changes since the early 1980s ... There is no agreed left position in the PLP today on the economy, Europe, constitutional reform (particularly the electoral system), the future of the welfare state, and much else besides. Insofar as the parliamentary left has found unity of purpose in recent years, it has been in fighting unsuccessful rearguard actions against changes initiated by the party leadership – on public ownership, on defence, on the closed shop, on OMOV, on Clause Four. [52]
The outcome of this is that the criticism from Labour’s left is often inaudible, and usually makes big concessions to Blairism. Stalwarts of Old Labour such as Roy Hattersley, former deputy leader and always firmly on the right of the party, are now some of the boldest critics of Blair (at least in the columns of The Guardian), while many erstwhile Bennites have made their peace with Blair. Dawn Primarolo, one of Tony Benn’s main supporters in Bristol and a poll tax non-payer as late as 1990, is now Paymaster General attached to the Treasury, and a full supporter of the Blair project. She said recently, ‘I feel I’ve matured. I’ve been an MP for 11 years ... I’ve learned a lot. And also the political agenda’s moved on’. [53] Other ministers have a similar approach. Robin Cook, once regarded as a leader of the left, now carries out Britain’s foreign policy, such as the bombing of Iraq, with apparent enthusiasm. He denies that he ever used the term ‘ethical foreign policy’ but refers rather to ‘an ethical dimension’ to foreign policy. [54] Traditional left wingers who are excluded from government office, such as Dennis Skinner or Tony Benn, are treated as mavericks or dinosaurs, allowed a certain degree of freedom to speak out because no one dares challenge them, but also dismissed as irrelevant. In any case they remain individuals with little power to influence events. The left in parliament is probably weaker than ever. Although some of this is due to the increasingly Blairite intake of MPs, it is also due to the left’s political weakness. After 1997 only six new MPs out of a total of 183 new Labour MPs joined the left wing Campaign Group. [55] The former leading lights of the Tribune Group such as Peter Hain are now in government. One of the most favoured platforms for left MPs, the NEC, has now been denied them, since MPs on the committee are no longer elected by the membership but appointed by Blair. The main opposition has come from the Grassroots Alliance, several of whose members, including Liz Davies and Tribune editor Mark Seddon, beat the Blairite slate to win places on the NEC under the new rules in 1998. However, since then their opposition has been muted and constitutional in its approach.
In London Ken Livingstone is campaigning to run for mayor despite the bitter opposition of Blair. He is obviously banking on things going so badly for Labour in areas such as Scotland and Wales that the leadership may be faced with no alternative than to let him stand. Yet this has led him into a campaign which is confused and contradictory and where he has hesitated in putting forward really radical policies. Livingstone has repeatedly made concessions to Blair including the following in October 1997:
I haven’t written off Blair and I don’t think the left should. There are a lot of truly ghastly people gathered around Blair, like lice on the back of a hedgehog and they have their own agenda ... They seem to regret being born in Britain because they would rather be working in the White House in Washington. Now we have nothing in common with these people. But Blair is different. When Blair became active in the Labour Party he was broadly in line with the consensus at the time.
Livingstone’s analysis went further; the extremes of the left at the time were to blame for Blair’s right wing development. In particular Tony Benn’s speech to the 1980 Labour Party conference ‘marked Benn out as too far to the left for many who had been sympathetic to him. So it cut him off from a constituency of genuine radicals’. [56] This appealing to Blair has not so far done Livingstone any good. He has been blocked from standing as mayor on the grounds that it is better to weather an argument now and prevent him from winning such a prestigious position than allow him to win and then be faced with permanent opposition in London. Livingstone has repeatedly tried to assuage the Blairites’ fears, most cravenly in a Guardian article where he offered to accept Blairite Trevor Philips as his deputy, to work with the government and to accept party control of the campaign. [57] This again received the predicted response and Livingstone has now launched a public campaign in favour of his candidacy for mayor, with backing from London Labour MP Diane Abbott, Billy Bragg, Jo Brand and other celebrities. A February meeting in London to launch his campaign attracted 1,000 people at short notice and during a tube strike. Even this campaign is described by Livingstone as ‘aimed at changing the one vote that matters, which is Tony Blair’s’. [58] The problem is that he reduces the idea of campaigning for a left wing candidate to one of manoeuvre, rather than basing it on rank and file support for the left wing policies which are marginalised under Blair. In addition, Livingstone is fairly typical of a new generation of left MPs who both reject the earlier radicalism of the hard left while presenting themselves as providing a slightly more left wing critique, especially of the economy, than Blair and Brown. [59] All this leads to a tacit acceptance of many of the fundamentals of Blairism and to a shared assumption that the old left is finished as a force and that compromise is the only way forward.
However, it would be wrong to deduce from the present weakness of the Labour left that it cannot regain its influence. Indeed, Blair’s right wing politics open up a space for the left which can only grow as long as his policies continue on their present course. The Livingstone campaign in London is one obvious focus where it can grow, but will also do so around the issues facing Scottish and Welsh politics, around future industrial struggles, cuts campaigns and around a range of politics where discontent with Blair has come to the surface. In such situations, even a politically very weak left can suddenly find that it is attractive to large numbers of people looking for an alternative to Blairism. Already we can see that figures like Livingstone are supported because they are identified with a much more left wing politics than are currently on offer from mainstream Labour. Any big upsurge in struggle will see a much bigger audience for the left, and the Labour left will grow as a consequence. At the same time, its political compromises with Blairism, its organisational weakness and its lack of any real roots inside the working class, plus its lack of a coherent ideological voice, mean that it will find it more difficult to consolidate that support than has been the case in the past.
Those who expected a stronger opposition to Blair from the trade union leaders have been disappointed. In practice they have acquiesced to most of Blair’s policies even though the unions have received very little in return for bankrolling much of the election campaign and for their loyal support for Labour. Despite spending £12 million in donations to Labour in 1996–1997 and providing 9,000 helpers in the election campaign, the unions have been shunned. [60] It is an open secret that the TUC leaders and the various heads of unions feel betrayed and outcast by Downing Street. Far from receiving favours from Labour, they are forced to stand by while the big bosses, many of them anti-union, have the ear of Tony Blair. On crucial union questions such as the minimum wage and the Fairness at Work legislation, agreement has been reached as a compromise between bosses and unions, only for Labour to renege on the deal and give into further lobbying from the bosses. Far from this leading to the unions taking a harder stand against Blair, it has made the leaders pathetically grateful for any crumbs they are given. [61]
Response to the attacks on unions as a body, especially the successive concessions to employers under the Fairness at Work legislation (even that title was abandoned when the bill was published) have been muted, with union leaders stressing positive aspects of the legislation such as slight improvements in maternity leave. Attacks on public sector pay are much disliked by the union leaders but they are terrified of leading a serious confrontation with the government. In fact, whatever the deep divisions between the Blairites in particular and the trade union leaders, the two need one another. The union leaders need a party from which they can win some concessions, however few or pathetic these might appear; in reality Blair is forced to rely on the unions for the block vote which has swung behind his changes time and again and for helping to sell Labour’s policies to union members. The head of the GMB, John Edmonds, made a revealing comment about the relationship: ‘Our 50 percent vote [at the party conference] is still a powerful weapon and no one should underestimate its usefulness to the leadership. We work out an unwritten code, if you like, that we underplay our power and that our first instinct is to support the leadership. We know the damage caused by divisions’. [62]
However, even the most docile trade union leaders feel themselves pushed to the limit by this government. They are constantly ignored or humiliated by those in positions of power. At the same time their members on the ground are increasingly restless. They make up a large proportion of Labour activists; during the 1997 election they were used to knock on doors to win votes for Blair; they have been left empty handed by this government. In addition, life at work is extremely hard, with pressure from employers over jobs and conditions. Public sector workers, having put up with years of Tory cuts, are finding no improvement and sometimes a worsening of conditions under the Labour government. Private sector workers feel increasingly insecure as the government refuses to intervene to stop employers from their worst excesses. No wonder that dissent is growing. Perhaps an interesting straw in the wind is a letter sent from Tony Dubbins, general secretary of the printers’ GPMU union, to all the union’s branches, which deals with requests from local Labour Parties for financial assistance in this year’s Welsh, Scottish and European elections. Dated December, part of it reads:
… the union has been deeply involved in consultations with the party with the ‘Fairness at Work’ proposals, and we expect them to be published in the near future. It is our intention to hold a meeting of branch officers to discuss the proposals as soon as possible after their publication. To this end I am strongly recommending branches that they should make no financial contributions to the Labour Party for election purposes until such time as we see the shape of those proposals, and the branch officers’ meeting has taken place. [63]
Similarly, anger in the Fire Brigades Union (FBU) has surfaced in proposed resolutions to the union’s annual conference, several of which called for disaffiliation from Labour. Bedfordshire FBU demanded that ‘the FBU immediately disaffiliates from the national Labour Party in reprisal for the betrayal by New Labour leaders of their union roots.’ Tyne and Wear demanded a withdrawal of support for councillors on Labour controlled fire authorities ‘who have been actively involved in campaigns to attack and erode conditions of service of FBU members’. From Mid and West Wales the resolution argued that ‘the Labour Party no longer represents working class aspirations and has abandoned all pretences of being a socialist alternative ... this union should withdraw its financial support for Labour until such time as it returns to its socialist ideals’. [64] While these resolutions have been ruled out of order because they require rule changes in the union, and so will not be debated at the conference, they indicate a level of protest at Labour’s actions and a refusal to continue supporting the party uncritically. It is obvious that the discontent at shopfloor and bureaucratic level in the unions is growing and that, although Blair has relied and will continue to rely heavily on union support while pretending that he doesn’t, the tensions are growing and may well erupt in unpredictable ways.
 
What is the alternative?
It is a major paradox that nearly two years into a Labour government there is widespread discontent with Blair and with New Labour but this is not matched by any rise in the level of struggle. The number of strikes is very low; even very obvious discontent such as that over nurses’ and teachers’ pay does not immediately result in industrial action. There appears to be little political opposition to Blair. Opinion polls show him with a high rating, there is little opposition within parliament, and very little that occurs outside parliament is reported. In the self referential world which New Labour inhabits, businessmen pay tribute to the government and it is still lauded by most of the people at the top of society. The right wing media might be turning against Blair, but there is so much about him that they admire that their criticism is still muted. Anyway, the Tory party is so deeply divided internally and so despised by millions throughout the country that few see a viable electoral alternative (apart from the nationalists in Scotland and Wales). It is therefore easy for Blair to pose as a one nation leader, to echo John Major in claiming that the vast majority are becoming middle class and that within a few years everyone who is now socially excluded will be able to climb the ladder of opportunity to an expanded middle class:
Slowly but surely the old establishment is being replaced by a new, larger, more meritocratic middle class ... characterised by greater tolerance of difference, greater ambition to succeed, greater opportunities to earn a decent living. A middle class that will include millions of people who traditionally may see themselves as working class, but whose ambitions are far broader than those of their parents and grandparents. [65]
Yet the reality is exactly the other way round. Many groups who may have thought of themselves as middle class – such as teachers and nurses, bank clerks, even some college lecturers, are seeing their wages and conditions being pushed down towards the working class. The idea that they or their parents failed to become middle class because of lack of ambition is also wide of the mark. Most people are destined to do jobs which are relatively low paid, increasingly insecure and dominated by speed up, supervision and other features of traditional working class life. Many of these jobs are characterised by relatively high skills coupled with intense work and often long hours – exactly the formula which is supposed to transport workers into the middle class but which in practice still leaves millions in low paid routine work. No wonder that the majority of people see themselves as working class: in 1997 around 60 percent did so, whereas around 35 percent saw themselves as middle class. Despite the idea that society is becoming much more middle class and that the working class is shrinking, these attitudes have changed little over the past 30 years. The percentage categorising themselves as middle class rose only 5.5 percent between 1966 and 1997. [66] Blair ascribes his election victory in 1997 to appealing to the professional and managerial middle classes. These are the sorts of people he goes out of his way to cultivate. But in reality his electoral success did not come from these people, but through winning the votes of groups who increasingly see themselves as routine workers, often white collar and skilled, often members of trade unions (whose overall decline among manual workers, as jobs in areas such as mining have disappeared, has been partly offset by a growth in white collar unions). Labour made particular advances among what are classified as C1s, who include low level supervisors and managers but are also made up of clerical workers. Whereas 47 percent of this group voted Labour (an increase of 19 percent), only 31 percent of ABs (managerial and professionals) did. This last group still composed the largest single area of support for the Tories at 42 percent. [67] This reinforces an Institute of Directors poll taken shortly before the election which showed that managers were intending to vote 40 percent Tory and only 25 percent Labour. [68] More detailed polls before the election showed that 60 percent of teachers intended to vote Labour and only about 15 percent Tory. This contrasted with 50 percent backing the Tories in 1979, compared with 32 percent for Labour. Similarly with nurses, a Nursing Times survey showed that 70 percent planned to vote Labour against only 16 percent Tory. Given that nurses and teachers are classified as AB groups ‘the change in their votes alone would account for nearly half the growth in the Labour vote in this grouping’. [69]
Among Labour Party members there is apparently little support for Blairite or anti-working class policies. Majorities questioned in 1997 wanted more money in the NHS, less spent on defence, and some income and wealth distribution towards working people. [70] A recent MORI poll showed that approval of big business was at a 30 year low. Whereas in 1970, 53 percent agreed that the profits of large British companies helped make things better for everyone who buys their goods and services, by 1999 only 25 percent believed this, with 52 percent against – an almost total reversal. [71]
It is no wonder that within months discontent began to grow with the Blair government among its traditional supporters. Few could have predicted that this discontent would be sharpest among Labour activists and its traditional supporters in the unions. Yet this is what has happened. Much of the evidence is anecdotal, but it is widespread. In many parts of the country Labour activists have left the party or slumped into inactivity, usually through demoralisation at having to defend Blair’s policies or at being taken for granted by a New Labour machine which assumes votes in strong Labour areas will always be there. This has been posed most acutely in Scotland and Wales, where the run up to the devolved elections has led to defections and disillusion. But that mood exists everywhere. A number of people have left over new policies: attacks on single parents and disability benefit; tuition fees for students; the bombing of Iraq. Letters in The Guardian repeatedly testify to the public renunciation of Labour. Some of those leaving are very much Old Labour but many must be some of the 140,000 who joined between 1994 and 1997. Labour Party membership has fallen over the past year. In one Liverpool council ward, where one of the three councillors is up for re-election in May and some fear losing to the Liberal Democrats, several constituency activists resigned over the bombing of the Gulf. Morale is low and activists are often not informed of public meetings held by their MP. Elsewhere in the city, in the Halewood ward, the branch chair resigned at Christmas over the bombing of Iraq. In Birkenhead ward meetings are very small and few are willing to take on responsibility. [72] In Bristol the chair of one Labour Party ward resigned after 15 years in the party. A former mayor of one West Country city has recently resigned from the party; in another town in Wiltshire the convenor of a factory is not standing again as a local Labour councillor. Bristol University Labour Students found themselves split over the bombing in the Gulf. [73] There are similar stories from around the country. A longstanding Labour Party member in Cheshire wrote an article for Socialist Review last December in which he argued:
Blairism is conservative. It is also dishonest. Blairism won an election in the name of Labour, on the back of the two centuries of working class struggle that created the Labour movement and with the help and the subs of party members who believed they were getting a genuine Labour Party elected. Once in power it has revealed itself to be something quite different. Not just broken promises but the repudiation of the very soul and aspirations of the historic labour movement. [74]
Michael Knowles’s conclusion was to leave Labour. He speaks for thousands who may or may not take the final step but who are so disillusioned that they are not motivated to go out and canvass, let alone enthuse about the government.
So Labour members who used to be active in most working class localities defending Labour policies, getting people to join, turning out the vote, are now often sitting on their hands. In south Wales there have been a number of meetings of Labour members around the contest for leadership and the Welsh Assembly. At all of them a sizeable number were interested in socialist ideas, were willing to buy socialist papers and so on. Labour’s landslide in 1997 depended on the enthusiasm of Labour supporters to carry it through: ‘A quarter of Labour voters reported [to MORI] that they encouraged others to support their party: only one-tenth of Conservative supporters did so, and whereas 12 percent of Labour supporters actively discouraged people from voting Conservative, only 3 percent of Conservatives took a similar anti-Labour stance’. [75] Blair has lost this enthusiastic support among many of his activists. There is also some evidence that newer Labour members who joined after Blair became leader are less active than older members; loss of support from the traditional activists is therefore a very serious problem for Blair. [76]
However, it is a much bigger problem for those who have traditionally looked to Labour and now feel betrayed. They have put up with repeated assaults on left wing policies, of accepting cuts and job losses in the name of achieving change, only to see their party run and influenced by some of the richest, least accountable people in British society. Blair has no feeling or empathy for their concerns and he is contemptuous of their values. The result is a crisis of Labourism as it has been constituted in Britain since the Second World War. Labour is not even committed to the very limited provision of public services and welfare that it was once. The process did not start with Blair, but with the 1970s Labour governments which back-tracked on commitments in the face of the first serious economic crisis since the war. But Blair has taken the project much further, with his open rejection of Labour values and his espousal of 19th century Liberalism. Many Labour members who have devoted their lives to political change through Labour see little alternative, but a growing number are realising that this is the end of the reform road. The cadre of the Labour left, especially the MPs such as Livingstone, are desperate to keep the activists inside the Labour Party, yet the more they compromise with Blair the harder it makes the creation of a left wing pole of attraction.
The defeats of the 1980s still mark the working class movement and still mean that employers are relatively confident, and organised workers often feel demoralised and unable to really bring about change. Blair has found better friends than he has deserved among the trade union leaders, who have repeatedly argued that nothing can be done to alter policy apart from quiet behind the scenes lobbying – which has been a total failure. His friends among former left wingers have also been invaluable in selling the various retreats over policy. However, while Labour members were willing to put up with a great deal to win a Labour government, there are fewer reserves of patience left, and even fewer reserves of loyalty to Blair. His failure to win the hearts and minds of Labour members in Wales and London is indicative of the shallowness of his support. So far, Labour has managed to keep the lid on opposition, but the nature of New Labour means there are few barometers to indicate the levels of discontent and the possibility of future explosions. These will also most certainly take Blair by surprise.
While the level of struggle has been much lower in Britain than in many other countries, there is no real evidence for British exceptionalism. The same mood of bitterness and anger which affects workers in Greece or Germany is also present here. The level of discontent is obviously growing, although the indications are still straws in the wind: the 500 workers from Brent who lobbied Downing Street over cuts; the public letters of resignation from Labour; the 82 percent vote for strike action against privatisation at UCLH and among Sheffield housing benefit workers; the sizeable demonstrations around Britain over the Gulf; the discontent exposed in union conferences; the protests over school and library closures; the joy at Peter Mandelson’s departure. This is not simply confined to the Labour Party: many thousands are questioning the political and ideological assumptions which they have accepted for decades and are looking to a left alternative. Socialists are able to find an audience at two levels: through intervening in the small but important struggles against the ravages of the market and the compliance of Blairism, which are there even though they rarely make the headlines; and by providing some of the ideological arguments about the alternative to a society run in the interest of capital. It is increasingly obvious that even one major national strike or an all out strike in one city would lead to a rapid crisis of Blairism and Labourism as society polarised along class lines. But we do not need to sit passively waiting for such an event to occur. Instead we can begin to develop a theoretical and practical alternative to Labourism, old and new, which can point the way out of the chaos of the system.

Notes
1. Marxism Today, November/December 1998. See especially S. Hall, The Great Moving Nowhere Show.
2. See D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, The British General Election of 1997 (Macmillan 1997), p. 112.
3. See M. White, Blair Hails Middle Class Revolution, The Guardian, 15 January 1999.
4. J. Northcott, Britain’s Future (Policy Studies Institute, University of Westminster 1999), p. 59.
5. Ibid., p. 61.
6. Ibid., p. 48.
7. Ibid., p. 38.
8. Ibid., p. 41.
9. The Economist, 16 January 1999, p. 38.
10. J. Northcott, op. cit., pp. 133–137.
11. Ibid., p. 16.
12. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 57.
13. J. Northcott, op. cit., p. 80, demonstrates that the working hours of British workers are the longest in Europe, more than three hours longer than the EU average.
14. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, p. 52.
15. Ibid., p. 109.
16. George Soros and Jeff Madrick, The International Crisis: An Interview, New York Review of Books, 14 January 1999.
17. See A. Callinicos, World Capitalism at the Abyss, International Socialism 81 (Winter 1998), and R. Hoveman, Japan Sinking Fast, Socialist Review 227, February 1999.
18. See, for example, the comparison of forecasts for UK growth during 1999 among supposed ‘experts’ which range from 2.1 percent to −0.5 percent in R. Adams, The Difficulties of Long Range Economic “Whether” Forecasts, Financial Times, 3 February 1999. The author compared the forecasts to ‘catching water in a sieve – not much good, but better than nothing.’
19. Budget Games, The Economist, 30 January 1999, p. 35.
20. Ibid., p. 36.
21. Private Welfare and Public Policy, Joseph Rowntree Foundation quoted in The Economist, 16 January 1999.
22. Quoted in S. Driver and L. Martell, New Labour (Polity 1998), p. 29.
23. G. Brown, Fair is Efficient (Fabian Society 1994), p. 22.
24. See S. Driver and L. Martell, op. cit., pp. 111–113.
25. S. Driver and L. Martell, op. cit., p. 113.
26. At a seminar for academics and experts where everything turned on welfare recipients finding work, Gordon Brown was asked what would happen if he failed to get most people into jobs. He refused to contemplate this happening.
27. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., pp. 313–314.
28. M. Winstone, Spiked, Red Pepper, September 1998, p. 18.
29. C. Bambery, Storms Over Scotland, Socialist Review 222, September 1998, pp. 16–17.
30. J. Goss, Winds of Change in Wales, Socialist Review 221, July/August 1998, p. 9.
31. Quoted in S. Driver and L. Martell, op. cit., p. 151.
32. Ibid., p. 152. See also A. Parker, Lords Reformers Peer into the Abyss, Financial Times, 19 January 1999.
33. A. Parker, Minister Calls for Voting Reform to be Scaled Back, Financial Times, 25 January 1999.
34. See, for example, M. Linton and M. Southcott, Making Votes Count (London 1998).
35. Derek Draper quoted in the New Statesman, 10 July 1998, p. 10.
36. Tony Blair quoted in S. Driver and L. Martell, op. cit., p. 26.
37. For a fascinating and graphic account of the interconnections see Paul Foot’s Footnotes, Private Eye, 22 January 1999, p. 27. See also J. Sopel, Profile of Derek Draper, New Statesman, 10 July 1998, p. 10.
38. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 295.
39. R. Peston and G. Parker, Negotiations Over Post-Election Pact With Labour Revealed, Financial Times, 22 January 1999.
40. R. Harris, The Blair Project Sinks With Ashdown, Sunday Times, 24 January 1999.
41. Quoted in S. Driver and L. Martell, op. cit., pp. 156–157.
42. T. Cliff and D. Gluckstein, The Labour Party – a Marxist History (London 1988), p. 34.
43. Quoted in N. Watt, Prescott Mocks Ashdown’s Claims, The Guardian, 25 January 1999.
44. Quoted in N. Watt, Blair Curbed Over Lib-Lab Links, The Guardian, 22 January 1999.
45. R. Harris, Sunday Times, op. cit.
46. G. Parker, Ashdown Says Blair’s Secret Ambition is to Split Labour, Financial Times, 4 February 1999.
47. G. Elliott, Labourism and the English Genius (London 1993), p. 60.
48. S. Fielding, P. Thompson and N. Tiratsoo, England Arise! (Manchester 1995), p. 106.
49. Ibid., p. 76.
50. G. Elliott, op. cit., p. 89.
51. Ibid., p. 66.
52. P. Anderson and N. Mann, Safety First: The Making of New Labour (Granta 1997), p. 375.
53. R. Adams, “Dim Dawn” Primarolo Set to Dazzle Critics in her New Role, Financial Times, 27 January 1999.
54. Steve Richards’ interview with Robin Cook, New Statesman, 13 November 1998.
55. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 207.
56. Steve Richards’ interview with Ken Livingstone, New Statesman, 10 October 1997.
57. K. Livingstone, I Only Want to Help, The Guardian, 29 January 1999.
58. C. Reiss, Ken’s Challenge to Blair, London Evening Standard, 8 February 1999.
59. See, for example, the profile of Alan Simpson MP by John Lloyd, In the Steps of Tony Benn, New Statesman, 5 December 1997.
60. L. German, A Landslide Country, Socialist Review 208, May 1997.
61. Steve Richards’ interview with Bill Morris, New Statesman, 27 February 1998, and see the even more conciliatory approach a year later in K. Brown, Meddlesome and Proud, Financial Times, 27 January 1999.
62. Steve Richards’ interview with John Edmonds, New Statesman, 11 September 1998.
63. Letter from Tony Dubbins to all GPMU branches, circular No. 255/98, 15 December 1998.
64. FBU circular 99 HOC 146 ML, 9 February 1999.
65. M. White, Blair Hails Middle Class Revolution, The Guardian, 15 January 1999.
66. Ibid.
67. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 246.
68. Poll in the The Observer, 13 April 1997.
69. C. Harman, Swing Shift, Socialist Review 209, June 1997.
70. Martin Smith’s interview with Patrick Seyd, Whose Party Is It?, Socialist Review 221, July/August 1998.
71. K. Brown, Approval of Big Business in Britain at 30 Year Low, Financial Times, 22 February 1999.
72. I am grateful to Suzanne Jeffrey for the information about Liverpool.
73. I am grateful to Mark Thomas for the information about Bristol.
74. M. Knowles, Why I Am Leaving the Labour Party, Socialist Review 225, December 1998.
75. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 238.
76. See interview with Patrick Seyd, Socialist Review 221, op. cit.
 



Misha Glenny
The Balkans 1804–1990
Granta 1999, £25.00
It is tempting to view the history of the Balkans as one long nightmare from which its inhabitants struggle unsuccessfully to awake. Misha Glenny’s new book helps us to avoid that temptation, even though his history of the region over the past 200 years contains descriptions of many nightmarish incidents. But he succeeds in putting this history into a context, which begins to make sense of many of the events. The dominant theme of his book is that it is impossible to understand politics and history in the Balkans without understanding the role of the various empires controlled by the Great Powers and how they have used the region for their economic and political gain without any regard for the outcome of their policies. Glenny writes:
Before 1999, the Great Powers had intervened three times in the Balkans. The first was at the Congress of Berlin in 1878 when European diplomats agreed to replace Ottoman power by building a system of competing alliances on the Balkan peninsula. The second began with the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum to Serbia in the summer of 1914 and culminated in 1923 with the Treaty of Lausanne and the Great Population Exchange between Greece and Turkey. The third started with Italy’s unprovoked attack on Greece in March 1940 and ended with the consolidation of unrepresentative pro-Soviet regimes in Bulgaria, Romania and a pro-Western administration in Greece.
These three interventions were so destructive that they guaranteed the Balkans’ relative economic backwardness, compared to the rest of Europe. And the relative violence that these interventions encouraged, often inflicted by one Balkan people on another, ensured the continuation of profound civil and nationalist strife. In the West, however, these events are rarely regarded as the result of external intervention. On the contrary, the Balkan countries are seen as culprits who force the reluctant outside powers into their unfathomable conflicts. [1]
 
The impact of capitalism
The Balkans came late and slowly to capitalist development, but could not escape the consequences of that development. The region covered by the Balkans did not develop at all in the way that western capitalism did. The history of northern Italy, the Low Countries, England, parts of Germany and France was one of the early development of merchant trade and with it the towns, universities, Protestant religions, plus the transformation of agriculture. Whether or not they were successful in becoming fully fledged capitalist powers, they did see fundamental changes in social relations, particularly the end of feudal dominance and the abolition of serfdom. In eastern Europe the pattern was very different with serfdom remaining dominant until relatively recently (in Russia it was only abolished in 1861). The capitalist class emerged in the west through the development of trade and the rise of the towns; its counterpart was far weaker in size and influence in the east. Many of these societies were therefore characterised by economic backwardness and alongside it a social and cultural backwardness which further hindered the growth of forces for change and progress.
But capitalism as it developed fully became increasingly a world system – nowhere could remain totally untouched by its economic system, the ideas which developed from it and the changes in social relations which capitalist production brought about. However, capitalist development was also combined and uneven development – it brought great changes and technological advance but had a very different impact on those societies in which it arrived later than it had on, say, England or Belgium. Glenny’s book covers precisely the period when capitalism began to have its impact on the various countries and peoples of the Balkans. There were people in the region who were influenced and enthused by the ideas which developed with capitalism, in particular with the 18th century Enlightenment which became embodied in the demands of the French Revolution for liberty, equality and fraternity. The right of nations to freedom and independence was an idea that took root at the same time. Despite the weakness of nationalist ideas in the Balkans at the beginning of the 19th century, Glenny makes the point that both the Serbs and the Greeks did fight very early on for independence from the Ottoman Empire with the Serb Uprising from 1804 and the Greek War of Independence of 1821–1830. In this they were well in advance of their counterparts in more developed parts of western Europe. But the societies in which they found themselves were not strong enough to maintain themselves without some outside intervention:
The First Serbian Uprising began over half a century before the unification of Italy; the first modern Greek state was proclaimed 40 years before the unification of Germany. But the national identities of Serbs and Greeks were ill-defined. Both national movements owed their success more to Ottoman decay than to their own inherent strength. To compensate for their political and economic weakness, the national elites sought support for their aspirations from the European powers. Herein lies the start of the Balkan tragedy – these were peasant societies poorly equipped to assimilate the ideas of the Enlightenment, and located at the intersection of competing absolutist empires. The result was a stunted constitutional development whose shortcomings would inevitably be exploited by the Great Powers as competition between them intensified in the region in the second half of the 19th century. [2]
The intensification of competition to which Glenny refers was a result of the varied and changing fortunes the different empires of Europe faced. The rapid pace of capitalist development itself impacted on these empires in different ways. German unification led to a massive increase in the economic power of the German Empire and a much greater push for influence in the Balkans at the expense of two old and decaying empires which had traditionally dominated and controlled the region – the Ottoman and the Austro-Hungarian. Italian unification had also shaved bits off the Austro-Hungarian Empire and led to Austria’s renewed interest in Bosnia. Russia, itself a huge if declining empire with further interests in the region, aimed to unite Russian Orthodox Slavs in a pan-Slavist movement. Russia’s war with the Ottomans in 1877 led to the creation of a massive Russian-influenced Bulgarian state, which brought Europe to the brink of war. It was only the Congress of Berlin in 1878, called by the ‘honest broker’ Bismarck as a means of redrawing the Balkans map in Germany’s favour, which averted this. Instead it established a series of compromises which cut the size of ‘big Bulgaria’, and balanced Russia’s influence by extending Austria’s influence to Bosnia and the Sanjak.
It was clear from the Congress of Berlin that the future of the region would be dominated by the European Great Powers – both those immediately in the region and those like Britain and France which saw their strategic interests threatened by the other empires, especially by the rise of Germany. And after the congress competition rather than co-operation dominated Great Power interests in the region. This was partly for military and strategic reasons, since the Balkans were the area where the Great Powers collided geographically. But this was also the heyday of European imperialism as the capitalist powers fought one another to control and carve up the world’s markets. Most famously this took place in the ‘Scramble for Africa’, where a whole continent was divided up by a handful of European powers; but the Balkans were also a region of increasing economic interest for the different empires. For example, the Treaty of Berlin that resulted from the congress obliged Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria ‘to fund various rail-building projects and tender the contracts to specified foreign consortia’. [3] In Bulgaria this took the form of a quarrel between Britain, Russia and Austria about which railway line should be built and when.
 
The road to war
This period of intensified nationalism and competition in the area only exacerbated local differences and conflicts as the empires tried to build their economic and military influence, and the larger states in the region – Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia and Romania – developed strong armies and an enhanced nationalist identity. Glenny demonstrates how the empires continued their traditional strategy of using different groups against one another in order to shore up their rule. And they all accepted, whatever their other differences, that they had the right to intervene in the Balkans to ensure what they saw as ‘stability’. The 20th century saw this intervention increase dramatically when rivalry between Austria and Russia over the control of Kosovo and Macedonia increased following Russia’s humiliating defeat at the hands of Japan in 1904. At the same time Germany’s alliance with the Ottoman Empire, constructed in order to further the former’s interests in the Middle East, terrified Russia and Britain into alliance in order to weaken Turkey and so damage German expansion.
This was the background to the Balkan Wars which broke out in 1912–1913 and which were a bloody prefiguration of the world conflict which erupted in 1914. That the Balkans developed into an armed, strongly nationalist, military camp in the years leading up to the First World War was very much due to Western intervention. In 1906, for example, France lent the already indebted Serbian government still further money to buy arms, on condition that this arms spending took the form of an exclusive deal for Schneider-Creusot artillery:
The Balkan armies were funded by Western loans, Western firms supplied them with weapons and other technology, their officers were schooled and organised by Frenchmen, Germans, Russians and Britons. The compulsion of the new states to grab territory, with scant regard to the facts of demography or history, reflected the practices of their Great Power neighbours, whose arbitrary decisions at the Congress of Berlin had ensured that there was plenty of territory to dispute. [4]
The Balkan Wars, first between Montenegro, Serbia and Bulgaria against the Ottomans, then between Serbia, allied with Romania, and Bulgaria, were horrific. But, as Glenny points out, ‘the Balkan states were not the powder keg [leading to a general European war] ... They were merely the powder trail that the Great Powers themselves had laid. The powder keg was Europe.’ [5] The Austrian annexation of Bosnia-Hercegovina in 1908 had further exacerbated both the inter-imperial rivalries and the nationalist tensions in the region between Serbs, Croats and Muslims.
The events of the years up to 1914 were increasingly tense internationally as the imperialist rivalries grew and various flashpoints around the world pointed to a heightened probability of war. One measure of this instability was that between 1900 and 1913, Glenny tells us, 40 heads of state, politicians and diplomats were assassinated for political reasons: ‘The Balkans recorded eight successful assassinations, including two kings, one queen, two prime ministers and the commander in chief of the Turkish army.’ [6] The European powder keg exploded in 1914 in a war which began with the assassination of an Austrian archduke in Sarajevo but spread far beyond the immediate dispute to pull in all the European empires. The war finished the Russian, Austrian, Ottoman and German empires and changed forever the victorious powers of Britain and France. The Balkans were very badly affected by the fighting, but perhaps even more so by the way in which ‘ethnic cleansing’, as it is called today, and straightforward murder of people because of a particular nationality became commonplace. The war ended in revolution. Russia’s empire collapsed in early 1917, and although the war dragged on for another 18 months, Germany and Austria-Hungary then exploded in revolution.
 
Revolution defeated
The aim of the Great Powers which had caused the war and spent the lives of millions in prosecuting it was to avert this revolutionary wave at all costs. The revolutions in Germany and Hungary were eventually defeated. In the Balkans themselves there was widespread instability. In Bulgaria there was repeated unrest, from food riots in 1917 to peasant rebellion in 1918, and it continued until the revolutionary wave was finally defeated in Germany in 1923. A mass Communist Party was created in Bulgaria under the impact of the Russian Revolution and the revolutionary wave throughout Europe. Perhaps the major weakness of Glenny’s book is that he pays too little attention to the Russian Revolution and its impact on ideas and political organisation throughout Europe. There was real excitement about what it meant in the Balkans, and the notion of international working class struggle was a strong counterpoint to ideas of nationalism and chauvinism. For example, the Croats were in favour of the Kingdom of the Southern Slavs in 1918.
Glenny tends to concentrate on politics from above, rather than the left and movements from below. He does describe these politics very well, however. He shows how the Treaty of Versailles and its associated treaties were the crucial attempt by the victorious powers to redraw the boundaries of Europe, in the process advancing their own interests and rewarding their allies. The Balkans suffered particularly from the effects of Versailles for, despite the high flown claims of US president Woodrow Wilson that national interests would be safeguarded, there was little principle or consistency in the carve up. Brazil, Glenny points out, had three delegates to the peace conference despite having contributed only two torpedo boats to the war, while both Serbia and Belgium, which had been all but wiped out, had only two. Russia was excluded altogether since the victorious powers were engaged in a war of intervention against its revolutionary government. The main aim of the conference was to make Germany pay in territory and reparations for the war. The aims of achieving democracy throughout Europe as a result of the treaty sounded fine as abstract declarations, but the sort of democracy Wilson wanted had little to do with the rights of small nations to self determination. Rather its aim was to make the continent safe for further capitalist development and so was in direct contradiction to the attempts at working class and peasant revolution that had taken place in the defeated empires.
Italy, the new regional power which attempted to fill the breach left by the old empires, tried to influence the borders of the new state of Yugoslavia, as well as Albania and Turkey. It was allowed to throw its weight about by trying to prevent recognition of Yugoslavia, occupying some of the territories of the new country and annexing Fiume, an act supported by the fascist soon to be dictator Mussolini. The loss of much Yugoslav territory from the new state to Italy only exacerbated tensions between Serbs and Croats, who felt that Croatian land had been abandoned. The country’s new constitution was regarded as a centralising one for Serbs and, therefore, the seeds of further tensions were sown.
Most horrendous of the effects of Versailles on the Balkans, however, was what Glenny calls the great catastrophe between Greece and Turkey. Here too Italy had expansionist aims – to pick off parts of the Ottoman Empire. In order to prevent this, Britain proposed that Greece should occupy the city of Smyrna (Izmir), a port in Anatolya which gave access to the Middle East reserves of oil. This was obviously likely to lead to war with Turkey – a war which Greece was unlikely to win and which would cause immense harm to the Greek population there, who tended to live on the Anatolian seaboard. In fact, as Glenny recounts, when the tragedy ended three years later:
… the Pontic Greeks, with their indescribable wealth of cultural tradition stretching back to Homeric times, had been ripped almost literally overnight from their homelands; old Greece had been reduced to economic rubble and suffered political and social dislocations whose effects would be felt for decades; thousands upon thousands of Turkish, Greek and Armenian civilians were dead, and had been subjected to barbarous cruelty. Yet the tragedy was prolonged still further by the diplomatic negotiations at Lausanne which finally brought an end to the Great War for Greece and Turkey as late as 1923. Here, all parties, with the solemn blessing of Lord Curzon whose wish to become Foreign Secretary had finally been granted, agreed to the compulsory exchange of almost two million Greek and Turkish people. [7]
The war was brutal enough but its aftermath was more dreadful than anything seen in the Balkan wars of the late 20th century. Greece was eventually defeated, abandoned by its erstwhile big power allies and unable to sustain a war in Turkey; as it retreated the fate of the Greek and Armenian nationals in Smyrna was terror and death. By 3 September 1922 an estimated 30,000 refugees were arriving in the city every day, fleeing the Turkish army. It was at this point that the Great Powers decided to maintain their neutrality and not interfere with the Turkish conquest, even though there were British, French, US and Italian ships in Smyrna’s harbour. On 9 September the Greek archbishop was murdered by a Turkish mob egged on by the Turkish military commander. Then Turkish troops sealed off the Armenian quarter, destroyed every house, raped many women and killed large numbers. Many Armenians who tried to escape at the harbour jumped into the sea and drowned or were shot by Turkish troops.
The Great Population Exchange agreed the following year at Lausanne meant that 1.3 million would be expelled from Turkey to Greece, while 800,000 Muslims would go from Greece to Turkey. ‘Under the eye of Britain’s senior diplomat, two Balkan nations agreed to end a conflict that British diplomacy had inspired, by setting a terrible precedent. It would be decades before the Greeks would properly recover from the Great Population Exchange; but the principle of partition and forced removal would be imitated again and again. [8]
The ensuing peace negotiations did not usher in a period of stability. The next two decades until the outbreak of the second global war of the century were ones of intermittent wars, dictatorship and fascism, mass unemployment, despair and misery. The economic weakness of the Balkans and the legacy of the Great Power interventions ensured that the region received its share of these problems. Greece was decimated by its war and took many years to recover. The national question continued to plague many countries: in greater Romania, for example, nearly a third of the population were non-Romanians. Countries such as Yugoslavia were dominated by agriculture, but much of its resources went into defence spending. Across the whole of the Balkans (apart from Bulgaria which was allowed only a token defence force under the Treaty of Neuilly) between 34 and 50 percent of national budgets were spent on the military. Yugoslavia fell to dictatorship within a few years of being established as a supposedly democratic state. Albania was effectively controlled by Mussolini’s Italy, bolstering the rule of the corrupt King Zog. And ‘the impact of the Wall Street Crash on the Balkans via Germany proved a challenge too far for democracy. In quick succession, the landowners, civil servants and generals throughout the Balkans backed dictators, royal and republican, to ensure stability against the rising danger of peasant radicalism.’ [9]
 
Fascism and war
The two fascist dictatorships in Europe intervened in the Balkans – Mussolini sought to enforce Italian interests and territorial expansion, while Hitler’s Germany was the only major European power prepared to invest as a means of ensuring its economic expansion. By 1936 the area was strongly dependent on the German economy. Fascism’s influence extended in oil rich Romania through the anti-Semitic Iron Guard. The image of the Balkan countries portrayed in the novels of Graham Greene or Eric Ambler – of spying, intrigue, repression and palace coups – dates from this period. And the right wing repressive dictatorships that increasingly dominated the economically poor and backward region allowed some of the worst horrors of the Second World War to occur in the area. The Axis and the Allied powers both ensured that the Balkans became a cockpit of war once again, with terrible consequences for the ordinary people of the region. In Yugoslavia invading Germans bombed Belgrade in April 1941, killing 17,000 in a matter of hours. They also decided to back the Croatian fascists of Ante Pavelic’s Ustashe, which comprised no more than 360 people when it took power. Glenny argues that ‘the installation of Pavelic’s brutal fascist regime resulted in the single most disastrous episode in Yugoslav history, whose consequences were still being felt in the 1990s’. [10]
The brutality of Nazi occupation and home grown fascism in the Balkans is breathtaking even by the standards of the history of the Second World War, and Glenny tells the story very well. In Greece people starved because of food shortages. In Yugoslavia concentration camps were established. ‘From the Wehrmacht’s meticulously recorded deportation of Salonika’s 50,000 Jews to the random hell created by the Ustashe in the Croatian camps, the Final Solution in the Balkans was improvised according to local conditions.’ [11] The mass resistance movements that grew up in Greece and Yugoslavia were a reaction to the hell of Nazi occupation and were civil wars between left and right.
Events outside the Balkan countries determined their fate, however. The agreement between Churchill and Stalin in 1944 planned the partition of Europe between the Great Powers, with Stalin maintaining influence over the eastern states, the British and Americans in the west. Greece was to remain under Western influence at Churchill’s insistence, while influence in Yugoslavia was to be shared between the two. In Greece, British military intervention ensured the defeat of the left. The left was ideologically disarmed, as it was in other ‘Western sphere’ countries such as Italy and France, by the politics of Stalinism which were totally opposed to any revolutionary overthrow of the system. In Eastern Europe, Stalinist regimes were established effectively by the Red Army. In Yugoslavia Tito’s partisans were eventually victorious. They had remarkable success in uniting the various nationalities, as Gabriel Kolko described in The Politics of War:
Tito had won the mass backing of the larger part of all Yugoslavs, whether Serbs, Montenegrins, Macedonians, or Croats, because he appealed to a pan-Slav nationalism, federal principles, and equality which promised a unified nation and social progress for the first time. The attraction was irresistible, and by its very nature applicable to much of the south Balkans. There was a potential expansionism, perhaps even imperialism, in Titoism which the Russians instantly recognised as a challenge to whatever position – passive or dominant – they would define for themselves in the area ... No later than April 1944 the Yugoslav Communists spoke of a Balkan federation that would include Bulgaria and Albania as a start, and they had vaguely talked of autonomy for Macedonia within a federal state, which would also include a portion of the population of northern Greece with the same ethnic background as well ... The Russians, it now seems certain, by the end of 1944 were instructing the Bulgarian Communists not to agree to the Yugoslav plans for a south Slav federation in the Balkans. In brief, the pan-nationalist key to Tito’s success threatened to absorb much more than the territory of Yugoslavia, and to challenge Russian pre-eminence in south east Europe. [12]
Yet again the attempts at organising across national and ethnic lines were subjugated to the needs of the Great Powers rather than to those of ordinary people. Similarly, at the conference to determine the post-war settlement between the Allies at Yalta in 1945, Stalin openly colluded with British repression of the Greek popular movement saying, according to the conference’s minutes, that ‘he had no intention of criticising British actions there or interfering in Greece’, to which Churchill, no doubt gratefully, responded that he was ‘very much obliged to Marshal Stalin for not having taken too great an interest in Greek affairs’. [13]
The post-war settlement did indeed achieve a period of stability in the region. The Tito regime, which soon broke with Stalin, established a fairly successful state capitalist economy and was able for a relatively long period to govern a Yugoslavia where national tensions seemed relegated to secondary questions. The establishment of the Iron Curtain through the middle of Europe meant that for some decades the Balkans were no longer at the point where empires clashed. The long economic boom of the post-war years also provided a period of economic stability. But, as Glenny demonstrates throughout his history, this was in many ways an exceptional period, rather than typical of Balkan history over the past two centuries. While the centralised command economies in Eastern Europe were able to grow in the 1950s and 1960s, they increasingly found themselves unable to compete with the internationalised global economies which developed in the West. The contradictions of the regimes also led to political protest, most notably in Poland in the early 1980s where the Solidarity movement’s challenge to the country’s rulers heralded the beginning of the end for all the East European regimes. Within a decade they had all fallen.
 
The search for an alternative
The collapse of the regimes was unlamented by those who had suffered state repression, authoritarian rule, and gradual erosion of living standards and conditions. But the promises of the free market were not delivered – hence the continuing crisis in a whole number of the countries, most obviously and with the most barbaric effects in the former Yugoslavia. The collapse of the state-directed economy in the late 1980s led to the growth of workers’ protests on the one hand and the resort to national ‘solutions’ by the former Communist leaders, most notably Milosevic and Tudjman, on the other. The wars of the 1990s were the result both of the eventual success of the nationalist arguments plus successive interventions of the Great Powers: over recognition of Slovenia and Croatia in 1991; over the bombing of the Bosnian Serbs in 1995 which facilitated the ethnic cleansing of the Krajina and led to the Dayton agreement with, among others, Milosevic and the effective colonial rule of Bosnia ever since. The latest chapter in this story is of course the 1999 bombing of Kosovo and Serbia in the name of humanitarianism, which had only exacerbated the problems in the area.
Glenny’s book is an invaluable guide to understanding the roots of this recent history and should be essential reading for anyone who wants to dig deeper into the history of the area. It gives an overview of the region and prevents the catastrophe of Yugoslavia being seen as simply irrational. However, there are a few areas where the book is less than satisfactory. One is its sheer scope, which means absorbing vast amounts of detail about particular areas of the Balkans whose history may not be familiar. Although its range is obviously also a strength of the book, this makes it quite dense reading at times. In addition, Glenny’s assessment of the latest war is a little ambiguous for someone who has such a clear eye about previous imperialist interventions in the region.
The weakest area of Glenny’s analysis, however, is his omission of much detail about any alternative to the interventions or to the nationalist solutions which have so dominated the former Yugoslavia in recent years, and which threaten a number of other countries from Macedonia to Romania. Here it is worth returning to the tradition which was destroyed by Stalinism but which attempted to build socialist organisation on the basis of a Balkans federation that cut across national and ethnic boundaries. In 1914, when all the main socialist parties around Europe were leading the working classes of their respective countries into war, the Serbian Social Democrats were among the few who stood out against the imperialist carnage. On 31 July 1914 the Social Democrat Lapcevic, speaking against the granting of war credits in the Serbian parliament, said, ‘When the costs of the war are assessed, the Great Powers will of course treat the small nations of the Balkans and Asia as mere objects to be handed out as compensation.’ He demanded that Serbia ‘cease to be a tool of the Great Powers, and pursue instead the goal of a Balkan federation’. [14] At the founding congress of the Communist International in 1919 Christian Rakovsky talked of the possibilities of revolution in the Balkans and advocated a Balkans socialist federation. A message from the Serbian Social Democrats talked of the enthusiasm for building revolutionary organisation among the different socialists in Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Hercegovina. [15]
This tradition has been hidden. But working people throughout the Balkans have fought back on many occasions even in the recent past. The interventions of the West since the collapse of Communism have done nothing to solve the problems of the region, nor has the resort to nationalism which has led the people of the former Yugoslavia to a decade of war and misery.
If in the future the populations of the Balkans are to be able to control their history, rather than become prisoners of it, they have to rediscover this socialist internationalist tradition. It alone can point a way out of the problems of the region and provide a positive alternative to the present rulers and to the imperialist powers. Glenny’s book has little to say on this subject. It would be useful therefore to read it in conjunction with the various accounts of the Communist International debates, with books like The Politics of War, which looks at Great Power policy at the end of the Second World War, or with David Fromkin’s A Peace to End All Peace, which details the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after the First World War. [16] But, like all good histories, it gives a mass of information and insights that can help those socialists who want to bring this alternative nearer.

Notes
1. M. Glenny, The Balkans 1804–1999: Nationalism, War and the Great Powers (London 1999), p. 661.
2. Ibid., p. 39.
3. Ibid., p. 172.
4. Ibid., p. 221.
5. Ibid., p. 243.
6. Ibid., p. 303.
7. Ibid., p. 381
8. Ibid., p. 392
9. Ibid., p. 427
10. Ibid., p. 476
11. Ibid., p. 496.
12. G. Kolko, The Politics of War (New York 1990), pp. 135–136.
13. Ibid., p. 359.
14. J. Riddell, Lenin’s Struggle for a Revolutionary International (New York 1984), p. 126.
15. J. Riddell, Founding the Communist International (New York 1987), pp. 94–95 and pp. 292–296.
16. G. Kolko, op. cit.; D. Fromkin, A Peace to End All Peace (London 1991).
 



For 15 years I have been swept along by the treacherous currents of oppression, revolution and war in Eastern Europe. What I witnessed on Thursday, October 5, 2000, was a tidal wave. Within hours, it had engulfed the diseased regime of Slobodan Milosevic ... What I saw on Thursday was a no-holds-barred revolutionary seizure of power. [1]
Out of the misery of recent Balkan history comes the hope of Serbia’s October revolution. The writer Misha Glenny, who witnessed the events in Belgrade, was clearly surprised and elated by them. But perhaps what surprised and elated all of us who have lived through the increasing horror of the 1990s, when the Balkans descended repeatedly into war and ethnic divisions between its different peoples, was the role of the ordinary people themselves. Just over a year ago these same people were being bombed in the name of humanitarian intervention by the West. The Zastava car workers, the miners at Kolubara, the refinery workers at Pancevo and the transport workers of Belgrade were at the forefront of opposing Milosevic. Their intervention was decisive in ensuring that he went, and that the election results were upheld. But the possibility of this scenario ever taking place was denied by those who argued that Milosevic would never be overthrown by the working people of Serbia, but only through the role of the Western governments against the whole people of the country. The mission of Tony Blair and Bill Clinton was to provide humanitarian aid to the Kosovan Albanians, it was said. Implicit in the mission was the task of civilising the Serbs.
The dominant Western view over the past decade has been to treat the Serbs as criminals imbued with an innate predilection for ethnic cleansing and a hatred of the other nationalities who made up the former Yugoslavia. Daniel Goldhagen, the author of Hitler’s Willing Executioners, the book that claimed all Germans were responsible for the Nazi genocide of the Jews, extended the same notion to the Serbs. Goldhagen argued in The Guardian that ‘the majority of the Serbian people ... have rendered themselves legally and morally incompetent to conduct their own affairs and a presumptive ongoing danger to others. Essentially their country must be placed in receivership’. [2]
Much of the ideological argument which took place during the war was about whether or not the people of Serbia could be trusted to make any changes to their own regime. The racist and condescending attitudes to Serbs epitomised by Goldhagen’s remarks are the other side of ‘humanitarian’ intervention by Western imperialism, which needs its bombing to be justified in terms of dealing with people who are ‘legally and morally incompetent’. But the actions of the Serbs in voting against Milosevic, in striking and demonstrating against the rigged results, and then in finally staging a revolutionary overthrow of the regime vindicates them from such attacks. The revolution involved very little bloodshed, unlike last year’s war, and it was not to further the cause of Serb aggrandisement or any form of nationalism. Rather, it was for democracy – the right to a vote which would not be tampered with, the right to a free press, an end to opposition repression and an end to corruption, and for more democracy in the workplace.
Those of us who opposed both military intervention and the Milosevic regime can feel vindicated by this astonishing turn of events. We did not know that our support for the people of Serbia would see them overthrow Milosevic so quickly or so decisively. But we did know that no other force – and certainly not the Western powers – could remove him without worsening the situation as they have already done in Bosnia and Kosovo. This vindication has come quickly and clearly. The Serbian Revolution also promises to bring about more far reaching change than just the overthrow of a hated leader. It heralds a wind of change in the Balkans themselves and the possibility of much greater struggles for democracy than have so far been the case, which can also feed into social and economic demands for change. Whether that happens depends on whether the forces for change understand the great achievement they have already accomplished, but also the many obstacles on the way to further progress.
 
Countdown to revolution
The causes and outcome of a revolution have rarely polarised opinion in the way that Serbia’s revolution has done. Is it in fact a revolution, or a counter-revolution, as some on the left claim? Does it make any difference, or is it simply one nationalist replacing another? Does it open up the possibility of change from below which can go much farther than the new president, Kostunica, intends? What was the role of Western imperialism? Was it a vindication of the bombing – a view echoed by B-52 liberals such as Francis Wheen? [3]
When the Russian revolutionary Lenin wrote about revolutionary periods, he talked about a general breakdown in society – that revolutions occur when the masses can no longer live in the old way and the rulers can no longer rule in the old way. [4] Serbia certainly fits both these conditions. The situation has become intolerable for ordinary people. Living standards have fallen dramatically during the 1990s. The G17 economic think tank estimates that average wages are DM 100 (£31) a month, down from DM 150 in 1998. The condition of the economy can be seen starkly. Last year real GDP fell by 23 percent – partly because of the bombing and partly because of a drought which affected agriculture. Output per head is between a sixth and a quarter of the EU average, and has fallen by two thirds since 1989. Bomb damage is estimated at $3 billion to $4 billion and the external debt runs at $12 billion, most of which is in default. Unemployment is officially 30 percent, although there is a large black economy. [5]
People in Serbia have lived through repeated turbulence since 1987 when Milosevic first played his nationalist card. They have seen workers’ struggles and nationalist movements, hyperinflation and austerity measures, the effect of sanctions in the form of shortages of basic goods, repression and corruption at government level, and, above all, war. In the early part of the 1990s, again in the middle of the decade, and most horrifically at the end, when NATO’s 1999 bombing over Kosovo lasted for 78 days and killed nearly 1,000 people, Serbia has been devastated by war. It has a massive refugee problem caused by the displacement of populations from the former Yugoslavia. Western intervention always made it easier for Milosevic to get away with media censorship and state repression.
The generally worsening situation and bitterness among ordinary people was heightened by a number of explosive questions. The first was hatred of the West and NATO for their intervention in ethnically cleansing the Krajina of Serbs in 1995, and then for their bombing four years later. The common sentiment in Serbia is anti-imperialist, and the election was won by Kostunica on the basis that he was against NATO, that he wanted the US to be indicted at The International War Crimes Tribunal at The Hague, and so on. This gave an edge to the movement in Serbia which was not present in the East European revolutions of 1989. It was not therefore possible to present the West as a benevolent fairy godmother showering gifts on the population. The population’s recent experience inoculated them from this view. The wind of change in the rest of the Balkans in recent months also made a difference, as voters in Croatia and Bosnia voted against the most nationalist leaders and parties, creating a sense that the war and divisions of the 1990s could be overcome. [6]
The second explosive factor was the nature of the old regime itself. It was increasingly composed of a small clique round Milosevic and his wife, Mira Markovic. These people controlled much of capital, the media, the economic enterprises and the state. They resorted to increasingly desperate measures against their opponents. A series of high profile assassinations in recent months created an atmosphere of tension. In addition there was increased corruption and profiteering by a tiny number of people at the expense of virtually everyone else. It was this which helped to create the crisis among the ruling class itself, with sections of the old rulers and, crucially, the army believing that the old regime was bankrupt, and that only a new presidency could break the log-jam.
The main explosive factor was of course the election process itself. As in many other societies where voters have been denied their most basic democratic rights, the stealing of the election crystallised the opposition. Previous oppositions had been courageous but ultimately unsuccessful. In 1996 three months of protests over similar fixing of local elections were successful in getting Milosevic to cave in, and Zoran Djindjic became mayor of Belgrade. But they were unable to shift the regime. Immediately after the bombing in 1999 there were major protests in towns like Cacak. Again a mixture of repression and demoralisation led to defeat. Now all the elements – the splits in the ruling class, the misery of ordinary people, the sense of having a legitimate grievance – came together to build the movement to topple Milosevic. Underlining it was the lesson from previous oppositions and protests – that they would have to be prepared to fight to the end to win the election result for which they had voted.
 
The revolution at work
Few had great hopes of the elections for the president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia which were called by Milosevic for 24 September. Most expected that Milosevic would win, or that the vote would be sufficiently close that he could fix the election to his advantage. His opponent, Vojislav Kostunica, was a respected but politically inexperienced law professor. He headed a coalition, the Democratic Opposition of Serbia, which was made up of disparate forces. Most oppositions in Serbia in recent years have disintegrated, to the advantage of Milosevic and the ruling Socialist Party. Everyone expected a mass of obstacles to be placed in the way of the democratic process, including all manner of repressive measures and intimidation. In the days before the vote there was much talk of a military diversion in Montenegro, or of false votes stacking up for Milosevic in Kosovo. Although opinion polls showed a clear Kostunica lead, few could bring themselves to believe that the vote would be honoured. So the election day itself and the first official announcement of the results came as a shock of exhilaration throughout the country. Even according to the official figures Kostunica was well ahead of Milosevic. But here came the controversy. Opposition election monitors all over the country had a pretty good idea of the votes cast in their areas. But when the votes were transported to Belgrade large numbers of them disappeared. Even worse, the opposition knew that its candidate had won outright in the first round with over 50 percent of the votes. The election commission denied this, however, and called for a second round a fortnight later. All the old fears resurfaced – Milosevic would get up to his old tricks, and might even go so far as to stage a coup in order to steal the election.
Demonstrations and protests erupted to try to prevent this possibility. The opposition refused to accept the need to go forward to the second round and insisted that Milosevic stood down. Masses of people took to the streets, with a huge Belgrade demonstration on the Wednesday following the election. Towns with strong opposition support were in turmoil, with protests ranging from school students’ walkouts to workers’ strikes. Towards the end of the week following the vote one of the opposition leaders, Zoran Djindjic, called for strike action over five days culminating in a general strike. This immediately struck a chord. Workers started discussing strike action, and a number of stoppages took place. Most importantly, the miners in Serbia’s huge Kolubara complex decided to strike. Their role in the revolution was central. They took strike action from Friday 29 September, and their action immediately had a huge political and economic impact. The danger that the strike would rapidly paralyse an already wounded economy through power cuts and shortages led Milosevic to try both co-option and coercion in his dealings with them. The government went into talks with the miners immediately but got nowhere. Already there were signs of mass action elsewhere. There were promises of strikes at the Sevojno copper mill and the Pancevo oil refinery starting on the following Monday morning. Kostunica visited Kolubara on Monday (by now it was being dubbed a ‘second Gdansk’, after the birthplace of Solidarnosc in Poland). By Monday night the regime was prepared to play its strongest card. No less than the head of the army, General Nebojsa Pavkovic, arrived at the mine and tried to negotiate throughout the night. He failed. The army itself was split at the highest level, with Pavkovic’s predecessor, Momcilo Perisic, who supported the opposition, also touring the mine complex urging them to keep up the action. He told The Observer immediately after the revolution:
I got to two sections of the mine after Pavkovic and managed to firm up their line. Then I moved on to the third section and talked to the men there shortly before Pavkovic arrived. As a result, he didn’t even get a hearing. They whistled and refused to listen ... I was in contact with 80 percent of the generals, urging them not to let the army be abused, though it was the role of the colonels that was crucial. [7]
With the army divided, and even Pavkovic saying that it would uphold the constitution, the miners held firm. Meanwhile the protests were gathering pace in other parts of Serbia. On Monday 2 October transport workers blockaded bridges in Belgrade. These were eventually broken by the police. Strike action began in many parts of the country. School students walked out and began demonstrations. The whole country was beginning to grind to a halt. Milosevic realised the Kolubara miners were the key to the situation and sent in the police. Strike supporters responded to calls to come and help, turned up in their thousands, broke through police lines and forced them to retreat. This was a turning point in the revolution which allowed the events of 5 October to go ahead. One report from a miner at Kolubara explains what happened in that historic week:
After Djindjic called a general strike, members of the Kolubara trade union responded immediately. Some were members of individual parties in the DOS [the opposition bloc] and some weren’t, but after consulting the workers they decided to call a strike. The mine directors reacted immediately and tried to make sure production did not stop with threats of dismissal. The strike committee got the support of the younger leader-workers, the heads of the dredger system and of electrical and machine maintenance. The head of the dredger system at the Medosevac mine (the so-called ‘Field D’) joined the strike committee and stopped the dig. My part of the Kolubara joined immediately as the next in the Kolubara processing chain (wet and dry separation, rail transport, drying and heating) followed by our great mine, Tamnava.
We were all conscious that we were running a great risk, especially us leader-workers who came out in solidarity with the strike (I am the leader-worker of the electric maintenance service in the processing chain made up of 90 men). The police then entered the mines, took over some buildings and tried to get production going with threats and the help of some directors. The workers did not fight the police but stayed in their workshops and refused to work the machines.
I should mention that we are the largest lignite open mine in Europe and that our machines are from Western Europe with a lot of domestic equipment which is very up to date. A good part of production is done with the help of computer processors so that the engineers could easily remove and hide the computer control cards. As a result, no one could start up production even if they wanted to.
Now we come to the nicest bit of the story. When people heard that the police were in the mines the whole of Lazarevac [the Kolubara mining town] and surrounding towns rose up. Everyone came to help the workers. The police tried to stop the masses but it isn’t easy to stop 30,000 to 80,000 people who are determined to carry on to the end. Happily someone was clever enough not to give the police orders to shoot so that after a short conflict the people broke through into the mines. Entire families could be seen at the gathering. These scenes were truly moving so that when the police saw this determination and very likely because of orders ‘from above’ they refused to act. To give you an example of what enthusiasm there was, large groups of people waded across the river Kolubara to get to the mine.
After President Kostunica himself twice came to the mine to support the workers there was no power left that could frighten us anymore, the strike wave paralysed practically the whole of Serbia and this led to great Thursday in front of Parliament. The rest you know. [8]
No one knows exactly how many people took to the streets of Belgrade on 5 October. Estimates vary between half and 1 million. The town of Cacak alone sent a convoy 20 kilometres in length, headed by a bulldozer, to march on the centre of government. From all over Serbia cars and buses converged on the city – 100 buses from Raska, 25 from Novi Sad, 50 from Kraljevo, Cacak, Gornji Milanovac and Kragujevac, 20 plus 150 cars from Nis – full of people determined to force Milosevic to accept the election result. [9] Their fury was fuelled by the announcement of the elections commission that the election results had been annulled, and that Milosevic would carry on as federal president until the middle of 2001. A series of astonishing events led to the government’s downfall. At lunchtime on BBC radio Misha Glenny was declaring that this looked more like a revolution than anything he had seen throughout Eastern Europe in 1989. Crowds gathered outside the parliament building. Milosevic had been given a deadline of 3pm to resign. Even before that there were signs that the police were unwilling to defend the government. Some handed over their badges and flak jackets. Others still continued to defend the regime. A group of workers from the state television station came to the front of the crowd to announce that they had walked out in support of the demonstrators.
There were repeated attempts to storm the parliament building. At first the police cordon held, but then enough protesters raced up the steps and into the parliament building. The police inside responded with teargas attacks. Despite the confusion that followed, the building was stormed. Emily Milich reported in The Sunday Times:
We could see three men in a first floor office to our left attempting unsuccessfully to shut the door. Chairs and furniture flew. A man in his twenties wearing a grey jacket and black trousers managed to climb the first floor balcony on the right wing of the building. Ignoring bottles and stones that were thrown, he broke the glass doors. He then helped others climb onto the balcony. A middle aged man wearing black was the first to enter the glass doors and bring out a Yugoslav flag. [10]
The parliament building was on fire. The demonstrators now moved on to the state television building, the hated centre of government propaganda. The bulldozer from Cacak helped to smash their way into the building and take control of the main media. Milosevic found that by this stage he had few levers to pull to try to exert control. Most importantly, the police and the army could no longer be relied on to defend the regime. Milosevic summoned Pavkovic late in the afternoon and told him to send in the tanks to crush the revolution. He received the answer, ‘I have nobody to do this. The army is staying neutral.’ A crack special forces unit also refused to fight when confronted with the crowd. They took off their balaclavas and ‘just stood there and hundreds of people walked past shaking their hands... There were also quite a lot of police who just handed over their equipment, helmets and batons to the protesters’. [11] As the state machine crumbled, the revolution triumphed. Key buildings fell to the opposition, and by the evening Kostunica was addressing an ecstatic crowd in the main square. Although Milosevic hung on for another few hours, it became increasingly apparent to the partying crowds and those who watched on television around the world that the fears of a fightback by Milosevic were groundless. He simply did not have the forces at his disposal to deal with the huge upsurge of people’s power that the election fraud had unleashed. In the words of the student movement Otpor!’s slogan, he was finished. But the revolution was not.
Immediately the old regime fell, so the demand went up that those associated with it should be removed from their posts. As the Financial Times commented, ‘With Milosevic’s rule crumbling, the workers have taken the communist rhetoric literally and taken charge of their enterprises, instituting various forms of “worker management”.’ [12] Up and down the country the workers and students who protested against Milosevic now forced out university rectors, managers and bosses who had made their lives such a misery. So in Belgrade workers attacked Radoman Bozovic, director of the trading company Genex, as he fled to his car. He was beaten, and later resigned when staff invaded his office and told him to quit. In the southern town of Nis workers stormed a state-run textile factory demanding the manager was fired. A week after the revolution Jonathan Steele reported in The Guardian on a factory occupation at the Trudbenik construction firm, employing 3,000 workers. By this time Kostunica was condemning the factory occupations and Nebojsa Covic, a DOS leader, was visiting factories urging workers to get back to work. While Steele was at the factory the old boss turned up drunk to reassert his authority. One worker asked him, ‘Who invited you here?’ The old director threatened that ‘I’ll go off and see Covic tomorrow, and the other DOS leaders’. Someone else shouted, ‘We’ll be here in the building all night and we’ll have reinforcements tomorrow from the rest of the company’s sections.’ The parting shot from another worker was, ‘And don’t use your company car any more’. [13] The revolution was continuing.
 
What sort of revolution?
Any revolution is an immensely confused phenomenon. By definition it does not take place at a prearranged time and place. It involves a whole range of forces, and it throws up ideas and organisation which are new, at least to most of the people involved. The different social forces have different aims and interests, yet this is less apparent when the revolution starts than it becomes later on. It is for this reason that many people seize on conservative policies of opposition leaders (including Kostunica), nationalism and claims of funding from the West and the EU to denounce the revolution or at the very least to claim that it will make no difference, simply replacing one group of rulers with another. Despite the overtly revolutionary and popular nature of the movement, there are many on both right and left who see it as pro-Western and a vindication of NATO’s bombing. Hugo Young in The Guardian has claimed all the credit for Tony Blair:
No NATO leader is more gratified by what has happened in Yugoslavia than Tony Blair. The deposing of Milosevic is the vindication of a strategy for which he risked more than anyone else in the West. He was the moral, if not the military, leader of what saved Kosovo, and has now led to the despatch of the tyrant.
He goes on, ‘The war I think now receives its final justification’. [14] Another Guardian warrior, Francis Wheen, argues that the bombing made Milosevic unpopular and so was justified. [15] The Western rulers themselves have claimed events as vindication of their strategy, with Robin Cook, Madeleine Albright, Bill Clinton and Tony Blair all joining calls on Milosevic to go. This view has its distinct reflection on the left, where some believe that Nato and other Western forces made the revolution. There are even those who claim that what took place on 5 October was a counter-revolution, funded by Western money, where the crowds on the streets were simply a stage army duped by hopes of improved living standards and EU funding. The view that the remains of Yugoslavia represent the last bastion of socialism in eastern Europe still holds sway among Stalinists of every description, their view reinforced by the support given to the revolution by Bill Clinton and Tony Blair. This attitude of support for the regime was a disaster during the war because it led to the view that the only alternative to NATO was uncritical support for Milosevic. It is a much greater disaster now because such support leads to attacking the very people – the poor, the working class, the students – who can provide the only means of fundamental change in Serbia.
It is also a view that flies in the face of every available piece of evidence about the nature of the Milosevic regime. This has been compared to ‘crony capitalism’ in Suharto’s Indonesia – a very close relationship between the state and capital, but with enterprises and the state machine controlled by a small, undemocratic and unaccountable clique. One third of the economy is already in completely private hands – not the case anywhere in Eastern Europe before 1989. Milosevic was already engaged in deals to privatise state industries. A telecom deal with Italian capital was only put into abeyance by NATO’s bombing. Superficial manifestations of the Western market already exist in Belgrade – after all, the war did disprove the theory that two states both containing a McDonald’s restaurant would never go to war.
The structure of Serbian capital has been held together by an increasingly gangsterised and corrupt clique. The imposition of Western sanctions played an important role in encouraging this corruption. Workers in Serbia have at various times over the past decade given strong support to Milosevic, but this has been on the basis of national unity in times of war, or on the basis of bread and butter reforms which the regime has traditionally ensured went to some groups of workers. One of the striking features of recent events is that many of the workers who struck during the revolution came from traditional Milosevic and Socialist Party strongholds. They clearly felt that their interests as workers lay elsewhere.
Some people in the West may see this as a pro-Western revolution. But many in Serbia do not see it that way. The mass of people in Serbia certainly believed when they went to the polls that they were voting against NATO. They certainly told Western journalists that the bombing had not helped to dislodge Milosevic. One student told the BBC, ‘We did it on our own. Please do not help us again with your bombs.’ [16] A shop worker told The Sunday Times, ‘It was the Serbian people who got rid of Milosevic, not NATO, and it is for the Serbian people to punish him.’ [17] And they certainly got no real help from the Western powers with their task. The right wing think tank Strategic Forecasts makes the point that ‘the Kosovo war discredited oppositionists with ties to Brussels or Washington ... the opposition decided he [Kostunica] was the only one electable’. It also says, ‘His disdain for Western influence in the former Yugoslavia isolated him from outside support.’ [18] John Simpson, BBC correspondent in Belgrade during the war, claimed that the revolution was made by people who were ‘depressed in equal measure by the careless savagery of the NATO bombing and the sheer nastiness of the Milosevic regime’. [19] Jonathan Steele, who supported the war but who is clearly sympathetic to the revolution from a radical point of view, wrote from Belgrade in The Observer:
[Milosevic’s] downfall was won not on a battlefield or by NATO pilots. It was won among the black dust of the Serbian coalfield, under the vast arc lights of Kolubara pit among the miners who had been among his most loyal supporters. [20]
Just as in Eastern Europe in 1989, workers and students acted against the regime with great bravery and decisiveness. Regimes which called themselves socialist and claimed a popular mandate fell without a fight. In reality they were unpopular, rotten regimes with nothing in common with democratic socialism. The Milosevic regime had exactly the same characteristics, which is why it has been so overwhelmingly rejected.
What of the opposition? Kostunica himself is obviously regarded as a Mr Clean, a man of principle untainted by corruption inside Serbia or Western money from outside. The law professor who drives a battered Yugo seems above sordid politics, and claims he is just a transitional leader for 18 months. Kostunica declared to massed crowds during the course of the revolution that he would succeed without Moscow or Washington, and was met with rapturous applause. [21] While he is unlikely to take this course, it was the theme central to his election campaign, which was full of denunciations of NATO. He made it clear that he wanted to steer a ‘third way’ between Milosevic’s extreme isolation from the West in recent years and the devotion to the West held by some of the opposition parties in the past. As he wrote recently:
Today and in the future the Serbs cannot count on any ‘allies’ in the old sense among the great powers. They can count, however, on covert and overt allies in the West, in Europe, and on the diffuse but ever more prevalent resistance all over the world to what has become known as ‘benevolent global hegemony’. They can count on the growing awareness that the NATO war against Serbia was mediated in the West by lies and manipulations, by the creation of a twisted and false picture about the Serbs that justified their punishment by sanctions, bombs and indictments at The Hague. [22]
Kostunica’s appeal was precisely the attempt to chart a course between the West and Milosevic, and he will be held to some of those policies by the people who swept him to power. At the same time his instincts are conservative: he wants more integration into Western markets, including abolishing controls and introducing sales taxes; he was very cautious throughout the revolution and repeatedly refused to act without the consent of the army. Take, for example, this assessment of his behaviour in The Sunday Times: ‘Kostunica had preached caution to opposition hotheads. But after being assured by the generals on September 29 that they would not attack civilians, he decided to launch mass demonstrations’. [23] He will therefore be constrained from two sides – from the demands of workers who have overthrown Milosevic and expect their lives to improve, and from the state machine, especially the army, which remains a strong force in Serbian politics. It acquiesced in this stage of the revolution but may not be happy to do so in the future. However, a sense of Kostunica’s standing for the present can be seen in the fate of some of the more pro-Western politicians who have seen their star fall as the revolution gathered pace. Vuk Draskovic – seen only a few years ago as the West’s greatest hope for overthrowing Milosevic – refused to join the Democratic Opposition of Serbia and stood as a spoiling candidate (probably with the collusion of Milosevic). He was humiliated at the polls. When Draskovic tried to address a crowd of students just days after the revolution he was shouted down with cries of, ‘Traitor!’ and, ‘We don’t need you any more.’ Vojislav Seselj, a far right nationalist politician, has so far remained part of the opposition but has denounced most aspects of the revolution, including the burning of buildings and the democratic removal of bosses in the workplaces.
It is obvious that the opposition was propelled forward by forces representing much more than Kostunica or any of his allies such as Zoran Djindjic, the man credited with organising the convoys on Belgrade. What we saw in those days was an example of genuine mass protest, sometimes called ‘people power’ after its proponents in the Philippines and Indonesia, or closer to home in the East European revolutions of 1989. In all these examples the massed weight of often millions of people protesting was enough to bring down a hated dictator and replace him with an opposition government. In most of them students played a key role, taking to the streets in the face of state repression and galvanising virtually the whole of society behind them. This element was present in Serbia, with Otpor! playing a central political and organisational role. But in Serbia strike action against the regime played the key role in overthrowing the government. The working class of Serbia took centre stage. There was another massive difference between this and the East European revolutions of 1989. The market had already done its work in the region, including in Serbia, and the revolution took place against a background of anti-capitalism in the West. Many people in Serbia, especially round Otpor!, were aware of this and would have seen the media coverage of demonstrations in Seattle and Prague. [24] These factors meant that the Serbian Revolution had a much stronger impetus to start with, and that the social forces involved give it the potential to go much further than the ‘velvet revolutions’ of the late 1980s. These looked much more to the West and remained at the level of political revolutions rather than ushering in wider social change.
This is not to say that the Serbian Revolution was a socialist revolution. It was not. It has many similarities with the democratic revolutions which have taken place throughout the history of capitalism – those in 1848 which fought (largely unsuccessfully) against the feudal order to establish capitalist democracy. Their demands were for an end to the old rulers (kings and princes), for the suffrage and elections to representative parliaments, for freedom of the press, for modern, fairer legal systems. They united virtually all classes in society around their demands. The rich capitalists chafed against the restrictions on trade of the old order, and therefore promoted democracy to allow themselves the freedom to do business. The liberal middle classes such as lawyers and newspaper editors resented the restrictions on their freedom of speech. The workers and poor peasants had a whole range of grievances including economic ones – unemployment, falling incomes, food shortages, restrictions on use of the land. All these forces were united in wanting to rid themselves of the old system, but divided – and sometimes fundamentally divided – over what to put in its place. Was the revolution to replace an old autocracy with a parliament of politicians while the lives of the mass of people remained exploited and oppressed? Or would the democratic revolution turn into a social revolution, challenging property relations at the heart of the capitalist class itself? In the Europe of 1848 the working class was in most cases too small and undeveloped politically to push the revolution forward, and this usually meant at least the partial defeat of the democratic revolution as well. In France, the revolutionary country with the strongest working class, the unity of the revolution in February 1848 turned to renewed fighting on the barricades in June, this time between the revolutionary workers plus their supporters and the representatives of the growing capitalist class. The young Karl Marx, a keen participant in the revolutions of 1848, wrote of the defeat for the French Revolution of 1848 in these terms:
The February revolution was the beautiful revolution, the revolution of universal sympathy, because the conflicts which erupted in the revolution against the monarchy slumbered harmoniously side by side, as yet undeveloped, because the social struggle which formed its background had only assumed an airy existence – it existed only as a phrase, only in words. The June revolution is the ugly revolution, the repulsive revolution, because realities have taken the place of words, because the republic has uncovered the head of the monster itself by striking aside the protective, concealing crown. [25]
The class divisions which can be papered over earlier on come to the surface later. The social crisis which itself leads to the revolution cannot be easily resolved, and therefore further struggles continue as the different classes fight to ensure that their demands from the revolution come to the fore. Most revolutions begin in this way. The Russian revolutions of 1905 and February 1917 had this character. So did the revolution which overthrew the Kaiser in Germany in 1918–1919. Perhaps the most apt parallels with the Serbian Revolution are the early stages of the Portuguese Revolution in 1974. Then, a revolution led by disaffected officers in the armed forces overthrew a crumbling fascist dictatorship. Tanks appeared on the streets and soon people were ‘embracing the soldiers, putting red carnations down the barrels of their guns, riding on the tanks in impromptu demonstrations, directing them to the hide outs of known secret police informers. The world’s press proclaimed this the peaceful “revolution of the flowers”.’ [26]
But it rapidly divided. The government of General Spinola, an old fascist sympathiser, was confronted with strikes – in May 200,000 workers in 158 workplaces struck, and the regime had to concede a 30 percent increase in the minimum wage and the sacking of 1,000 company directors with fascist connections. There were more strikes, and as plant closures were threatened so workers occupied their factories. Thus began a huge process of saneamento – the cleansing of workplaces and enterprises of those with connections with the secret police or the fascists. This was part of a process of workers’ control inside the factories. The following 18 months were a struggle for control of the streets, the workplaces, the press and the land between those forces who wanted change – some left wing army officers but overwhelmingly the working class and the poor agricultural labourers – and those who wanted a peaceful transition to modern capitalist society.
There are many similarities with the situation in Serbia – the role of the working class and strikes, the disaffection of sections of the army following defeat in war, the demands for a free media, and perhaps most importantly Serbia’s own process of saneamento which began immediately as the revolution took place, and where a key demand was to remove Milosevic supporters and appointees from all areas of life.
Revolution is not just a single moment but a process. Thursday 5 October was a key turning point, but there can now be months if not years, where the class struggle goes to and fro, where sometimes the workers are on the offensive and others on the defensive, when they accept the demands of their new rulers, others when they reject them. It is perfectly possible that from this process the right can eventually emerge triumphant or can hide behind some form of bourgeois democracy. But it is unlikely to do so without some decisive confrontations between the revolutionary forces and those who want to hold them back. Similarly, the West will not be able to impose its agenda without taking on groups of workers who have both withstood its bombing and fought their own ruling class. If those groups of workers want to fight the attacks that such an agenda will bring then they will have to move beyond trade union organisation to workers’ democratic organisation, through councils based in the workplaces which can begin to present an alternative centre of power to that of the capitalist class. These can spring out of the needs of the struggle if the revolution does go forward and if workers remain at the centre of it. Those workers also need their own political organisation, based on the principle of genuine democratic socialism from below, if they are to chart their way through the ideological confusions and traps which lie ahead.
 
Why did the West support the revolution?
The main source of confusion over the nature of Serbia’s revolution comes from the fact that it is supported by Western leaders who are normally bitterly opposed to any such action, and who applaud ‘people power’ when it is used against their enemies but denounce it among their own population. In Britain and the US we are told that change can only come through constitutional methods and that industrial militancy is to be abhorred, whereas in Serbia mass demonstrations and general strikes suddenly become legitimate weapons. Even for Serbs, however, those people who hate revolution want to limit any popular element to the struggle, for fear that it will get out of control and lead to a much greater social upheaval. The day after the overthrow of Milosevic, a report about US attitudes to the events said:
[Kostunica] is viewed in Washington as a strongly nationalist politician, who may even be somewhat hostile to the US. The most immediate question would be under what conditions he would be able to take power. Balkans experts said last night that, if the protests continued, there would be a growing risk of chaos and bloodshed, which could inhibit a peaceful transfer of power. [27]
However, the West has been desperate to get rid of Milosevic at virtually any price. This is in itself a sign of its failure of strategy in the region. Every Western intervention in the past decade has left the former Yugoslavia more divided and fragmented than before and, until now, Milosevic has remained in place regardless. This happened in 1991, when Germany backed independence for Slovenia and Croatia. It happened in 1995, when the Dayton agreement created essentially a colonial administration in an ethnically partitioned Bosnia, and did a deal with Milosevic which ignored the question of Kosovo. And it happened in 1999, when the West intervened over Kosovo, bombing the former Yugoslavia for 78 days, and imposed an administration in Kosovo which has had disastrous consequences. This supposedly humanitarian intervention has left 200,000 Serbs and Roma ethnically cleansed from the province and the remaining minority inhabitants living in fear, all under the rule of the West in the form of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo. There has been a growing recognition, even among many supporters of intervention, that nothing has been resolved in the region, and that future Western interventions will only leave it further fragmented.
There is also one stark fact that affects countries well beyond the boundaries of the former Yugoslavia – it is impossible to rebuild the Balkans without Serbia. The Stability Pact for the Balkans that the EU and US are trying to foist on the region therefore has a big hole in it. It has been impossible to clear the Danube, blocked since the bombing, because of Western hostility to the Milosevic regime. This affects German and Austrian capital, and the much poorer neighbours of Serbia down river, Bulgaria and Romania. Transport in the region runs through Serbia. The sanctions were having an effect not just in Serbia but in surrounding areas. For all these reasons it was impossible to regenerate the area and make it safe for capital without trying to reintegrate Serbia into Europe. The West also wanted the political and economic credit for doing so.
In addition, Western leaders needed an endgame to the wars in Yugoslavia and the stand-off with Milosevic. In the months before the election there were rumours of deals which would allow Milosevic to leave power and live in exile while escaping the war crimes tribunal at The Hague. The indictment of leading Yugoslav politicians during the 1999 bombing led to tactical headaches for the West. The impossibility of bringing Milosevic to trial was matched by the inflexibility which the indictment led to when it came to any diplomatic solution. The West had to make noises about bringing him to trial. Even many Western leaders and diplomats felt such a trial was undesirable because of the tensions it would exacerbate in the region. This led to divisions inside the Western powers as to the best way to proceed. The West treated Serbia as a ‘rogue state’ and Milosevic as an outcast. Those who wanted to find a solution in the region increasingly had to thrash around looking for an alternative. No one in the West alighted on Vojislav Kostunica. Instead Western money went on politicians like Vuk Draskovic, who trumpeted pro-Western policies but also worked at various times with Milosevic, and were discredited for both reasons. Kostunica was not the West’s choice, but nonetheless the Western leaders are prepared to work with him. They are relieved that Milosevic has gone, and their willingness to work with the new government whose policy over Kosovo is in all essentials no different from the previous government shows their hypocrisy. If Kostunica accepts their economic prescriptions and allies himself to the West politically then the national question in the Balkans will be relegated to second place, despite all the West’s claims during last year’s war. They want above all a stable regime, and they hope that promises of (very limited) Western money plus greater integration into the rest of Europe will do the trick. But the transition is fraught with dangers for the Western ruling classes, and for Kostunica himself.
 
The economic problems ahead
In Eastern Europe the process of conversion of power in 1989 which allowed all but the very top officials (and sometimes even them) to convert their control of state enterprises to control over the new private and semi-private economy was possible because of the peculiar circumstances in which the old regimes collapsed. [28] In some countries their dissolution had been under way for some time, and already many at the top had begun to make the shift to the market. Where this had not occurred – as, for example, in Bulgaria or Romania, or even Russia – there was an interregnum after the change in politics at the top. This enabled those at the top to construct new positions both ideologically and politically, and to distance themselves from the legacy of the old regime. Ironically, too, the demonstrations of 1989 were not that intense – power never really passed into the hands of the street, important though the threat of protest was in concentrating minds at the top on the need for change. This meant that the room for manoeuvre at the top was considerable.
In Serbia the space has been much narrower. Similar processes to those seen in Eastern Europe in 1989 and after were already under way in Yugoslavia in the 1980s – indeed, they were perhaps more advanced. This helps to explain how a similar conversion of power took place in fragments of the old state like Slovenia and Croatia. This was true also of Serbia, and despite the view in some quarters that the Milosevic regime retained some ‘left wing’ credentials during the 1990s there were further attempts to ‘privatise’ state assets. Semi-private control was taken over by anyone with contacts and influence. Even leaders of the old state trade unions took a hand, using any residual leverage they had with the workers to gain acceptance for their deals. One worker on the Crisis Committee established in the Trudenik construction company (representing 3,000 workers) told how:
The trade union secretary particularly ran this company. He got rid of the last managing director in 1995 and chose the new one. Under the privatisation the trade union secretary formed a company called Sind which built upper-income flats in Belgrade. They won the workers’ loyalty by paying them DM 5 (£1.50) an hour while other workers here get DM 100 (£30) for a whole month. [29]
But in Serbia the political developments of the 1990s, the wars and isolation, brought the Milosevic regime and the wider ruling class much more closely together, and identified one with the other in a peculiarly intense way. This partly arose from the need for all of the bosses of the different enterprises to work closely with the state. This was then amplified by the general cronyism of the regime in which the top managers drew corruptly on the regime and the regime drew corruptly on them. The close personal connections with Milosevic and his family were an extreme example of this. Thus, for example, Genex – the state import-export company – was run by Radoman Bozovic, a former prime minister who appears as a key figure in the finances of the regime and the Milosevic empire. As the regime strove to hang on in conditions of decay, and to ward off protest, the space between the political leadership and the rest of those at the top narrowed even more.
In these circumstances it was difficult for many of the figureheads in what was left of Yugoslav industry to detach themselves from the Milosevic regime quickly enough and position themselves to survive the fall. Some tried this. Jonathan Steele reported that the general manager of the Lola Corporation, an engineering plant near Belgrade, had agreed with the local trade unions on the need for a general strike ‘for truth’, and had supported workers going to Belgrade to protest and promised them full pay. [30] But he appears to have been unusual. Given the distance that some bosses would have to move, such a neat side-step did not look convincing for many. One Genex worker told a reporter that ‘the ... bosses are like snakes. For the past two weeks they didn’t know which side would win; now they’re wriggling from their skins.’ [31]
The new government was immediately put on the spot by workers challenging their bosses. Kostunica and his immediate supporters had no interest in seeing this develop any further. On 12 October he told The New York Times, ‘I’m having as much trouble with my friends as enemies,’ and he quickly moved to condemn the factory occupations. [32]
The old Milosevic forces were also anxious to damp down this dynamic and do deals to consolidate their positions. Least of all, perhaps, was there any enthusiasm for the extension of such actions in the West, where the pressure was coming for a rapid establishment of order and the introduction of economic reforms. But the threat to the workers of Serbia and all of those who had so bravely gone out on the streets is that not only will this stabilisation path force them back into the hands of the old order dressed up in new clothes, it will also undercut what little is left of their economic base.
For what are being advised at the moment are not policies which will stabilise the country in the sense of helping rebuild and recover from the months of bombing by NATO, and the decade of exploitation and oppression by Milosevic. Instead what threatens is a concentrated Gdansk effect. Gdansk, the birthplace of Solidarity, appeared to generate the prospect of workers in Poland taking power back from the ruling class that ruled in their name. In the event, over a period of years the mainstream of Solidarity was diverted into the path of supporting market reform and the IMF/World Bank led transition. This produced a Poland that is certainly freer than in 1989, but it is hardly one that has realised the dreams of those who were prepared to sacrifice so much in the 1980s. This year has seen the fallen figure of Lech Walesa gain a pitiful 1 percent of the vote in the presidential elections. Of course, he could no longer get the support of the Gdansk shipyard workers, because that yard had effectively closed some time ago – a victim of the market reforms.
It is this prospect that now threatens in Serbia. If Gdansk is a symbol in Poland then the likely equivalent symbol in Serbia, unless the direction of the transition is arrested, will be enterprises like the Kolubara coal mine where the major early battle was fought against the regime. For market reform in the current conditions will leave no space for such enterprises to exist in the long run.
This is not an idle warning from the left. Alarm bells have been ringing loudly for a long time about the wider state of the Balkan region in particular and the transition states in general. Poland and Hungary have recovered their 1989 levels of output, but most of the other countries are stuck in deep difficulties. Table 1 shows the official data for the different regions:



TABLE 1: CHANGE IN INDEX OF REAL GDP IN TRANSITION
STATES BY AREA 1989–1998 (1989=100) [33]




 


Eastern
Europe


CETE-5


SETE


Baltic
States


CIS




1989


100.0


100.0


100.0


100.0


100.0




1990


  93.2


  93.3


  93.1


  97.8


  96.8




1991


  82.9


  84.1


  80.7


  89.9


  90.9




1992


  79.3


  83.8


  71.4


  67.9


  78.0




1993


  79.0


  85.0


  68.4


  58.2


  70.4




1994


  82.1


  88.5


  70.8


  55.2


  60.3




1995


  86.8


  93.5


  75.2


  56.4


  56.9




1996


  90.1


  97.8


  76.6


  58.8


  55.0




1997


  92.1


102.6


  73.6


  63.7


  55.6




1998


  93.5


105.9


  71.7


  71.3


  54.0




CETE=Central European Transition Economies
SETE=Southern European Transition Economies



So, far from becoming a boom area attracting foreign investment, the economic interest in the region has been marginal. Investment in Ireland in 1999 (with its population of 3.5 million) was greater than all foreign direct investment in the Balkans, with its population of 50 million, in the past decade.
The United Nations Commission on Europe, in its report on the Balkan War situation, was hardly less forthright, although it kept its language more decorous. The gap between the Balkans and the other transition countries of Central Europe was, it said, already enormous, let alone the gap between them and the EU:
For these countries to catch up with the central Europe transition countries in 2000 will need as big a leap forward as these countries are themselves trying to make to the EU average level ... The time required for such a catching-up is alarming: unless trends in economic performance are broken, it will take decades for the poorest countries to reach the mediocre level of per capita income enjoyed by the more advanced central European transition economies. [34]
Yet policies that had failed to deliver evidence of sustained growth were still being encouraged. Indeed, the problems were often being compounded. Financial ‘assistance to the transition economies since 1989 has consisted of loans, some at concessional, most at market rates of interest’. It then noted that, even more bizarrely, in the Kosovan reconstruction programme the same pattern was emerging, and it asked for the Balkans as a whole if ‘increasing the foreign debt of these countries is the best way to provide them with help’.
In this sense, of course, the revolution in Belgrade was not only a calling to account for the Milosevic regime, but also for the Western governments and the EU who had urged on change. Indeed, Neal Ascherson suggests that in the wider view this was the great question posed by the bravery of the demonstrators:
The Belgrade Thursday, with its pride and hope, asked the biggest question of all questions about Europe. Are you serious about one Europe? Or do you still secretly mean to have two: a rich Europe in the West which uses the East and the Balkans – stripped of their industries – as a colonial backyard to provide cheap labour and raw materials? That is what the old German vision of Mitteleuropa meant before 1914, and what Hitler’s plan for European empire entailed. [35]
In fact the answer is already clear. The European Union itself is quite happy to manipulate the idea of Europe as a carrot but keep it just far enough away to prevent most of the people in the east having any chance of taking a bite. Were it more serious it would have given something back in return for the political support it got during the Balkan War. Yet in almost every respect it gives little and speaks with the forked tongue of diplomacy. One aspect of this is the double-edged suggestion that the countries of the region should co-operate more together. Co-operation is in itself a good thing, but the danger is that it becomes a substitute for a proper response from the EU. As Ascherson suggests, this seems to be the intention: ‘Brussels just loves the idea of smaller, poorer nations forming “regional blocs” in which small, poor aspirants to full European status could be easily forgotten’. [36]
But worse still, as the Milosevic regime crumbled, eyes were lighting up elsewhere about the new opportunities this provided. Willem Buiter, the chief economist of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, set out the restructuring plans even as demonstrators were breaking the lines of police outside the coal mine. The overthrow of Milosevic meant an opportunity for the bank, the IMF and the World Bank to begin to plan the reconstruction of what was left of Yugoslavia. ‘Yugoslavia’, he wrote, ‘is a long way from completing the three early steps for transition to an effective market economy – liberalisation of administered prices (still widespread), privatisation and macro-economic stabilisation.’ But the underpinning all of this, he argued, had to be effective law and property rights – ‘protection of minority shareholder and creditor rights has to be established’:
The removal of artificial barriers to trade and factor mobility is a necessary condition for a rational reallocation of resources and sustained growth. In the short run, such restructuring can involve serious hardship for those involved as workers, entrepreneurs or owners, in the formerly sheltered sectors of the economy.
At best Serbian workers would depend on his recognition of the need ‘to provide social safety nets to prevent deprivation without slowing the process of moving human and other resources towards long-run viable areas’. Nor was this simple altruism. Rather, it reflected the fear that without some gesture towards social protection there was the risk of losing ‘popular support for wide-ranging and deep structural reforms’. Of course, such a message is not one that will go down well amongst the workers whose plants are threatened. So there is a desperate need on the part of Western capital to get influential political figures in the former Yugoslavia on board and convince them that theirs is the only way.
In this sense the aims of the West, which pay lip service to the revolution, are in direct contradiction to the mass of people who made the revolution. The Zastava car workers, bombed by NATO but in the forefront of the strike action to oppose Milosevic, will be less than happy with the prospects that the West holds out. Pressure will be on Serbian workers, in the same way that it has been on other European workers, to downsize, to cut jobs to increase competitiveness, to accept low wages and labour ‘flexibility’, and to take on a greater burden of taxation as welfare is cut. The ravages of globalisation will hit Serbia’s economy hard:
As Serbia is rapidly reintegrated into the rest of Europe, most of it will no longer be able to compete. Ten years ago, for example, there was little to choose between a Yugo car and a Czech Skoda. Now Skodas compete on an equal footing with cars from the world’s top manufacturers but the old Zastava factory which makes Yugos produces barely 5,000 a year. [37]
The pressure from global competition which workers at Rover in Birmingham have suffered this year will be brought to bear on the Zastava workers, as it will on all the others, like the Kolubara miners, who were so central to the revolution. These workers are unlikely to take kindly to such attacks, and much of the success of the future of the revolution depends on them taking action to defend themselves from the embrace of the IMF and World Bank. Whatever they do, there is little on offer from the West. The most likely scenario is attacks on workers that we have seen elsewhere, coupled with very little real investment. As Mike Haynes argued recently in The Guardian:
Will any amount of wage flexibility or amendments to labour codes to make hiring, firing and working hours more flexible encourage more than a token gesture to rebuild Yugoslavia’s industry or encourage sustained development elsewhere in the Balkans? [38]
All the evidence from elsewhere in eastern Europe, and of the damage caused by the Western financial institutions in poor countries round the world, would suggest not. There will be a lot of pain without any real gain.
 
The problems ahead: nationalism and war
An End To The Balkan Wars headlined the Financial Times editorial on 7 October. Bill Clinton believed this was the restoration of democracy as he knows it: ‘It is the end of the war Mr Milosevic started in the former Yugoslavia 10 years ago... The greatest remaining obstacle to the long held dream of a peaceful, undivided, democratic Europe for the first time in history has now been removed’. [39] Milosevic has gone, and with him the source of all wars in the Balkans – or so the story goes. Yet this is perhaps the biggest lie perpetrated by the West in its demonisation of Milosevic. He and the president of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, were twins in their ability to warmonger and whip up nationalist feeling. The wars in Croatia and Bosnia in the first half of the 1990s had the effect of underwriting nationalist governments in Croatia, Bosnia and Serbia. These wars were the driving force of ethnic cleansing on all sides. This in turn led to partition and repartition across the former Yugoslvia. [40] The two major supposed solutions to these wars – brought about by Western bombing in 1995 and then again in 1999 – were the creation of two states in the region supposedly removed from the internal politics of the area and run by the West. The UN, NATO and the Western powers pose here as a benevolent force rising above the ethnic divisions of the region. In fact they are reinforcing those divisions, creating the conditions for future conflict. Even with the best intentions, the alliances and tensions created by the West mean that as soon as one problem is solved another is created. And the West does not have the best intentions for the peoples of the region. Rather, it is concerned with bolstering its own interests. Neal Ascherson has written of these interests:
The first commandment is to keep international interference out of the Balkans. The worst problem here is the existence of two international ‘protectorates’, Bosnia and Kosovo. Everyone knows why they are there. But they now form a bridgehead from which the West – above all, the United States, Britain and France – can meddle powerfully in Balkan affairs. [41]
The West has created another Israel or Northern Ireland in the Balkans – partition and division backed up by great powers which makes the achievement of any unified multi-ethnic settlement in the region much harder. This is despite the probable desires of many Serbians, who in voting against Milosevic also voted against the worst forms of nationalism and warmongering associated with the last decade. So did the majority of Croatians when they voted against Tudjman’s party earlier this year. Even in Kosovo, where the majority of Kosovan Albanians are for independence from Serbia, the October local elections saw a big majority for the party of Ibrahim Rugova, seen by the Kosovo Liberation Army as compromisers with the Serbs. But the probable wishes of most inhabitants of the region for peace and a greater degree of at least co-operation between different ethnic groups will not necessarily be the outcome. And this is still true despite the fact that, even among the Western powers, there are many who would like a reintegrated Yugoslavia based on Western bourgeois democratic values. This was expressed by the Financial Times:
No one wants further fragmentation in the Balkans. Macedonia, for example, fears an independent Kosovo might prove a magnet to its large ethnic Albanian minority. Such ethnic tensions have bedevilled the Balkan peninsula for centuries. But if all goes well in Belgrade, all Balkan communities will, for the first time in history, be under democratic governments capable of defusing such tension. [42]
This wishful thinking is unlikely to bear fruit. It is claimed that one danger is that Kostunica is a nationalist, and that this will continue to exacerbate tensions in the region. But Kostunica’s politics are not extreme nationalist. Indeed, his views are not materially different from those of government leaders in countries such as Germany or Britain. He wants Kosovo to remain part of Yugoslavia, but this is a view held by the vast majority of Serbians, and was indeed accepted by many in the West until the bombing began. The real barrier to peace lies in the nature of the settlements which the West has created, especially that in Kosovo. The province is very far from the multi-ethnic civil society which the West claims to embrace. The vast majority of Serbs and Roma have been ethnically cleansed by Kosovan Albanians under the eye of the UN, which administers the province. There is constant fighting in the south eastern borderland, an area claimed by some Kosovan Albanians as ‘eastern Kosovo’, even though it is recognised by everyone else as part of Serbia. The former KLA still exists and runs large sections of Kosovo as a gangster fiefdom, attacking non-separatist Albanians as well as other national minorities. There is pressure from many sections of Kosovan Albanians for full independence, since Kosovo remains formally part of Yugoslavia under UN resolution 1244, which established a form of international protectorate there. There is some pressure for a degree of independence, for example in a recent UN report which called for Kosovo to gain ‘conditional independence’ – independence still overseen by the West with possible further partition of the northern part where most remaining Serbs still live. [43] There are also sections of the US ruling class and those most heavily involved in promoting conflict at the time of the Rambouillet talks in early 1999 who favour independence. These people worked closely with the KLA before and during the war, and tended to regard the European powers which participated in the NATO bombing as soft on the Serbs. In a recent memoir James Rubin, former spokesman for the US State Department, attacked in particular the Italian government for siding with the Serbs, and revealed that during the bombing he was in virtually daily contact with the KLA leader Hashim Thaci:
Most mornings Thaci would call me at the State Department by satellite telephone. He was deep inside Kosovo holed up with the rest of the KLA leadership. [44]
The US is talking much more strongly about independence than its European allies. [45] But the US will do whatever suits it best. It will certainly not be guided by the interests of the Kosovan Albanians it claims to protect. However, for most of the Western leaders the rise of Kostunica is also a suitable means of extricating them from demands for full Kosovan independence, which they see as creating further instability in the region, as an independent Kosovo can become a stalking horse for a Greater Albania, pulling in Albanian minorities in Macedonia, Serbia and Greece. The general feeling among much Western opinion has been that demands for full independence from Yugoslavia – most obviously in Kosovo but also in Montenegro – will no longer be fostered and encouraged by the West, but will be pushed down the agenda until an indefinite future time. They would rather put their money on a strengthened pro-Western Serbia than on a series of unstable, economically weak statelets attempting to exist on their own and creating further tensions in the region.
That is why among Kosovan Albanian politicians the downfall of Milosevic was not greeted with joy. They realised that his going would make winning independence – a demand for which they are totally dependent on the Western powers – more difficult. The convergence between the supposed aims of the Balkan War of 1999 (to get rid of Milosevic and establish ‘democracy’ in Serbia) and the reality is clear here. Those most militant about Kosovan independence care little for the democratic change which the people of Serbia have achieved, but only for their complete separation. Hashim Thaci, who was reportedly ‘dismayed at Milosevic’s fall’, sums up their narrow nationalism. His response was, ‘I fought for democracy in Kosovo – not for democracy in Serbia.’ As one commentator argues, ‘With the rehabilitation of Serbia’s image at the fall of Milosevic, the international community’s sympathy for Kosovo’s Albanians is over’. [46] The push for independence will continue, making Kosovo a continuing flashpoint. Those like Thaci have every interest in playing up and exacerbating national and ethnic divisions between Kosovans and Serbs in order to bolster their own positions.
Similar problems exist in Montenegro, still nominally part of Yugoslavia but previously moving towards independence under the benevolent eye of the West, which did everything it could to weaken ties between Montenegro and Serbia. This included injecting masses of Western money before the local elections earlier this year (a strategy which did not pay off) and establishing the deutschmark as a parallel currency to the dinar. Montenegro’s president, Milo Djukanovic, was hailed by the Western leaders as a democrat, even though his government is nothing of the sort. Now, however, the West’s attitudes have dramatically changed:
Montenegro not only fears a loss of aid but also increasing pressure from the West to forge close links with Serbia and drop its aim of turning Yugoslavia into a loose federation of two sovereign states, let alone any thought of independence. [47]
In all these dealings the West has shown itself to be totally cynical – saying that it cares about the peoples of the region, but in reality backing whatever policies it thought were most harmful to Milosevic. Now it will back policies which enable it to work for the time being with Kostunica, regardless of whether that means a complete about turn. This cynicism is dangerous, raising expectations which the West has no intention of meeting. It is only necessary to look at Bosnia, under the West’s rule for the past five years, to see exactly what has been achieved in the area: ‘After five years of peace, a common Bosnia passport has still not been agreed ... while rail links stop at entity boundaries. Telephone connections between the countries’ two halves remain poor.’ [48]
Peace and prosperity are not the issue for the West – keeping the lid on the problem is the main aim, regardless of what greater problems may be caused as a result.
 
Conclusion
Of all the possible outcomes which could have resulted from the upheaval in the Balkans since the late 1980s, few would have considered revolution. As the region descended into nationalism, war and partition, those of us who believed that it was possible for working people to oust Milosevic were an isolated political trend. Surely the nationalism was so deep, the argument went, that Serbs would never break from their rulers. Indeed, the defeat in war might well have the opposite effect – refugees, for example, would back Milosevic against the people who drove them out. People would not believe that they could make common cause with others of a different nationality. Even those of us who believed that workers could follow such a course of action would hardly have predicted that it would happen so quickly. It shows the speed with which workers change their ideas, especially in a period when there is a crisis of imperialism and global capitalism. But all revolutions are a process, and this one is only just beginning.
This article has tried to outline the problems which face Serbian workers and students in the months ahead. There will be many politicians who argue that they should trust the West, and welcome Western investment even if it means attacks on their living standards. Some will preach greater integration into Europe. Others will try to blame Serbia’s problems on other nationalities and hope they can win support by appealing to ‘all Serbs’. All these solutions are dead ends for those who want a genuinely democratic and peaceful Serbia. They come from people who have always preached compromise with the existing order rather than its overthrow, and who now hope that Serbia’s problems can be solved if only working people accept sacrifice.
Yet Serbian workers have shown that they can change history – they destroyed a hated ruler. Now they need to challenge the system which both Milosevic and the West in their different ways supported, one which exploits them and puts their interests last. If they want to develop their strength and ensure that the revolution represents more than just a change at the top they have to develop demands which challenge their exploitation. That means putting forward demands for union organisation and massive increases in wages, and a refusal of workplace flexibility. It means opposing plant closures and job losses. It means fighting for a decent welfare state. These demands will come into conflict with the workers’ new bosses as well as their old bosses. The movement of Serbian workers to rid themselves of their Milosevic-supporting managers was a tremendous component of the revolution, echoing the saneamento in Portugal and raising the question of who runs the workplaces. Is it the employers, or is it the people who produce the wealth? The same thing began to happen in the media, where workers in newspapers and television began to question what they were producing, and fighting for different news values which reflected opposition viewpoints. These movements can begin to challenge not just the immediate organisation of a particular workplace, but the very basis on which society is organised.
The revolution will go forward if it builds on and extends these demands and movements, making sure that in every workplace, every school and college, a similar process is under way. That process also needs to be extended to the army and police. The state machine refused to defend Milosevic because of the strength of the revolution, which meant the police and army were split. The ordinary soldiers and many of the police backed the opposition. Their friends and families supported the revolution. Even the top of the army was divided. But the army leadership was not defeated, nor were the police. They acquiesced to the revolution and remain in place. They may not acquiesce at future mass protests. Therefore the revolution needs to win support among the rank and file without creating illusions in the army. It also needs to rely on workers’ strength rather than a neutral army in future confrontations.
All this requires moving towards many of the classical ideas of socialism – the need for workers’ organisation including workplace councils, the need to take on the state machine, the need for genuine representative democracy. These ideas are still more discredited in eastern Europe than anywhere else. Whereas in the West the anti-capitalist movement and the growth of workers’ struggle in many countries is leading to a growing interest in socialist ideas, this process still lags behind in eastern Europe. The identification of rulers like Milosevic and his system with socialism makes it extremely hard to get a hearing for socialist ideas. But events are forcing workers and students in Serbia, as elsewhere, to change their ideas at a rapid pace. Their own struggles leave them open to democratic socialist ideas.
Here the role of the Western left is crucial. Some left wingers here regard Milosevic as the last bastion of socialism and have therefore condemned the revolution. The Communist Party paper the Morning Star headlined its 6 October report ‘Arson rules in Belgrade: pro-capitalist demonstrators burn parliament.’ Those who insist on defending the east European regimes as socialist have forfeited their right to tell anyone in Serbia what to do. They are also incapable of relating to the growing politicisation in the West which rejects the east European model as socialist. Instead those socialists who have argued against exploitation and state repression East and West now have the chance to put their argument. In the process they can win a new generation of fighters in eastern Europe to their ideas, and to a successful revolution. As the leading US peace campaigner Noam Chomsky put it:
What happened was a very impressive demonstration of popular mobilisation and courage...the mass movement in Serbia merits great admiration, and provides an inspiring example of what united and dedicated people can achieve.
What has taken place, and where it will go, is in the hands of the people of Serbia, though as always, international solidarity and support can make a substantial difference. [49]

Notes
1. M. Glenny, The Sunday Times, 8 October 2000.
2. D. Goldhagen, The Guardian, 29 April 1999.
3. See F. Wheen, Slobo’s Appeasers, G2, The Guardian, 11 October 2000.
4. V.I. Lenin, Left Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder, in Selected Works (London 1969), p. 567.
5. Figures from Mike Haynes, and from S. Wagstyl, Serbia’s Uncertain Dawn, Financial Times, 7–8 October 2000.
6. See D. Plavsic, Green Shoots of Resistance, Socialist Review 242, June 2000; and NATO’s War: The Truth Comes Out, Socialist Review 244, September 2000.
7. J. Steele, The Observer, 8 October 2000.
8. Part of e-mail from Dusan Plavsa, who works at Kolubara, sent to Dragan Plavsic.
9. Figures given in The Sunday Times, 8 October 2000.
10. The Sunday Times, 8 October 2000.
11. Ibid.
12. Financial Times, 11 October 2000.
13. J. Steele, Angry Workers Root Out Fear, Favours And Fat Cats, in The Guardian 14 October 2000.
14. H. Young, Blair Is Moved By Foreign Misery But Tougher At Home, The Guardian, 10 October 2000.
15. F. Wheen, op. cit..
16. Quoted by N. Chomsky, Comments on the Milosevic Ouster, e-mail, 16 October 2000.
17. The Sunday Times, 8 October 2000.
18. Stratfor commentary: www.stratfor.com/cis/commentary, 6 October 2000.
19. The Sunday Telegraph, 8 October 2000.
20. The Observer, 8 October 2000.
21. Quoted in A. McElvoy, West Will Find This New Leader No Pushover, in The Independent, 7 October 2000.
22. From V. Kostunica, Serbs and the West, Rockford Institute e-mail, 12 October 2000.
23. The Sunday Times, 8 October 2000.
24. Otpor! means ‘Resistance!’, also the main slogan (‘Widerstand!’) against the fascist Jörg Haider in Austria, and on the Millau protest in France in support of the farmer José Bové.
25. K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, printed in Surveys from Exile (London 1973), p. 60.
26. C. Harman, The Fire Last Time (London 1988), p. 277.
27. Financial Times, 6 October 2000.
28. Many thanks to Mike Haynes for much of the information and analysis in this section.
29. The Guardian, 14 October 2000.
30. The Guardian, 13 October 2000.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. United Nations 1999 Economic Commission for Europe, Economic Survey of Europe, no. 3, p. 128.
34. United Nations 1999 Economic Commission for Europe, Economic Survey of Europe, no. 2.
35. N. Ascherson, Hard Road To True Freedom, The Observer, 8 October 2000.
36. Ibid.
37. T. Judah, After The Party, The Hangover, The Observer, 8 October 2000.
38. M. Haynes, Balkan Reform Needs Big Bucks, The Guardian, 16 October 2000.
39. Quoted in Financial Times, 7–8 October 2000.
40. For a full analysis see L. German (ed.), The Balkans, Nationalism and Imperialism (London 1999); and T. Ali (ed.), Masters of the Universe? (London 2000), especially part 3. Also for the early collapse into war see M. Glenny, The Fall of Yugoslavia (London 1993).
41. N. Ascherson, Hard Road To True Freedom, op. cit.
42. Financial Times, 7 October 2000.
43. Reported in The Guardian, 23 October 2000.
44. J. Rubin in Financial Times, 30 September–1 October and 7–8 October 2000.
45. See The Guardian and The Independent, 30 October 2000
46. Quoted in T. Judah, Serbian Upheaval Scares Kosovars, The Observer, 22 October 2000.
47. The Guardian, 18 October 2000.
48. Financial Times, 25 October 2000.
49. N. Chomsky, op. cit.
 



The terrible election results which the Labour Party has suffered in the past 18 months are one of the great unspoken features of British politics today. The tame journalists and leader writers spend a day pondering why the results are so bad and then move on to the agenda which the spin doctors have conveniently drawn up for them. The Labour leadership has no interest in trying to highlight, let alone explain, why this should happen, and so continues to talk about Labour’s second term and how Labour remains ahead in the opinion polls. The most that happens is that dissident Labour figures plead for more attention to be paid to Labour’s ‘heartlands’ and ‘core support’ in the run-up to the next election. This lack of interest highlights the widening chasm between ‘official’ politics and what people are actually thinking and doing in their daily lives. For there now exists a crisis of representation in British politics which contains within it many warning signs for Labour. These include:


A collapse in the morale of Labour supporters and activists which leads to widespread demoralisation, abstention from votes and even the switching of votes to electoral alternatives.
 
Very low turnouts in polls which are differentially lower in strong Labour areas than in Tory or marginal areas.
 
The haemorrhaging of Labour Party members in many areas.
 
The decay of any Labour Party organisation or infrastructure.
 
The decline in support for Labour inside its affiliated unions, where a growing minority are prepared to break from Labour to the left.


All of these questions deserve to be addressed in a more serious way than they have been in recent months. But they need to be looked at in a wider context than mid-term blues with a Labour government. These mid-term blues in fact follow a pattern under Labour governments. But the decline of the Blair government’s fortunes also marks a deeper crisis for Labour: the low point of its post-war organisational decline and an ideological turning point for much of Labour’s left.
 
Three years on: disillusion and despair
A recent letter to a national newspaper from a London Labour Party member gives a sense of the crisis among Labour’s activists:
It is the Labour Party which really causes the heart to sink. My local party has lost about 300 members, or nearly a third of its membership. Several friends have resigned in sorrowful anger at the machinations, dishonesty, blatant nepotism, vapid statements almost immediately retracted – as on the North-South divide and GM foods – and sheer arrogance … foot soldiers still count more than pagers or focus groups in elections. Well, Blair bade farewell to vast numbers of his in London with his monstrous manipulations and attempts to bully people in the course of the Ken Livingstone mayoral debacle. [1]
This letter from Putney is one of many that have appeared in the press around the country. It is typical of the outpourings in the newspapers, at meetings and in discussions in the Labour Party itself over the past year. It speaks of the huge crisis in which Labour finds itself. To lose nearly one third of the members is bad enough, but to lose many of them over questions of policy and principle means that many of them will want to remain at least in part politically active, but cannot do so within the Labour Party. They are not just resigning into apathy. The results of their disaffection can be seen in every electoral contest over the past 18 months. The Scottish Parliament includes one Scottish Socialist Party member, Tommy Sheridan, and one former Labour MP, Dennis Canavan, who was rejected for selection as a candidate to the parliament by the Blairites, despite having a good record as a Westminster MP. Even worse results awaited Labour in Wales, where the Blair stitch-up of the selection of assembly leader to ensure the victory of Alun Michael over Rhodri Morgan led to the loss of a virtually assured Labour majority in the assembly and the victory of Plaid Cymru in rock solid Labour seats such as Islwyn and Rhondda. In London the results of the mayoral and assembly elections were even worse for Labour. Ken Livingstone won comfortably. His official Labour opponent, Frank Dobson, was soundly beaten by the Tory and was nearly pushed into fourth place by the Liberal Democrat.
But Labour’s rout went further than this. Massive numbers of Labour members refused to canvass, and Labour was forced to put out separate London Labour leaflets – one for the mayoral race, the other for the assembly with no mention of Frank Dobson on it. Labour lost two of the London assembly constituencies which it expected to win (Barnet and Camden, and Ealing and Southall) and so only had an equal number of seats to the Tories in the London assembly in a city which is overwhelmingly Labour. It also suffered massive losses outside London where council seats in Labour heartlands fell to the Liberal Democrats and the Tories. In London there was also a significant vote to the left of Labour with the Greens – in this instance clearly representing a left protest vote – winning three seats in the assembly after gaining Livingstone’s endorsement. In addition the vote of the London Socialist Alliance (LSA) was 3 percent across London, rising to 6 and 7 percent in two constituencies. In some parts of inner London the vote to the left of Labour stood at 25 percent.
It is a common defence from Labour’s leadership that the appallingly low turnout resulted from its supporters and core voters staying at home. Last year when Labour’s vote collapsed in the European elections, we were told that this was because of contentment – Labour voters simply could not be bothered to turn out because they were so happy with what the government was doing. Even the Blairites can no longer repeat this line with a straight face, especially since it is clear that, where there was an alternative motivated, Labour voters often did switch allegiances. As John Curtice pointed out after the election, Labour has a bigger problem than the Tories in getting its core support out. He argues on opinion poll evidence that ‘those who before polling day said they would vote Labour in the assembly election were, in the event, 5 percent more likely to have stayed at home than Tory supporters’. He goes on, ‘Among those who intended to vote Labour beforehand and who did go to the polls, only 77 percent actually voted Labour. In contrast, more than 90 percent of Tories stayed loyal to their cause.’ Curtice also concludes that ‘Labour’s vote did not fall most where turnout dropped most. Rather the opposite is the case. Labour’s vote fell most where the Lib Dems mounted their strongest challenges and in so doing motivated voters to come to the polls’. [2]
While it is of course true that any party in the mid-term of office can expect to suffer in local and regional elections, there are two features at work here. First, Labour is still relatively popular in headline opinion polls. Its results in various elections in the past year have been consistently worse than its poll ratings. Secondly, it clearly has a problem in motivating its core support and even its activists, which allows positive campaigning by anyone else to cost it votes. The reason why this occurs cannot wholly be found in the immediate crisis of Labour. Instead we have to look at the long term decline of Labour’s support and the connection between the disappointment of Labour policies and the weakening of its base.
 
The highs and lows of Labour support
Those who argue that Labour’s present problems are simply the result of a particular unfortunate set of politics and circumstances are missing the point. Every particular crisis or exodus of members from the party adds further to Labour’s long term decline and makes it harder for the party to recover. This has become particularly acute in the past 25 years, since reforms have no longer been on the agenda in the way that they were during Labour’s ‘golden age’. It is true that both major parties in Britain have suffered this long term decline, but Labour repeatedly finds itself at more of a disadvantage in this decline: its working class base is much harder to mobilise than the equivalent Tory loyalists. And the tendency for activists to be to the left of the Labour Party means that they are more likely to come into conflict with a Labour government than Tory supporters are with a Tory government. In any case, any study of Labour’s support since the war shows a near constant decline in membership and proportion of the vote.
Labour’s high tide was the 1945 Labour government, responsible for shaping the post-war settlement which created the political consensus – full employment, welfarism and a mixed economy – that dominated the next 30 years. Labour’s share of the vote in 1945 was 48.8 percent, a figure matched again in 1951 (although in this election Labour actually lost to the Tories because of the distribution of seats) and even marginally surpassed in 1966, with 48.9 percent of the vote. [3] Labour’s membership also reached its peak at around this time. By 1950 it had 908,161 individual members – up from the 1945 figure which, although it suffered from the dislocations of wartime, was nearly half a million. In 1952 and 1953 individual membership stood at over 1 million before starting a slow but steady decline over the next two decades before accelerating in the 1970s and 1980s. [4]
The level of activism and involvement was relatively high in the early period after the war. Even then, however, Labour suffered what was to become a typical pattern of post-war governments: initial enthusiasm wore off relatively quickly as Labour failed to match its supporters’ expectations, leading to electoral losses. So the local council elections of November 1947 revealed a loss of support to the Tories. Labour lost 652 seats and 24 councils in England and Wales. While Labour had held its vote, the Tory vote increased. As the bosses’ magazine The Economist said at the time: ‘Austerity has awoken the middle classes from their apathy and made them politically active, while it has quenched the evangelical enthusiasm of the working class for “our government”.’ [5] This enthusiasm was certainly dulled by the mismatch between promises and delivery, even under this most reforming of Labour governments. A survey of planned and actual delivery of facilities carried out on 100 new housing estates in 1952 found that of 46 nursery schools planned only one had been built, of 33 health centres none had been built, and of 24 infant welfare clinics planned only 6 had been built. [6]
Despite the 1951 election marking the beginning of 13 years of Tory rule, Labour Party membership and organisation remained buoyant for most of that time. Labour retained a huge infrastructure of local newspapers and newsletters, offices and social clubs, agents, and affiliated organisations which had roots inside the working class in many localities. So the Romford, Hornchurch and Brentwood Labour Voice, a monthly Labour Party newspaper in Essex, could write of the 1951 defeat:
The Labour Party can be trusted to fight hard in parliament. Our task in the constituencies now is to keep up and improve our organisation and our propaganda; to be always ready for ‘the Day’, which cannot be long deferred. This Tory night can only be brief, and though the Tories will inevitably do some mischief, they cannot reverse the march of social progress. With the first light of dawn, they and their misdeeds will vanish. [7]
While the paper’s analysis was almost totally misguided – the Tories followed the post-war consensus and benefited from the economic expansion which raised living standards during the long boom of the 1950s, staying in office until 1964 – its existence and confidence pointed to substantial organisation on the ground. Labour filled a number of social and cultural functions in some areas as well. A report in the Labour Organiser in 1961 paints a picture which would seem unbelievable today:
A Labour space age club for 3–13 year olds that bulges at the seams – a Labour old people’s club that sits down 200 at its annual dinner. Those are at the two ends of Gateshead’s ‘Cradle to the Grave’ programme. And these are not proposals. They are live flourishing enterprises. To keep pace with its ‘new look’ the Gateshead Labour Party has provided the Young Socialists with their own coffee bar and independent meeting room. [8]







To compare Labour organisation in Gateshead now, and the extremely low turnout there and in other Labour strongholds of the north east of England, with this Labour Party, which attempted to organise and involve its members on a whole number of levels, is to begin to get some idea of how steep the decline has been. The sharp onset of decline began not – as might be expected – during the Tory years of the 1950s, but under a Labour government between 1964 and 1970, where Labour lost votes, activists and organisation.
 
The 1960s – decade of decline
Labour’s very narrow election win in 1964 and its decisive victory 18 months later in 1966 were greeted with enthusiasm. Labour’s programme was, as always, timid, and the party leadership subscribed to the view that Labour had to be modernisers if they were to win over more than their traditional supporters. But the party leader, Harold Wilson, was of the left and the expectations were that Labour would bring about real change after so long under Tory government. These expectations barely lasted past the 1966 election victory. Already it was noted that the turnout in 1966 was lower than in 1964, although still at 75.8 percent. In addition, while the Tory vote fell by 2 million compared with 1959, Labour’s only increased by 800,000. [9]
The government hit the rocks within a few weeks of being re-elected. It attacked the seamen’s strike, accusing its leaders of being Communists and creating great bitterness inside the working class movement. It was followed by the crisis over the pound which led to cuts in public spending and wage controls. This led to further unpopularity among Labour’s traditional supporters and the beginning of a sharp decline in membership and activity. A record of a Manchester Labour Party ward organisation shows how sharp this was. In Newton Heath average attendance in 1965 was 30 and total membership was 280. By 1967 average attendance was 18. In 1968 the average was 9. Total membership in the ward had more than halved by the late 1960s. [10] Overall, membership fell nationally from 817,000 individual members in 1965 to 680,000 in 1970. Labour’s share of the vote in the 1970 election (which it lost unexpectedly) fell from 48.9 percent in 1966 to 43.9 percent – a figure to which it never subsequently recovered. [11]
This decline and the failings of the Wilson government have to be seen against a backdrop of rising working class discontent and a growing radicalisation among young people. The loss of Labour members was over issues as diverse as the Vietnam War and Barbara Castle’s attempted introduction of the anti-union legislation, In Place of Strife. This led to working class protests against the Labour government and to a profound disillusionment with official Labour politics which propelled many of the most radical youth in particular away from any connection with the Labour Party. The high level of working class struggle continued under Edward Heath’s Tory government after 1970, which itself tried to introduce legislation attacking trade union rights. The anger welling up under Labour broke out between 1970 and 1974, leading to mass demonstrations and protests against the Industrial Relations Bill (later Act), the struggle to free the Pentonville dockers in 1972, two national miners’ strikes in 1972 and in 1974, all manner of other strikes over a range of issues including equal pay, and political radicalisation around a range of issues from student occupations to racism. By and large Labour failed to capitalise on these struggles and movements. Membership continued to fall and many of those newly politicised leapfrogged the Labour Party to join a number of the left wing organisations which had grown as a result of the events of 1968 and their impact on consciousness worldwide.
This partly continued the long term trend first noted in the 1950s: Patrick Seyd’s book, The Rise and Fall of the Labour Left, demonstrates how acute this problem was: in 1955 Labour’s NEC reported 45 constituency Labour parties with a membership of 3,000 or over – by 1977 this had fallen to six. In Bermondsey there were 4,689 members in 1952, but under 1,000 in 1977. Total membership of the three Lewisham constituencies in 1952 was over 16,000; by 1978 the then two constituencies had 4,000 between them. [12] To many active in the Labour Party now, even these lower figures would seem incredibly high – they testify how much Labour did have roots in the early post-war years compared with today. There is no question that here too the experience of Labour government in the 1960s played a key role in breaking up that support. In the space of four years – between 1965 and 1969 – Labour went from 60 constituency Labour parties affiliated with a membership of more than 2,000 to 22. Brixton Labour Party in south London suffered a catastrophic loss in the same period, from 1,212 members in 1965 to 292 in 1970. Brighton Kemptown halved its membership in those five years. There is evidence that much of this decline was due to disillusion among working class members, especially the manual working class – the ‘core vote’ which refused to be motivated by a Labour government that attacked workers. [13]
The Tories lost the 1974 election in the course of the miners’ strike and a Labour government was elected against a background of sharp class polarisation and after four years of major working class struggle. However, the share of the vote for Labour was disastrously low, both in February and again in October, when Labour stood again to win a bigger majority. It received 38.8 percent and 36.7 percent respectively, whereas the Liberals picked up many votes, scoring just under 20 percent. [14] Although Labour began to recruit people again in the 1970s, and one writer says that Labour probably had more members in 1980 as individuals than it had in 1970 [15], the long term decline continued. The membership figures never recovered overall from the fall of the 1960s. Seyd points to the sorts of people who joined in the 1970s: higher educated, public sector employees, working class militants and feminists. [16] Few of them had reason to support the Wilson-Callaghan governments which succeeded the Tories. The high hopes of the early 1970s were turned sour as the unions were brought back onside through the Social Contract, and where the government presided over high unemployment, falls in working class income and severe public spending cuts, while also ushering some of the worst reactionary ideology in areas such as education and the family. The relatively high working class unity of the first part of the decade turned into bitter divisions among the working class, with scabbing sanctioned by the trade union bureaucracy in a number of disputes. Little wonder that the government collapsed in ignominy in 1979 against the background of working class struggle pitched in headlong opposition to it.
 
Bennism and the left
Divisions between left and right in the Labour Party had always been there, but had become more acute in the course of the 1970s, with disputes over issues such as deselection of MPs (the case of Reg Prentice, the right wing Labour MP for Newham north east, who was deselected allegedly by the new middle class membership which had parachuted into various working class constituencies and was trying to draw Labour to more extreme left wing views, was one of the best known). The left outside parliament began to get better organised: in the late 1970s, for example, 18 local Tribune groups were established round the country. [17] But with the victory of Thatcher in 1979, all the divisions inside Labour came to the surface and the left was in the ascendant. The argument that Labour had thrown away its years in government by attacking its working class supporters had a resonance. So too did the argument that being inside Labour was the only way for the left to effect change. The movement around Tony Benn which culminated in his contest for deputy leader in 1981 brought into the party and into activity many activists and left wingers, some disillusioned with working in left wing groups throughout the 1970s and seemingly getting nowhere.
Bennism was the high tide of the post-war left and the chance to reverse the decline in Labour’s membership and the fortunes of its activists. Although it held out this promise, it was not to happen. By 1980 party membership stood at 348,000, almost half that of a decade earlier. [18] Partly the rise of Bennism polarised the party even further with the right-wingers around the Gang of Four splitting to form the SDP in 1981. More importantly, although the left came close to winning Tony Benn as deputy leader, this represented the high tide for the left and it was afterwards under a series of attacks. These attacks were compounded by Bennism’s organisational weakness. In particular, it did not have roots inside the union rank and file which could have helped to resist the attacks. The party leadership was able to set in motion a series of attacks and witch-hunts on the left throughout the 1980s which undercut what base Bennism still had and demoralised another generation of activists. Even in the early 1980s Michael Foot placated the right by denouncing Peter Tatchell, a left winger who was the official Labour candidate for the Bermondsey by-election. Foot also started the witch-hunt against Militant.
The leadership could not have been successful, however, without the political weaknesses of the left themselves. The left retreated into its stronghold – local government. In the early 1980s Bennites and others on the left controlled a number of councils including the Greater London Council, Lambeth, Liverpool, Islington and South Yorkshire. It was here that they would build a base and challenge the Tory government to defeat them, and here that they would revitalise the Labour Party. It didn’t happen. There were key points in the retreat of the left. One was the refusal to fight the Tory government over its ratecapping policy in 1985. The GLC under Ken Livingstone moved to comply in March 1985, to be followed by all the ratecapped authorities. The left’s local government stand had failed, and with it went the further decline of activism on the ground. Patrick Seyd describes it thus:
By now many left wing councillors had become disillusioned with local government: their radical commitments had been undermined by central government pressures, electoral necessities, bureaucratic hostility, or Labour Group power politics. Others had tempered their political ideals to the practical necessities of administration. Some councillors withdrew, politically and personally exhausted by the struggles, whilst others were moving on from Sheffield to Westminster politics. [19]
The result of the 1980s was a much bigger intake of local government left MPs by 1987, who adapted very quickly in most cases to the demands of the leadership – David Blunkett and Margaret Hodge were two examples. Local parties were often left effectively leaderless as a result of expulsions of key activists in localities and the abandonment of the field by many more.
Neil Kinnock, Labour’s leader from 1983 to 1992, saw one of his main aims as crusading against the ‘hard left’ inside the party, despite having come from the left himself. This was done in the name of ‘making Labour electable’ although Kinnock himself was singularly unsuccessful in this and was credited with being an electoral liability in 1992. He set out to witch-hunt Militant from the Labour Party. In this he was, however, partly successful. He regarded the year long miners’ strike in 1984–1985 as a setback on the path to Labour Party modernisation and used the 1985 Labour Party conference to make a speech attacking Militant in Liverpool. The Militant-led council was coming to the crunch about setting a rate. Kinnock used the image of the left as unconcerned with the practicalities of people’s lives, concerned only with grand gestures:
I’ll tell you what happens with impossible promises. You start with far-fetched resolutions. They are then pickled into a rigid dogma, a code, and you go through the years sticking to that, outdated, misplaced, irrelevant to the real needs, and you end up in the grotesque chaos of a Labour council hiring taxis to scuttle round a city handing out redundancy notices to its own workers. I am telling you, no matter how entertaining, how fulfilling to short term egos – you can’t play politics with people’s jobs and with people’s services or with their homes. [20]
The speech caused uproar but since the struggle against ratecapping was going down Kinnock was able to use that, plus the miners’ defeat, to press home his advantage against the left. He adopted the policy of the ‘dented shield’, which argued it was better to run local government on the Tories’ terms than not to run it at all. The consequence was major cutbacks, retreats and defeats as Labour councils accepted more and more limiting terms. This as much as anything led to further demoralisation and passivity from Labour supporters who could no longer make a difference in local government. It also meant that, when Thatcher’s greatest disaster, the poll tax, was introduced in 1989 and 1990, Labour’s official policy was extremely timid and didn’t really oppose it. Building demonstrations against it was by and large left to those outside the Labour Party.
The defeat of the miners coupled with the defeat over ratecapping also led to a polarisation on the left of the Labour Party which meant further demoralisation. Many made their accommodation with the leadership and abandoned any hope of changing anything while others continued on the path which the Bennites had mapped out in the early 1980s. The defeats of 1987 and again of 1992 led to renewed debate about whether Labour should continue to ‘modernise’ and abandon its traditional policies or whether it should be much bolder in putting forward socialist ideas. Those advocating the latter were increasingly in a minority and even many erstwhile left wingers decided that it was worth compromising in order to win an election. This was the path followed after 1992 when the extremely cautious ideological right winger John Smith won the backing of many former left wingers, and when Tony Blair encountered relatively little opposition in his abolition in 1995 of Clause Four of the party’s constitution, the paper commitment to nationalisation. A sign of how far some of the old ‘soft left’ had travelled in this process can be seen from the chair of the Labour Co-ordinating Committee, once a left body, now a slightly critical cheerleader for Blair, who wrote in 1995:
But the culture of betrayal will only be finally banished if Labour now seizes the moment to both clarify its project and solidify support for this in the Party ... No one should be under any illusion that the easy victory at the April special conference reflected whole-hearted endorsement of the Blair agenda by the great bulk of party activists ... A chasm now exists between the 100,000 new members Labour has recruited in the past year and the many activists who run the party at local level. The new members not only embrace the change – they may even have joined because of it. Whilst many of the traditional activists, by no means hard left sympathisers, were at best ambivalent ... Labour’s cultural revolution is still only at its early stages. It is still a long way from becoming the participatory, empowering, listening, campaigning party which might attract people in large numbers to become actively involved in the politics of change. [21]
In the early 1990s the modernisers and Blairites set massive store in building this sort of mass campaigning party to which they could appeal directly without the bother of having to go through the party structures. Certainly, in the early years of Blair’s leadership he had some success in appealing to those with no ideological backgrounds in the labour movement to join. He argued in 1995, ‘We have increased our individual membership by 120,000. By the next election over one half of our members will have joined since the 1992 election. It is literally a new party.’ Patrick Seyd estimated that when Blair became leader in 1994, membership stood at 265,000 and that by the election in 1997 it was around 400,000 – an increase of 140,000. But rapidly people also began leaving Labour. [22] The truth is that Labour is further away today from building such a party than it was five years ago. The latest estimates put Labour’s membership at 350,000 – a loss of 50,000 since the election. [23] The new passive members have proved to have retained less loyalty to the party than might have been expected and those old activists who remained have found themselves increasingly disillusioned with prospects for change.
This was quite predictable, because in reality there was not such a distance between the two in terms of ideas and values. For instance, a lot of the new members were working class, even though the proportion of trade unionists went down. The Labour Party has also remained the party of the poor. In 1998 nearly a quarter of all Labour members were on incomes of £10,000 a year or less. Therefore the attitudes of the ‘New Labour’ members are not in most areas fundamentally different from those of Old Labour. But the organisational links with the new members are much weaker, with new members less likely to do even the more passive activities in supporting Labour at election times, such as displaying window posters or donating money. [24] Patrick Seyd argues that this leads to a fundamental weakness at election time:
For a party to be successful it has to offer incentives to its activists. The activists go out and do the recruiting, canvassing and encourage others to join. But if you create a party that bypasses the activists, which I think the Labour Party has done over the past ten years, those incentives disappear. The Labour Party does have very strong vertical communication between the Labour leadership and party members. But it also needs horizontal communication – people in the same street or area who go along to their friends and remind them to vote. That communication is very weak. [25]
Blair has proved a failure in attempting to build a mass party without roots, appealed to through the media and the spin doctors. The plan to double the membership never came to fruition and now membership seems on all anecdotal evidence to be falling. Even worse, he has succeeded in destroying many of the roots that Labour did have and taking the long term crisis of membership and activism which Labour has suffered onto a new plane.
 
Worse and worse
Labour’s 1997 election win was widely welcomed and confounded the expectations of Labour’s leadership in its scale. But the size of the landslide hides a multitude of sins. Labour’s vote was in fact relatively low: ‘First, at 44.4 percent, Labour’s share of the vote was lower than it had achieved in all elections from 1945 to 1966, including the three it lost in a row in the 1950s. Second, with the turnout across the United Kingdom as a whole at a record post-war low of 71.2 percent, only 30.9 percent of the electorate voted for the new government’. [26]
The weaknesses of Labour’s general election performance have only been exacerbated by events since. The experience of the recent elections show low turnout, higher than average Labour abstention, especially in Labour strongholds, and demoralisation of many activists. The leadership’s behaviour in the selection process for elections in Scotland, Wales and London has caused much dismay and bitterness, and has had the effect of leading at least some activists to consciously decide not to help Labour get elected. The commonsense view at Millbank and in Downing Street is that this does not matter and that elections are not won or lost by the activists. But there is much evidence to the contrary – consciously arguing and campaigning for a particular party can make a real difference in certain localities. [27] In 1997 it was found that Labour members were more confident: ‘A quarter of Labour voters reported that they encouraged others to support their party; only one-tenth of Conservative supporters did so.’ [28] The activity on the ground can make a big difference to Labour. In this context, the debacle over selection, especially around Ken Livingstone, can only have had a very harmful effect. It does not simply mean that Labour activists are fed up with the leadership and the apparatus. It also means Labour has squandered its most precious resource – and it is finding this resource increasingly difficult to replace.
There are, of course, different responses to the demoralisation of Labour’s activists. The government’s is to throw a few sops before the next election, especially over pensions where Labour’s miserly policy has caused great anger and allowed them to be outflanked by the Tories. Many of those who opposed the government over Livingstone or over the Scottish and Welsh parliaments are keen to paper over the cracks, to use the discontent inside Labour to extract further concessions from the Blairites, hoping that Labour can be revived again. This is the view put by Paul Flynn in his book about the Welsh stitch-up, Dragons led by Poodles, and is also the view of the majority of the left which is still in the Labour party. [29] Here the key campaigns focus around getting Livingstone back into the Labour Party. Yet this approach misses the whole point about the cumulative disillusion among Labour activists: it comes from Labour’s repeated failure to deliver anything which can meet the aspirations of its supporters. For nearly two decades now, Labour activists have been told to swallow successive abandonment of policies in the interests of getting Labour elected. Now, with the biggest Labour majority ever, they are being told they still have to accept the policies they had always fought against. For a substantial number of Labour activists this is too much to stomach and they are turning their backs on Labour. These are not just passive Labour voters – they are people who have been councillors, local Labour party officials, key people in holding organisation together during long and difficult years. They have devoted 20, 30, 40 years to the Labour Party and they now feel that they do not have a political home.
This is often a personal tragedy for the individuals but their dilemma is made easier by two things: the right wing nature of Blairism, which is pushing people away from Labour, and the increasing recognition on the left that there is life outside the Labour Party. The growing mood of resistance around issues such as asylum seekers, job losses in the car industry or the privatisation of council houses, plus the votes for the left in Scotland and Wales and now with the LSA, means that for the first time in many years socialists find that they are saying things which have an echo with much greater numbers of people than the organised left. The pressure from both sides means that it is possible to talk about building a socialist alternative outside Labour and find a resonance among a significant minority inside the working class.
Blairism has severely weakened Labour. There is a major crisis of cadre inside the party as those who have traditionally carried the arguments of the party lack the motivation to continue to do so. Although some of the cadre can in theory be won back to doing so, there is no obvious reason why they should be, given their lack of sympathy for the Blair project. The weakening of the cadre worsens the long term decline of organisation inside the Labour Party, and the experience of the 1960s and 1970s suggests that that can never be totally recovered. Labour’s lack of organisation in its traditional strongholds is now a serious problem, especially in a closely contested election. Finally, recent elections have demonstrated that there is a weakening loyalty to the Labour vote. In some parts of London almost a quarter of all voters in the assembly election voted Green or LSA, ie to the left of Labour. Once formerly loyal voters make this jump, it is harder for Labour to pull them back in subsequent elections.
Labour has traditionally depended on the union leaders to deliver money, votes and support for its policies and it is still able to turn to them, however critical they are of Blairism. But the hostility to Labour’s leadership from the rank and file is growing – as witnessed by the overwhelming union votes in London for Ken Livingstone. After the selection fiasco an important minority in the unions wanted to back left alternatives such as the LSA, and calls to withhold the political fund to Labour have been growing. Increasingly the experience of council workers, health workers and local government workers is of having to confront Labour councils and a Labour government to achieve their aims, and this also weakens the bond between the unions and Labour. Such discontent makes the national officials even more reluctant to rock the boat, fearing as they do revolt from below more than anything else, but it is increasingly the case that Labour is having to rely on these officials to keep the lid on working class discontent. So far this has often been successful, but Labour is now acting increasingly without the safety valves which kept so many working class militants loyal to it. The absence of safety valves means that there is also often an absence of organised expression of discontent. The other side of this is that the Labour and trade union leaders have little or no warning of when explosions are likely to occur.
The weakening of Labour’s base, the demoralisation of its cadre and the breaking of many good militants from ‘their’ party present huge and exciting opportunities for socialists. Increasingly those who want change are finding that they have to look for it outside of Labour, and this raises in concrete form the urgent task of building a real socialist alternative.

Notes
1. Letter from R. Knowles in The Independent, 6 April 2000.
2. J. Curtice, Heartland Blues, The Guardian, 8 May 2000.
3. Figures for share of the vote given in K. Laybourn, A Century of Labour (Stroud 2000), p. 158.
4. Figures for membership, ibid., p. 159, and P. Seyd, The Rise and Fall of the Labour Left (London 1987), p. 41.
5. See S. Fielding, P. Thompson and N. Tiratsoo, England Arise (Manchester 1995), p. 175.
6. Ibid., p. 106.
7. From the Labour Party Archive, quoted in S. Fielding, The Labour Party: ‘Socialism’ and Society since 1951 (Manchester 1997).
8. From Labour Organiser 40:464, quoted in S. Fielding, op. cit., p. 64.
9. Quoted, ibid., p. 78.
10. Quoted, ibid., pp. 80–81.
11. See figures in K. Laybourn, op. cit., pp. 158–159.
12. P. Seyd, The Rise and Fall of the Labour Left (London 1987), p. 42.
13. Ibid., p. 43.
14. K. Laybourn, op. cit., p. 158.
15. G. Hodgson, Labour at the Crossroads (Oxford 1981), p. 57.
16. P. Seyd, op. cit., p. 44.
17. Ibid., p. 82.
18. K. Laybourn, op. cit., p. 159.
19. P. Seyd, op. cit., p. 157.
20. Quoted in S. Fielding, op. cit., p. 131. I was at the conference where Kinnock made the speech and it was absolutely electric, dividing the conference down the middle.The gatherings then were incomparably more left wing then than they are today and although the left was in decline it still had considerable conference strength.
21. From Labour Activist, June 1995, quoted in S. Fielding, op. cit., p. 150.
22. See Whose Party Is It?, Interview with Patrick Seyd by Martin Smith, Socialist Review, July/August 1998, p. 14.
23. The estimate is based on a survey by Patrick Seyd and Paul Whiteley reprinted in The Independent, 30 May 2000.
24. M. Smith, op. cit., p. 14.
25. M. Smith, op. cit., p. 14.
26. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, The British General Election of 1997 (London 1997), p. 295, appendix by John Curtice and Michael Steed.
27. See P. Whiteley and P. Seyd, Grassroots Gains, The Guardian, 8 March 2000.
28. D. Butler and D. Kavanagh, op. cit., p. 238.
29. P. Flynn, Dragons led by Poodles (London 1999).
 






Where is Tony Blair taking Labour and how far can he go? Lindsey German looks at the fight for the party’s future



‘We are dealing with a rump of people suffering final withdrawal symptoms, who have not yet come to terms with the fact that we are a social democratic party. They know it’s not practical to renationalise water, gas and electricity.’
This statement from a Tony Blair supporter campaigning against the retention of Clause Four sums up both the contempt felt by the modernisers for the bulk of Labour activists and the extent to which they want to move Labour away from its roots.
Blair and his backers want to turn Labour into a US style Democratic Party, with no links to organised workers and no particular commitment to collective values or social change.
Blair said in June last year, just before his election as Labour leader, that reform of Clause Four – the section of Labour’s constitution which commits it to some form of collective ownership of industry – was not a priority. Just over three months later, at Labour’s October conference, he announced his intention to scrap it.
The decision – to be taken at a special Labour conference in April just a few days before the local government elections – is likely to go Blair’s way. But his task is not without difficulties, partly because Labour still has working class roots, and partly because Labour members’ enthusiasm for Blair as leader does not necessarily stretch to accepting his view of what Labour’s policies should be.
The main reason for Blair’s victory in last year’s leadership elections was that he convinced most Labour members that he would be the most voter friendly, especially to the southern middle classes. Even then around half of Labour’s members affiliated to the trade unions voted for one of his rivals, either John Prescott or Margaret Beckett.
Blair and his supporters mistook this acquiescence for a green light to take Labour much further to the right than most of its previous leaders have ever envisaged, let alone attempted. At the very least this has been a gross miscalculation by Blair. He will probably win his position at the April conference, but at the cost of creating divisions inside the party.
He is already having to rely very heavily on the union block vote in order to secure victory. This is from a man who has always dismissed and denounced the union machines as part of ‘old Labour’. In return, the union leaders are putting pressure on Labour’s shadow cabinet to make firm commitments to renationalisation of water and railways. Even so, union leaders such as Bill Morris have so far been highly critical of Blair’s plans. Many constituency activists are also against him. A survey by Tribune demonstrated that, of 62 constituency parties, 60 had decided against change of Clause Four.
The present arguments can hardly be the ones envisaged by Blair when he launched his attack three months ago. Even the Economist has warned:
‘He should avoid taking on his party’s activists on too many fronts. Otherwise, they could conceivably give him a bloody nose, even at the cost of giving Labour’s electoral prospects a black eye.’
His standing in the eyes of Labour members has been damaged by a number of issues in those months. So there is much more unease about his leadership than previously. Labour members are still disgusted at Blair’s decision to send his son to the grant maintained, selective, conservative, Catholic London Oratory school. Former deputy leader Roy Hattersley has argued that schools like London Oratory should be scrapped while the Independent reported that Paul Flynn, MP for Newport West, ‘was reported to have said that while he was a “serial loyalist” to the party leader, the damage he had done in his constituency was regarded as “incomprehensible”.’
The other retreats by Labour on education – vacillation over grant maintained schools and the refusal to charge VAT on private school fees – have also created a backlash among Labour supporters, for whom non-selective state education has always been a key political issue.
Labour’s leadership seems happy to capitalise on the Tories’ unpopularity without feeling the need to put forward policies which differ sufficiently from them. The shadow cabinet seems so in awe of big business that it refuses to commit itself to anything that costs money or that might upset the money markets.
So the Tories’ cut of unemployment benefit to six months under the new Jobseeker’s Allowance will not necessarily be restored by Labour. More importantly, last month Blair reneged on Labour’s commitment to renationalise the railways, refusing to commit himself to any policy. He was forced to back down almost immediately but since then Labour’s policy has been at the very least opaque, with commitments to renationalise hedged round with qualifications depending on how far privatisation has been achieved. Listening to Prescott parrot this latest line, while Tory MPs take the rare chance to run rings around him, shows just how much damage these fudges inflict even on Labour’s better advocates.
Coupled with the retreat over Clause Four, this turn of policy may yet haunt Blair. Privatisation is more unpopular than it has ever been and many would vote Labour to keep the railways nationalised. A recent survey showed that 85, 74 and 75 percent wanted water, gas and electricity back in the public sector. Even among Tory voters, 39 and 43 percent wanted water and gas in public ownership.
The co-author of this survey, Patrick Seyd, was quoted recently:
‘I think there is no doubt that Blair made a huge blunder in not making a commitment over the railways. Alarm bells began to ring that there was a hidden agenda. So long as party members feel that public ownership is not being eliminated entirely, he would get the support of a majority of individual members.’
Blair claims that he will only consider what to do with the railways when and if they are privatised – something which he claims the Tories will not be able to achieve in the first place. But Labour’s vacillation over whether to take rail back into private ownership will only make it easier for the Tories to go ahead with privatisation in the first place. One of the strongest arguments put by Labour during the parliamentary debates on privatisation of rail was that a Labour government would certainly renationalise the industry – so deterring potential shareholders.
Yet ‘New Labour’ under Blair has fought shy of any commitment to spending which would in any way deter those in business and within the capitalist class who have so enthusiastically backed the Tories over the past 15 years. These people are only even contemplating backing Labour today because they fear the Tories have lost all electoral credibility.
The contradiction facing Blair is that he is still pulling Labour further to the right at a time when opinion among the bulk of Labour’s potential voters is, if anything, moving to the left. A poll at the time of the Labour Party conference showed big majorities supporting a minimum wage (which Labour refuses to fix a level for), renationalisation of the utilities, the social chapter of the Maastricht Treaty, a wealth tax and more state intervention in the economy.
Behind the disagreements with Blair lies a fear that he is really no different from the sort of Labour MP who split the party in the early 1980s through forming the SDP. Some of the MEPs whom Blair described as ‘infantile’ certainly put him in that category. But even his close friends seem to regard him in a similar light.
Extracts from a forthcoming biography of Blair by John Rentoul describe the dilemma faced by fellow Labour right winger Gordon Brown when deciding whether he should run against Blair in the leadership contest. Rentoul writes:
‘He [Brown] knew he could win only by “calling on such dark and awful forces” that it would negate the attempt. It would mean having to portray Blair as SDP non-Labour, anti-trade union. It would have been an appalling campaign which might have damaged the party’s chances – and thus his own – of gaining office.’
The modernisers are revealed here as people who want to break all links with Labour’s past as a working class party, to create a party which can manage the market system, only with more humanity and social conscience than the Tories.
Their model is Bill Clinton’s Democratic Party, where Democrats vie with conservative Republicans to attack those living on welfare and take a hard line on crime. But Clinton’s two years in office should he instructive for Blair. He has been unable to implement plans to reform the private health care system in the US, mainly because the big capitalists and vested interests in the health industry refused to see their profits hit for the benefit of the majority of American workers. Now his conservative, cautious policies have led to a slump in his popularity while opening the way for a right wing Republican backlash.
Whatever Labour does, however much it bends over backwards to appease the ruling class, it is always going to lose out. Even the most timid declarations from Labour that the banks might make too much profit or that the big supermarket chains are monopolies lead to outrage in the City. The Economist said recently, ‘If Labour is to realise its aspirations, it has no choice but to learn to love, or at least tolerate, profits.’
This doesn’t bother Blair. But unfortunately for him the Labour Party is still a long way from becoming the open party of big business that the US Democratic Party represents. However right wing its leaders and however distorted the party’s aims become, it still has real connections with working class people, especially through the unions – the reason why the Labour Party was set up in the first place.
These links exercise some constraint on the modernisers. Although the trade union leaders themselves accept at least part of Blair’s agenda, they also understand that if Labour is to be at all distinct from the Tories it has to commit itself to a health service, public utilities, a more equal society.
It is also clear that millions of workers look to Labour as a means of improving their lives. Many who voted Tory throughout the 1980s are – if the polls are any indication – willing to trust Blair in a way that they did not trust Kinnock. But this says at least as much about how unpopular the Tories now are as it does about any real enthusiasm for the modernisers’ agenda.
They will expect something better for themselves and their children if they vote Labour. If Blair follows the dictates of the Economist and those who run the system, the workers who vote Labour will he sorely disappointed. Blair is caught between the interests of business and having to deliver at least something to those who expect so much after so many miserable years of Tory rule.
Already Blair has been forced to make more commitments to public ownership than he would like. Whether he is forced to make further concessions depends on whether he receives enough pressure from below, from those prepared to take action to defend education, jobs, the health service.
It also depends on whether we can continue to build a significant revolutionary alternative to Labour, before and after the election, which both tries to ensure a fight over all these issues, and also tries to give a voice to the demands of those who want real change, and who increasingly only see that happening through changing the whole system.
A nation of shareholders?
Going public – background to Clause Four
 






Millions saw the Second World War as a conflict between democracy and fascism. But was that how our rulers saw it, asks Lindsey German



The sacrifices of the generation which fought between 1939 and 1945 had saved democracy, said John Major in his introduction to the VE Day commemorative brochure. This view of the war as one to defend democracy against fascism is one with which those of us born in the years shortly after the war were brought up.
As the war went on, its successful conclusion became fused in people’s minds with ideas of radical social change. If industries could be effectively nationalised and labour directed during wartime, why could planning not be used in peacetime to better people’s lives? Why should full employment only be possible with rearmament, as was the case in the 1930s?
The war has been variously described as a good war or a people’s war, terms which denote both the large civilian and popular involvement in this war compared to previous ones, and the sense in which it was a watershed: a defence of democracy against dictatorship which would lead to the creation of a better world.
The ‘good war’ was seen by most working class people as different from the dreadful and seemingly pointless carnage of the First World War. It was also seen in a very different way by the various ruling classes around Europe.
In 1914 these ruling classes each had a simple aim: to win against the rival imperial powers. The cost four years later was great: instability in the victorious powers, revolution in the defeated ones. So by 1939, Europe’s rulers’ fear of being completely overthrown from below was greater than their fear of defeat in war by a rival power. This explains the splits in the ruling classes which led very often to collaboration with the fascists.
In every country occupied by the Nazis the repression of Jews, socialists, communists and trades unionists was at least as much directly by sections of their own rulers, backed by indigenous police and other forces, as it was by occupying Germans.
In France the collaborationist Vichy government was voted in by parliament. In Norway the name of the collaborator Quisling became internationally synonymous with ‘traitor’. In Holland Dutch fascists and military police rounded up Jews for the gas chambers.
There is little doubt that – had Britain been invaded – many Tory politicians and business men would have collaborated. The evidence from the only part occupied – the Channel Islands – shows that many people who resisted the Nazis were persecuted by the islands’ rulers.
Sections of the British ruling class were keen admirers of Hitler, including the former king (the Duke of Windsor), and cabinet ministers such as Lord Halifax.
Before the war, a strong section of the Tory party favoured accommodation to Hitler.
To the bulk of Europe’s population, therefore, the sense of the war as one for democracy was heightened by class hatred for those who wanted to collaborate. In Britain this took the form of hostility to those regarded as appeasers of Hitler – the ‘guilty men’. Many of these same people were blamed for inadequacies of defence, such as few public air raid shelters.
The standpoint of ordinary people in the colonies, however, was very different. For the mass of workers and peasants in India, Africa and the Far East the main enemy was the colonial powers. They did not live in democracies and suffered repression from their colonial rulers. Hardly surprisingly, they did not see the Germans as a bigger threat than the British.
When German and British armies were fighting in the desert not far from Cairo, many Egyptians wanted to see the British defeated. Krishna Menon, who went on to become foreign minister in an independent India said in early 1941:
‘We are not impressed by such things as “democratic imperialism”, there is no such thing, as there is no such thing as a vegetarian tiger ... There is no use in asking whether you would choose British imperialism or Nazism, it is like asking a fish if he wants to be fried in margarine or butter. He doesn’t want to be fried at all.’
The Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky – forced into exile by this time by Stalin – wrote in 1934:
‘A modern war between the great powers does not signify a conflict between democracy and fascism but a struggle of two imperialists for the redivision of the world. Moreover, the war must inevitably assume an international character and in both camps will be found fascist as well as “democratic” states.’
Of course in such a situation there might be aggressor and defender states, but nonetheless the imperialist aims on both sides were clear.
Churchill’s strength as a war leader, indeed, stemmed from his desire to protect Britain’s empire, which is why he was so keen to control the Mediterranean.
Against such a background, what attitude did the left take to the war? The main social democratic and Labour parties in the advanced capitalist counties supported the war, as they had done in 1914. In Britain Labour became part of the wartime coalition and indeed its ministers were absolutely central to ensuring wartime production and preventing strikes taking place.
The line of the various Communist Parties zigzagged according to the dictates of Stalin’s foreign policy. For years before the outbreak of war, the CPs had been arguing for ‘defence of the democracies’ against fascism. When war broke out in September 1939, their leaderships were initially enthusiastic. French CP leader Maurice Thorez volunteered to join the army.
However, the line had changed through the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact, and the war was now denounced as imperialist. The CP after much bitter argument and a change of leadership now denounced the war. The Russian paper Pravda in its May Day edition of 1940 talked of two peace loving nations, Germany and Russia.
By mid 1941 the line changed again as ‘peace loving’ Nazi Germany invaded the USSR. Now the CP raised no criticism of Churchill – one of Stalin’s main allies. It supported the war effort and was against strikes. In 1945 the CP wanted a national government of Churchill and Eden.
The Trotskyists were a tiny force internationally. They took a position against the war as an imperialist war, but recognised that it was not possible to simply call for the defeat of one’s own ruling class – as Lenin had done in the imperialist war of 1914 – without taking into account the special conditions which the existence of fascism created.
This did not mean capitulating to the governments of the ‘democracies’ as the main workers’ parties had done. It was necessary to defend democracy against fascism, but at the same time to look at the map of the class struggle rather than the military map to see how this could be done.
Trotsky argued this meant independent working class organisation and demands rather than trusting the capitalist state – however ‘democratic’ its form – to fight the Nazis. ‘If we remain in irreconcilable opposition to the most “democratic” government in time of peace, how can we take upon ourselves even a shadow of responsibility for it in time of war when all the infamies and crimes of capitalism take on a more brutal and bloody form?’
In effect the argument that he and his followers put is that workers wanted to defeat fascism, which they saw as the greatest threat. In order to do so they had to overthrow their own ruling class in order to fight better against the fascists.







This meant campaigning around class issues at home: backing strikes when workers were forced to carry the burden of higher productivity, fighting for adequate civil defence, supplies of food and housing, ensuring that workers’ living standards were not under attack. It also meant maintaining revolutionary organisation and producing a paper which campaigned against the policies of the ruling class.
Trotsky also explained that ‘if the proletariat should find it beyond its power to prevent war by means of revolution – and this is the only means of preventing war – the workers... will be forced to participate in the army and in war.’ He attacks individualist solutions of passive resistance or sabotage and goes on:
‘But just as in the factory the advanced worker feels himself a slave of capital, preparing for his liberation, so in the capitalist army too he feels himself a slave of imperialism. Compelled today to give his muscles and even his life, he does not surrender his revolutionary consciousness. He remains a fighter, learns how to use arms, explains even in the trenches the class meaning of war.’
The real aims of the ruling classes – the redivision of the world and the continued subordination of the working class and the masses – became more apparent as Hitler’s defeat loomed. When it became clear that Germany was losing the war, the ‘democratic’ governments did everything to prevent revolution and very often helped the fascists and other right wingers who they were supposedly fighting.
In occupied countries, the resistance movements were key to fighting for liberation from the Nazis. Nowhere were they seriously backed by the Allied powers. In Italy the Allies backed the government run by Marshal Badoglio, a fascist who opposed the partisans. France was liberated by the resistance, which was then disarmed by General de Gaulle and Maurice Thorez. Many Nazi war criminals were allowed to escape to the west and many pro-fascists were left in place in Germany and Italy.
Here the role of the CPs was crucial, in helping to disarm the working class and ensure that the revolutionary uprisings which ended the First World War did not recur at the end of the second. The concern of the rulers for democracy was such that they intervened to prevent popular movements coming to power in countries as far apart as Greece and Malaya after the war had come to a close. The Franco fascist dictatorship in Spain and its counterpart in Portugal were allowed to continue in ‘free Europe’ for another 30 years.
Ultimately the ruling classes were more interested in maintaining their own power than in any real freedom for those who had suffered during the war.
 



Uncle Vanya
by Anton Chekhov in a version by Frank McGuinness
Between the old order dying and the new one being born, a variety of morbid symptoms appear, argued the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci. He could have been describing this and the other plays of the Russian playwright Chekhov.
Uncle Vanya, subtitled ‘scenes from rural life’, is set on a Russian country estate at the end of the 19th century. Chekhov portrays the rural landowners, representatives of a class which is dying.
Vanya is an intelligent and sensitive man whose life has passed him by. He has worked the estate for the benefit of his hated brother-in-law the professor, Serebryakov, revered by the family but a worthless academic. ‘Not one page of his work will survive him’, says Vanya. But now for Vanya too ‘the fire has gone out’ because of ‘living in this backwater’.
Everyone – Vanya, the doctor Astrov with his forestry schemes, the professor, the women Sonya and Elena who are both unhappy in love – finds their lives unfulfilled and disappointing. At the end Vanya and Sonya return to running the estate. Work is seen as their salvation.
Yet we know that even this isn’t possible. The antiquated methods of working the land have led to tiny rates of return on the estates, a discontented peasantry and frustration among those like Astrov who have a more visionary view.
Only six years after Chekhov wrote Uncle Vanya, those same peasants rose up in revolution against their landlords, and in less than 20 years two revolutions swept this way of life away forever.
Chekhov has much sympathy for the old life even while he portrays it as doomed. The professor’s answer to low rates of profit is to sell up and invest in capital. His wife Elena remarks that ‘it’s only in modern novels that people have time for the peasants’. In contrast, representatives of the old values like Vanya and Sonya do have time for the peasants, but have no answer to their poverty.
This is an Irish Russian Chekhov, translated with beautiful dialogue by the Irish playwright Frank McGuinness and produced by the Derry theatre company Field Day. The frustrations of an Irish country estate of the same period are easy to imagine – so much so that references to vodka or noodles almost seem out of place.
The play is extremely well acted, especially by Stephen Rea in the title role who combines sarcasm with self pity to produce a Vanya who is both very funny and very sad. This production very successfully conveys a social sense of the ‘idiocy of rural life’ while at the same time giving the play a sense of urgency and dynamism sometimes missing from productions of Chekhov.
Plays at the Tricycle Theatre, Kilburn, London
 






The storm over the recent film Disclosure has thrown up debate about women’s sexual freedom and sexual liberation. Is the fight to end women’s oppression about ‘equality in a man’s world’ or should it be linked with the fight to end class society? Lindsey German investigates



‘I like my hair like I like my men – great looking and easily changed’ is the slogan on a current advert for shampoo. It’s a slogan that advertisers think will click with many women. And they are probably right. It’s now common to hear the same kind of attitudes expressed even by socialist women. Others in the same vein run along the lines. ‘At least Madonna’s a woman who’s in control.’ ‘If you push hard enough you can get your own way.’ ‘If a bloke makes a joke about the way I look, I just make a joke about the size of his ass.’ ‘I’m in control of my own sex life.’
A sexual revolution has taken place within the lifetime of most women. Images, attitudes and subjects of discussion that are commonplace today would have been unimaginable to people only 40 years ago.
Yet sometimes it seems that the demands for sexual liberation – which played such an important part in the radicalisation of the 1960s – have been turned upside down. It is as if sexism has made a comeback by masquerading as sexual liberation.
So sexual freedom is symbolised by the poster at every bus stop of Demi Moore on top of Michael Douglas. The demand for women’s equality is supposed to be met by turning women and men into sex objects – Club 18–30 advertises its holidays with a picture of a man in bulging underpants while the Chippendales draw in huge crowds of women to their shows.
The slogan ‘burn your bra’ – always more popular with the media than with ordinary women but nonetheless symbolic of a search for freedom from restrictive clothing designed to portray women’s bodies in a particular way – has been superceded. Now we have the Wonderbra ads – thought up by a woman and supposedly a sign not of women’s oppression but of assertiveness and control.
The subtext of all this is that women’s oppression no longer need concern us. Women can compete on equal terms with men. They no longer have to be sexually submissive. Their aggression comes from their personal stance, lifestyle and job. Indeed, in many areas they are becoming so successful that it is the traditionally dominant sex – men – who are under threat. (Michael Douglas has cornered the market in films perpetuating this view.)
The idea that inequality can be overcome with the right mixture of confidence and assertiveness is strongly reinforced by some of the new young postfeminist writers. Katie Roiphe made her name with a book, The Morning After, which argued that date rape (rape between acquaintances) was a figment of feminists’ imagination. Roiphe’s view that ‘there is a grey area in which someone’s rape may be another person’s bad night’ is an assault on the whole attempt m the 1960s and 1970s to demand that women should not be treated as sex objects in rape cases.
Only after much argument and campaigning did it become unacceptable for the judges, the police and the media to condemn a woman victim because of her dress, social life or sexual history. The move toward anonymity in court cases was a recognition that women did not usually make false claims of rape but on the contrary were often too distressed to make any complaint at all.
Seeing women as victims is, however, definitely out of fashion for the postfeminists. Roiphe feels that the issue of rape is used as a ‘call to arms’ for feminists and that it, like sexual harassment, is much exaggerated. Buy a new dress, put on some lipstick and snap out of it, seems to be the general message.
Naomi Wolf – more of a feminist than Katie Roiphe – also believes that no one will help a woman who doesn’t help herself. In Fire with Fire she argues that women need to show their power and if they are strong enough they can gain equality. She talks of the ‘genderquake’ in recent years and embraces ‘power feminism’. To her this means, ‘Learn from Madonna, Spike Lee and Bill Cosby: if you don’t like your group’s image in the media, decide on another image and seize the means of producing it.’
Wolf feels that ‘women deserve to feel that the qualities of stars and queens, of sensuality and beauty, can be theirs.’ Perhaps unsurprisingly, one of her great heroines of power feminism is Princess Diana.
What sums up both the images of aggressive and sexually predatory women and the notion of women becoming empowered on the same basis as men is that collective struggle is a thing of the past. We no longer need social conflict. Just celebrate identity and difference – or, as it used to be called, do your own thing.
This is women’s liberation viewed from the privileged comfort of the upper middle classes: a world of elite schools and universities, access to the media and lecture tours commanding high fees. Missing from the analysis is any real assessment of the world as it confronts millions of women. But many socialists and feminists who do not come from privileged backgrounds have accepted some of these attitudes, and prefer to see women’s liberation as about changing lifestyles and confidence in a world where greater social change seems a long way off.
Sexuality here becomes detached from wider society. The sexual revolution is not then about a more equal and fairer society, or about a complete transformation of social attitudes and values. It is about women becoming more like men, accepting all the inequalities there are in sexual relationships, but this time making sure that women come out on top.
In sexual attitudes as in so much else we see the limits of a women’s liberation which will not challenge the fundamental inequalities of a society whose major division is that of class.
And of course this sort of power feminism cannot really challenge any of the attacks on women’s rights which have come from right wingers over the 1980s and early 1990s. Instead, their answer to the ‘backlash’ they see against women’s rights is to get more women in positions of power.
Yet to pose power dressing strong women as the only possible opposition to a backward looking and male chauvinist reaction is to misinterpret both the real position of women today and any strategy for liberation. It also leads to an overestimation of the backlash and therefore a tendency towards stressing the individual solutions to women’s oppression so beloved of the postfeminists.
There has been an attack on some of the gains of women’s liberation inside the US in recent years. The general climate which has led to real wages being cut, massive public spending on new prisons and millions of people being denied any real welfare benefits has had its impact on the position of women. Single parents – especially young black women – have been scapegoated as ‘welfare queens’.
The vicious onslaught against ‘political correctness’ and the movement against affirmative action (positive discrimination) reflect the attempts of white middle class men – often given cover by career women who claim they can ‘make it on their own’ – to claw back the very limited concessions which blacks and women won in the 1960s and 1970s. In many recent rape cases it seems there are now two equally suffering victims: the accuser and the accused.
But we are not about to return to the 1950s. It may be fashionable to call women ‘babes’ and Barbie may be have made an astonishing comeback as a role model for some women. But that is not how most women are, not how they see themselves. The behaviour of the ‘new lads’ may be one of the less savoury aspects of the 1990s (old fashioned sexism dressed up as detached irony) but it does not result in women being pushed into the home in a way that the worst sorts of bigots would like.
Instead, women are on the labour market in unprecedented numbers, making up nearly half the workforce in Britain and over half in the US. They are the new flexible workers eulogised in the press. The unemployment rate for women in Britain is half what it is for men – showing that capitalism may be an exploitative system but it doesn’t necessarily always favour men for exploitation.
Although women’s wages are substantially lower than those of men taken overall, there has been a narrowing of the gap in some areas and for a layer of managerial and professional women there has been a fairly dramatic increase in earnings.
Indeed the growth of that layer of women has been one of the most notable social developments of the 1980s and 1990s. In 1991 in the US there were 2.3 million women with personal incomes over $50,000 a year. Around 7 percent of Hispanic, 7.4 percent of black and 11.9 percent of white women were executives or managers. Whereas in the early 1970s less than 5 percent of business masters degrees went to women, by the mid-1980s that had risen to 40 percent.
The change in women’s role – at work, with access to new careers and in higher education – has altered social attitudes. Most noticeably this is true of abortion, where a large majority of women favour the right to choose. Even right wing Republicans are reluctant to launch a frontal attack on abortion rights because they fear it is electorally unpopular. The ‘Contract with America’ on which the Republicans fought last year’s mid-term elections was conspicuously silent on abortion.
Attempts to roll back the clock for women always meet with spirited opposition because of women’s changed political role. Even the much maligned single parents have refused to accept attacks on welfare without a fight. Most women do not see why they should have to put up with unequal treatment, sexist remarks or have to choose whether they work or have children.
Even film and television programmes now reflect this change. Whether it is the distasteful Disclosure or the invigorating Thelma and Louise, women are much more likely to be given a role as independent beings. The material conditions in which women find themselves have incomparably more impact than the reactionary attitudes surrounding home and family which right wingers constantly reiterate.
But what the ‘backlash’ is able to do is create a more unfavourable ideological climate. Women’s problems become their own fault. If the burden of the family is too great then there are only individual solutions. If welfare is under attack, then women just have to accept more responsibilities in the home as well as going out to work.
There is therefore in the 1990s a strange combination of assertion of equality and a more egalitarian reality for millions of women, coupled with a shift to the right by those in government, media and other positions of power to blame the victims and put more pressure on individuals.
So what is really happening? Over the last 20 to 30 years more real women’s equality has developed – whether in pay, jobs or in reforms of the law. There has been much greater general acceptance of women’s equality over the same period.
But there has been an ideological backlash over the last 10 to 15 years. This has often been supported by middle class feminists and postfeminists keen to show that they can succeed in a ‘man’s world’. The backlash has only been partially successful, but does have resonance among some on the left. There has over the same 10 to 15 year period been an increasing attack on welfare. This is an attack on us all, although it does affect women in particular in some areas.
Some on the left have the attitude that we should adopt personal and sexual assertiveness in the here and now – while also arguing the need to go further in the transformation of society. But there is a difference between assertiveness which develops from political awareness and collective struggle, and assertiveness which is simply about ‘getting ahead’ of everyone else. The individual attitude puts a barrier between socialists and the majority of women who have little illusion that merely asserting themselves can reverse the disaster afflicting their society. In fact it can prevent unity of working class women and working class men by creating the impression that individual men are in reality the problem.
A theory of women’s liberation based on class is more essential than ever: oppression is part of a wider system which exploits and oppresses nearly everyone, which divides and rules on the basis of sex or race, which tries to turn everything – even human beings – into commodities to be bought and sold.
The postfeminists are ill equipped to develop or to understand such a theory. Their ideas represent the thin layer of managerial and professional women who have done so well out of the 1980s and who see their role as playing a part in the exploitation of the rest of us, or at best, trying to run the system in a slightly more humane way.
The aspiring Labour MPs around Emily’s List – the campaign to get more women into parliament – do not challenge the stereotypes of women’s oppression with their identical suits and neat haircuts. Rather they mimic their male middle class counterparts and have a simple demand: more jobs for the girls.
Most importantly, they have no way of really challenging those who have done even better out of the advances women have made in the past decades. Capitalism has an amazing ability to use the changes in society to its own advantage, even if the capitalists and their supporters have done little or nothing to bring these changes about.
The capitalists are quite happy to use greater sexual openness where once they counselled repression – so long as they can make a profit. The more sex becomes a commodity, the more everything connected with it – and even the sex act itself – becomes for sale on the open market. Hence the Chippendales, the lacy bras, Disclosure, Cosmopolitan and page three of the Sun.
Having sexual matters openly discussed and advertised is a step forward. It makes it very difficult for the church or reactionary governments to keep the wraps on sexuality and relationships, as they did in Portugal and Spain right up to the mid-1970s, or in Ireland till even more recently. It makes people more aware about aspects of sex and sexuality than they might otherwise have been. It makes society more open.
But treating sex – and people’s bodies – as objects to be bought and sold does not and cannot in itself lead to sexual liberation. That is why socialists have to go beyond the sexual stereotypes and beyond simply a postfeminist response to the question. Most socialist feminists don’t like the postfeminists. But because they too stress that individual men are the problem, they are incapable of developing a strategy for ending women’s oppression. Their main answer during the 1980s was to join the Labour Party – no wonder they now see individual solutions as the way forward.
The answer to women’s oppression is not ogling at the Chippendales or picking up a different man every night. However enjoyable or otherwise these occupations might be, making men into sex objects or admiring their penises – as Camille Paglia urges us to do – does not negate or abolish the inequality which women suffer.
A socialist response to sexual liberation should be one which recognises the stultifying and destructive effect that class society has on social and sexual relationships, and which understands that only a society where there is no competition, inequality or alienation can truly produce sexual freedom and liberation – not just for women but for all humanity.
When we stress the importance of a class analysis of women’s oppression therefore, it is not simply about our criticisms of middle class women. It is about developing a strategy which can end class society and the many inequalities – not least those of gender and sexuality – which it produces.
 



Theatres of Memory
Raphael Samuel
Verso £19.99
The cry that Britain has been turned into a massive historical theme park is common these days. Many feel uneasy that they are being asked to participate in the recreation of a mythical ‘national heritage’ which only serves to reinforce the most conservative values, and to play up the importance of our rulers and the rich through the ages.
Not so, says the historian Raphael Samuel, who in this first of three volumes about popular history and culture argues that the attempts by ordinary people to reclaim the past are to be welcomed.
Much of the movement for conservation has come not from right wingers but from the left. He points out:
‘The Body Shop emerged from Brighton counter-culture; the Campaign for Real Ale from beer-swilling radicals. Covent Garden, in its present form, sprang from a “community” agitation in which the newly radicalised students of the Architectural Association played a big part.’
Samuel castigates those who attack popular history and ‘heritage’. He sees them as dry academics who believe history is their exclusive preserve, or as elitist left wingers who look down on the involvement of the masses. His dislike of this snobbery is woven throughout the book as he celebrates different aspects of living history from below.
But there is a problem here. There is a difference between the various attempts, current especially since the 1960s, to express history from the point of view of the poor, the oppressed and exploited, and the portrayal of the past as a golden age of pastoral cottages, home baking and cobbled streets.
Most of what passes for ‘heritage’ today hinges on the second interpretation, and even when it focuses on the farm labourer and mill worker rather than on the stately home owner, it tends to sanitise the past rather than give a more rounded view.
Surely this is precisely the point of the critics of the heritage industry. The past is presented as a comfortable never never world, without misery or destitution, let alone class struggle or conflict.
And those who seek to present it in this way have their own political agenda. It is usually the people who defend ‘heritage’ who also believe that history is a packaged past, not something which living men and women are constantly in the process of creating. Samuel half recognises this. He says for example, ‘The historicist turn in British culture coincided with the decline of Labour as a mass membership party, with the demise ... of socialism as a worker’s faith.’
This should lead him to extreme caution about the whole heritage industry, but it does not because he somehow conflates ‘heritage’ with popular history or culture. This makes Theatres of Memory a frustrating and in the end unsatisfactory book.
There are also some technical problems. Do we really need two chapters on Dickens, or, more particularly, Samuel’s critique of the film Little Dorrit (they are reprints from two different publications)? His criticism of the film does, however, provide a good example of the double bind he is in. Here he argues that the present perception of Victorian ‘heritage’ prevents us from seeing an accurate view of Dickens’s London.
Christine Edzard’s film may be accurate in its period detail but ‘the critical and radical intentions ... are continually betrayed by the prettiness of the scenic properties.’ This is because of ‘an imaginative revolution which has taken place in perceptions of the Victorian past, and the altogether new value conservationism has given to “period” setting.’
The analysis strikes me as basically correct – but isn’t it what Patrick Wright was arguing in On Living in an Old Country? And doesn’t it contradict much of Samuel’s earlier thesis?
Socialists should surely welcome and applaud much conservation and any revolutionary struggle will involve defending much which is under threat from the ravages of capitalism.
But there has to be a distinction between preserving and rediscovering much of what has taken place in history and allowing those who want no change in the future to impose on us their version of the past.
 



Silvio Berlusconi – only ten months ago the triumphant victor in Italy’s elections – held office for only 226 days. Splits in the ruling right wing coalition led to votes of no confidence being tabled against the prime minister. He resigned to avoid the final humiliation of losing such a vote in the Italian parliament.
Last spring, Berlusconi was hailed on both the left and right as the new man who could overcome the historic weaknesses of Italian politics. His control of the media, it was argued, made him all powerful and allowed him to impose a new political agenda.
Nothing could have been more wrong. As we said last April, his government ‘will be extremely fragile. The right wing alliance in Italy has been cobbled together from three quite different and antagonistic forces.’ (April 1994 SR). The alliance between the right wing populist Northern League, the fascist MSI with its base in the south, and Berlusconi’s creation Forza Italia was a marriage of convenience which has now ended in a messy divorce.
One of Forza Italia’s strongest planks of appeal was its anti-party nature and its attacks on corruption. Many Italians who voted for it thought it would mean a new era free from corruption. But Berlusconi was very much a man of the old political system which is completely rotten. He was even a member of the Masonic P2 lodge, with close connections to right wing terrorism.
Now Berlusconi is himself entangled in the corruption allegations which brought down the previous government, his brother and business associate was given a prison sentence just before Xmas and his media monopoly has been judged unconstitutional. But the key reason for his demise was his failure to achieve the Thatcherite project he set himself.
Extra-parliamentary opposition was immense. In November 1.5 million people demonstrated in Rome against Berlusconi’s plan to cut state pensions. He was doomed from the moment that he backed off in the face of a general strike. It was then he lost the confidence of the Italian ruling class.
Berlusconi’s retreat on pensions marked the beginning of his downfall, and brought to the fore his open warfare with Northern League leader Umberto Bossi. As the Financial Times commented: ‘Not surprisingly, [Bossi] chose the moment the premier came under investigation for corruption by Milan magistrates and had been humiliated by unions threatening a general strike.’
At one point, Berlusconi threatened to call on his supporters to come on the streets in protest. Nothing happened.
As we went to press, Berlusconi and his fascist allies in the MSI were arguing that new elections should be called, but it is more likely that a new coalition government will be formed from other parties. This raises the prospect of the old parties who have dominated Italian politics since the war once again playing a central role. Bossi would like a government with the remnants of the old Christian Democrats and other centre parties.
The former Communists in the PDS – still one of the strongest single parties – talk of a grand coalition embracing all but the extremes of left and right. By this they mean the hard left Rifondazione Communista on the one hand, and the MSI on the other.
Yet such a government would continue the anti-working class policies of Berlusconi. The PDS would bend over backwards to be moderate and tell workers not to press their demands for fear of creating instability. And to equate Rifondazione with the fascists can only mislead Italian workers. Rifondazione, whatever its political weaknesses, wants to build opposition to ruling class and government attacks. The fascists are out to destroy working class organisation.
The Italian situation demonstrates how polarised politics are. The tragedy is that no one in Italy is really building on the successes of the trade union campaign against the pensions law, nor are they presenting any kind of socialist alternative to the policies put forward by the PDS.
The danger in this situation is that the fascists can grow from the weakness and divisions of the other right wing parties. While Berlusconi himself could not create a stable government, he could pave the way for the much greater threat of Gianfranco Fini’s MSI. However, recent local elections results were not good for the fascists, even in their traditional stronghold of the south.
The volatility of Italian politics means that they are not at all certain to benefit from the collapse of this government. Their base is still based on voting rather than organised support on the streets and is therefore much more susceptible. But their longer term defeat depends on the mobilisation of the left and organised workers.
The strength of the mobilisations in recent months demonstrate that the Italian working class movement is still one of the most militant and best organised in Europe. The test in the coming months is whether it can move onto the offensive against continued government attempts to make it pay for the crisis, or whether it will yet again be sidetracked by the role of the PDS in particular.
The whole government crisis demonstrates the inherent weakness and instability of Italian capitalism. And the problems remain. The budget deficit is still there. All of which suggests big battles ahead.
 



At a banquet in London last May the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, drew a sketch on the back of his menu card. It was a map of Bosnia as he predicted it would look in ten years time, partitioned between Serbia and Croatia. The dinner gathered together various heads of state and other dignitaries to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of VE Day (to which Tudjman, was invited despite his pro-fascist sympathies). Few of them – including Tudjman, himself – could have predicted that the war in the former Yugoslavia was about to take so dramatic a turn against the Bosnian Serbs and that only months later the sketch map would bear a much closer resemblance to reality.
Events in the former Yugoslavia have moved so fast in recent months that the balance of forces in the region has changed completely. Calls for Western intervention and for arming the Bosnian government have been heeded by the US and its allies with predictably bloody consequences. The relative weakness of the Bosnian government’s military forces has been largely overcome by NATO air strikes which destroyed many of the Bosnian Serb defences. The displacement of the Krajina Serbs and Bosnian Serbs represents the biggest movement of refugees in Europe since the Second World War. There are more and more stories of atrocities against Serbs, although most of them tend to get very little publicity in the Western media, in strong contrast to the stories of atrocities committed by Serbs against Muslims or Croats.
Dreams of the Serb nationalists of a Greater Serbia have turned to nothing as Serbs have been ethnically cleansed from whole swathes of Bosnia and Krajina. The Serbian government has not lifted a finger to help them.
The shift in the balance of forces has led to the latest peace plan, brokered by the Americans and cementing the current ethnic partition of the region. The peace deal allows a state which is 51 percent Croat-Muslim federation and 49 percent Serb. But there is little doubt which state will be dominant in the federation. As The Economist puts it, ‘Mr Tudjman can probably have his cake and eat it: he can win Western plaudits for backing the Bosnian federation, knowing that despite its nominal independence and multi-ethnic constitution, it is likely to consist of little more than a Muslim statelet and a Croat statelet, and to be dependent on Croatia itself’. [1]
The reversal of Tudjman’s fortunes has been made possible by one crucial element: the intervention of the Western powers, especially the US. The latest phase of the war has quite clearly seen Bosnian and Croatian forces on the ground moving in step with the wishes of the US. The Bosnian government offensive to drive a wide corridor between Sarajevo and most Bosnian territory and Croatia’s attack on Western Slavonia have both taken place alongside increased NATO intervention. So NATO jets attacked Serb positions at the end of May shortly before the Bosnian government launched its offensive. The Croatian invasion of the Serb area of Krajina – called Operation Storm recalling the Desert Storm invasion during the Gulf War – began soon after the conclusion of a military pact between the Croatian and Bosnian governments which was witnessed by the US ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith. The September Bosnian-Croat offensive against large chunks of Bosnian Serb territory was greatly helped by the destruction of the Bosnian Serb ‘nervous system’ – their defences and ammunition dumps – by NATO air strikes.
Despite much talk heralding peace, the most likely outcome is still instability and war, leading to misery for the vast majority of ordinary people of every nationality who have to live in the hell that the various republics have become. One journalist compared the current situation in Eastern Slavonia (which borders Serbia proper and which Tudjman has made noises about invading) with the situation just before war broke out in 1991: ‘[War in Eastern Slavonia] will seem as certain as the war of 1991 seemed more than four years ago, when politicians crowed about peace and distraught villagers waited for war’. [2]
The resurgence of Croat and Bosnian government forces and the decisive intervention of the US have vindicated those who argued that this is a war in which socialists should not take sides. It is a war of repartition which, by definition, will discriminate in turn against different sections of the population simply because of their ethnic origin. In such circumstances, the intervention of the Western imperialist powers can only make things worse. The events of recent months have borne out this view. However, there are many on the left who almost wilfully ignore recent developments, preferring to continue to paint the Serbs as ‘fascist aggressors’ and the Muslims, and to a lesser extent Croats, as innocent victims. Taking such a view means accepting fairly uncritically many of the nationalist views of the Croatian and Bosnian governments.’ [3]
So the recent suffering of the Krajina Serbs and many Bosnian Serbs has left many people cold. The Independent’s editorial for 7 August, after Tudjman’s blitzkrieg victory in the Krajina, began:
It is tempting to feel euphoric about this weekend’s Serbian defeat at the hands of the Croats. At last, the Serbs have been taught an overdue lesson, given a dose of the medicine that they have so freely administered in recent weeks to Bosnia’s Muslims.’ [4]
Former Labour Party leader Michael Foot wrote three weeks after the invasion, ‘The idea that the Croatian authorities were suddenly themselves adopting a policy of ethnic cleansing was a wicked lie’. [5]
Some liberals and left wingers have always seen the Muslims as the victims in this war. Indeed, some of them have even seen Croatia as the underdog. ‘Serb aggression’ has been blamed on the whole Serb population rather than on the nationalist military and political leaders. Such politics leave their advocates disarmed in the face of the many reports of atrocities in Krajina and the Bosnian Serb areas in recent months, and of a refugee problem on a massive scale, with an estimated 250,000 Serbs on the move since August, and without any sense of solution to the war.
’Siding with the victim’ should in logic now lead such people to demonstrate some sympathy and support for the Bosnian Serbs. Instead much ‘respectable’ liberal opinion is prepared to turn a blind eye to atrocities and injustices, including some of the worst ethnic cleansing of the war.
Yet now, more than ever, it is becoming apparent that there can be no winners apart from the nationalist leaders, the ruling classes who back them and the imperialist powers. The losers are those, from whatever background, who favour democracy, multi-ethnicity or any form of socialist solution to the problems of the region.
 
The invasion of Krajina
The latest phase of the war began last May when Muslim and Croat forces started new military offensives in order to seize back land which the Serbs took at the beginning of the war four years ago. The Croat invasion of Western Slavonia in May was in many ways a dress rehearsal for the invasion of Krajina in August. In June the Bosnian government went on the offensive too in order to ensure a corridor of land between most of its territories and Sarajevo. Then came the Bosnian-Croatian military pact, midwife to the Croatian army’s invasion of the Krajina.
Krajina means, literally, frontier – the buffer zone on the edge of the old Austro-Hungarian Empire peopled by Serbs who had traditionally backed the Austrians against the Ottoman Turkish Empire. Today the area and its main town of Knin are strategically important to Croatia, lying between the capital Zagreb and the coastal resorts. The Serb dominated area wanted to remain with the former Yugoslavia when Croatia declared independence in 1991. The invasion this summer was to destroy the Serb republic of Krajina and to drive the vast majority of its Serb inhabitants to flee either to Bosnian Serb territory or to Serbia itself, as they feared (accurately) that the war would follow them east and northwards. The traditional Serb population in this Serb dominated area of Croatia were turned out of homes and farms. The invasion was completed within days, with devastating consequences. An estimated 150,000 Krajina Serbs were on the move in front of the advancing armies. The effect of the military pact between Croatia and Bosnia became clear: the invasion allowed the Muslims to break the siege of the Bihac pocket in north western Bosnia, while Croatia went ahead with its offensive.
The Croatian army recaptured a Serb dominated area populated by Serbs for over 300 years. Krajina Serbs were forced out through a campaign of atrocities which led to the biggest single displacement of population of the war. Serb villages were looted and burned, farm livestock was killed and there were many instances of killings of older Serbs and anyone else who was left in the area. The motives of the Croatian army were clear. The Washington Post reported that ‘human rights observers said the burning of homes and killing of livestock are designed to dissuade Serb refugees from returning’. [6] A United Nations spokesman was reported as saying two weeks after the invasion, ‘Krajina is literally ablaze. There are villages which were turned into a living hell by the Croatian army. We have lists of villages where as many as 80 percent of the homes were torched.’ Another observer said that an estimated four fifths of buildings in the Knin area of Krajina had been damaged ‘by organised burning and looting’ on the part of Croatian army and civilian police. [7]
The reaction of the Western media, echoing their rulers in the respective countries, has been to turn their backs on such atrocities. There have been no calls for air strikes against Croatia, no indicting of Tudjman, or his generals for war crimes against a civilian population (unlike the treatment meted out to the Bosnian Serbs) and indeed a denial that many of the worst atrocities have even taken place. As The Economist commented ironically just after the invasion:
Since the Croats did not load Serbs onto buses at gunpoint, as the Serbs themselves did to Muslims when they overran the eastern enclaves last month, the Croats argue that this is not ethnic cleansing, but flight. To the Krajina Serbs, who feared that their throats would be cut if they stayed, the distinction is not clear. [8]
The Krajina Serbs were right to fear for their lives. The Croatian authorities have denied looting, pillaging and killings by their troops – blaming any atrocity which is backed by hard evidence on ‘uncontrolled elements’ – but eyewitnesses on the ground tell a different story. Within days of the Croatian army victory, civilian Croats driving cars with Zagreb number plates were seen looting empty homes near Glina in Krajina. [9] Serbs were not only driven out of areas which had been their home for generations, but signs were changed from the Cyrillic (Serbian) script to the Latin (Croatian) one, and Orthodox churches were destroyed.
Reports coming out of Krajina rapidly demonstrated that even worse events were taking place. The journalist Robert Fisk filed a series of reports in the Independent which are notable for their honesty. His reports paint a devastating picture of ethnic cleansing fuelled by sheer terror. For example, Fisk reports on 4 September 1995 how every house in the town of Kistanje had been destroyed by the Croat army. He quotes a confidential document from the European Union assessing the situation in the region which, as he says, speaks for itself:
Evidence of atrocities; an average of six corpses per day, continues to emerge ... the corpses, some fresh, some decomposed, are mainly of old men. Many have been shot in the back of the head or had throats slit, others have been mutilated. Isolated pockets of elderly civilians report people recently gone missing or detained ... Endless [Croat] invitations for Serbs to return, guarantees of citizens’ rights and property rights etc., have gushed forth from all levels ... However, Serbian homes and lands continue to be torched and looted.
Contrary to official statements blaming it on fleeing Serbs and uncontrollable elements, the crimes have been perpetrated by the HV [Croatian army], the CR [Croatian] police and CR civilians. There have been no observed attempts to stop it and the indications point to a scorched-earth policy. [10]
Fisk also records a United Nations report which details the deaths of a whole number of elderly Serbs in Krajina and his personal encounter with three Croatian soldiers engaged in burning and looting a Serb farmhouse. [11]
The invasion of Krajina marked a turning point. It began the offensive which spread throughout western Bosnia displacing tens of thousands more Serbs, thus putting the Croatian and Bosnian government forces clearly at an advantage in any subsequent carve up of land.
The incredible speed with which the Croatian forces took Krajina gave the military and the politicians the confidence and the impetus to go further. The Croatian and Bosnian military launched the attack on the Serb held lands of western Bosnia, thereby setting about redrawing the boundaries of the Bosnian republic. They achieved by force in a matter of weeks more than had been achieved in the previous year.
But none of this would have been possible without the NATO air strikes. The combined Croatian and Bosnian Muslim armies far outnumbered the Bosnian Serbs even before this latest offensive, with an estimated 65,000 active troops plus another 15,000 reserves in the Bosnian Serb army, while the Croatian army alone has 105,000 active and 120,000 reserves, and the Bosnian Muslims have another 160,000. The Bosnian Serbs have traditionally been better equipped – although they are now matched by the Croats in many areas, and outgunned by the combined weaponry of the two allied armies. US mercenaries have been used to train Bosnian troops in a ‘boot camp’ for the army. The Croatian army also receives training from a US firm, Military Professional Resources of Virginia, which sends retired US army officers to teach at the Zagreb military academy. [12]
The NATO bombing was decisive in establishing the dominance of an already numerically superior force, with increasingly good training and better equipment, by wiping out their enemy’s defensive equipment. NATO launched its air strikes in early September following the shelling of Sarajevo by Bosnian Serb artillery. This provided the pretext which the Western powers needed to bring the war to what they hoped would be its final phase. The battle begun in Western Slavonia in May could be ended only if the already strengthened Croatian and Bosnian armies could be helped decisively by what one journalist described as ‘a fearsome display of military superiority’ which only the Western powers could provide. [13]
The NATO tactic was not simply to push the Bosnian Serbs back from Sarajevo; in addition it was to fatally weaken them just as the Croatian and Bosnian armies were advancing. NATO aircraft flew a total of 3,400 sorties attacking 56 targets with 350 aiming points within them.
NATO took out the Serbs’ most valuable cards, negating their most decisive advantages. NATO attacked the Serbs’ ammunition and armaments manufacture and repair facilities – their most obvious advantage over the more numerous but less well-armed Muslims.
But, more important still, NATO punched out the Serbs’ eyes and the nervous system of the Serb military machine. And one of the areas that they concentrated on was around Banja Luka, where there were strong air defences – the area where the most recent Croat and Muslim advances have since taken place. [14]
In public the Western powers urged the Bosnian and Croatian governments not to take advantage of the bombings. In practice, however, their advance could never have been so swift – moving through western Bosnia until they were within a short distance of the Bosnian Serb stronghold of Banja Luka – without the air strikes and without the tacit acceptance of the NATO powers that these could only benefit the enemies of the Bosnian Serbs.
 
The peace process
As the war in former Yugoslavia took a more bloody turn so the latest round of ‘peace talks’ got under way in Geneva. But in the short term the background to the talks saw the different powers in the former Yugoslavia fighting to gain and retain as much land as possible. The fighting has achieved what diplomacy was unable to do and the Bosnian Serbs were forced onto less and less land: ‘The UN estimates that in the past month or so the proportion of land held by the rebels [Bosnian Serbs] has fallen from around 72 percent to around 55 percent’, wrote one journalist, Emma Daly, in mid-September. [15]
The formal peace plan – with 51 percent to the Croat-Muslim federation and 49 percent to a Bosnian Serb republic – represents a military fait accompli. The US sees this as vitally important. It has intervened to ensure that the Bosnian Serbs were sufficiently on the defensive that they would have to come to the negotiating table. The Bosnian government has had to rely heavily both on NATO air strikes and on the militarily superior Croatian army to take much of the land they have conquered in recent months. There were reports just before the ceasefire of the Bosnian Serbs regaining small areas of land, with the Bosnian government’s army finding it difficult to hold its lines.
Those who hope that the settlement brokered by the US will result in a lasting peace are more than likely to be disappointed. Most importantly, the proposed deal itself merely reinforces the ethnic divisions exacerbated by the war. As one diplomat put it, ‘If the peace sticks, what we’ve got is Greater Serbia, Greater Croatia and the Muslims as a self governing minority in Greater Croatia’. [16] As the article in which this source was quoted goes on to say,
We are now looking at ethnically pure states. There are virtually no Serbs left in Krajina in Croatia, although some 200,000 Serbs lived there until the Croat offensive. The enclave of Gorazde is the last puddle of Muslims left alive along the Drina valley in eastern Bosnia, one of the great historical centres of Muslim population. Despite their multi-ethnic policies, there are few Croats and Serbs left in the Muslim dominated Bosnian government territories around Tuzla and Zenica in central Bosnia.
‘Throughout the whole territory of Bosnia, ethnic cleansing is now nearly complete’, said Steve Curliss, of the UN High Commission for Refugees, after the fall of Zepa in July. Since Curliss said this, the UNHCR estimates that 417,000 people have left their homes in Bosnia and Croatia. These are the last tectonic shifts of ethnic cleansing. [17]
The ceasefire was from its very inception likely to cause still further ethnic cleansing. The day after it came into effect it was reported that, ‘Some 40,000 Serb refugees were moving east last night towards Banja Luka from the newly fallen towns. At the same time, thousands of the remaining Muslim residents of Serb held northern Bosnia had been forcibly expelled across the front lines by Serbs’. [18] There were an estimated 20,000 Muslims around Banja Luka until the ceasefire, all of whom were expected to be forcibly moved.
In any case, the deal is unlikely to work even in its own terms. There is still much dealing to be done, for example over Sarajevo, where Bosnian Croats want their own special sector of the city and the Serbs want it partitioned. The Bosnian government wants it intact as the capital city of Bosnia. Also much disputed are the narrow corridors of land which link the Muslim held Gorazde to other Muslim areas, and the Brcko corridor which links Serb areas in eastern Bosnia with Serb areas in the north round Banja Luka.
The plan is for a Peace Implemenentation Force to go into Bosnia to replace the discredited UN forces, many of whom will be withdrawn. These UN troops at present number around 28,000; the PIF will comprise 60,000 troops of whom one third will be US troops – and the total force is planned to be under US military command, although in the name of NATO. This represents an escalation of outside intervention, not a decline, with all the problems that entails. As one commentator spelt out:
Intervention by outside forces has achieved precious little. Arguably, it has actually made the killing worse by prolonging the agony. Unarguably, it has done potentially irreparable damage to the Western alliance and to the standing of the United Nations. Peace has become a US show, implemented to raise the standing of President Bill Clinton in the eyes of his own electorate. US support of Croatia has upset the Russians and disturbed the Europeans. [19]
None of the parties directly concerned is particularly happy with the deal. The initial ceasefire came and went as all sides jockeyed for control of more land. The Bosnian government has taken advantage of its favoured position vis-a-vis the US government to hold out for more of its demands. For example, in the days before the original ceasefire date of 10 October 1995, the Bosnian government insisted on ‘a tough NATO response’ to violence in the Tuzla area as one of its conditions for the truce. [20]
The Croatian government will be happy with the Croat-Muslim federation which has control over the majority of Bosnia. But Croatia’s expansionist aims have still not been satisfied. The army’s success in the invasion of Krajina over the summer prompted calls for Croatia to take Eastern Slavonia, the last remaining Serb controlled area of Croatia. The area borders directly onto Serbia and there are fears that this would result in war between Croatia and Serbia. The UN inspired ceasefire there expires in November and Croatia has said that it will take the region forcibly if ‘peaceful reintegration’ is not achieved by then. Retaking Eastern Slavonia was one of the main themes of the recent election campaign in Croatia.
The US ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith, has desperately tried to broker a deal which allows the Croats to regain control of the area after a period of transition. However, the Serbs want this period to be five years rather than the 18 months favoured by the Croats, and, having witnessed the experience of the Krajina Serbs, they may be more than reluctant to come to any peaceful agreement. [21]
The Bosnian Serbs have found themselves forced onto the defensive in recent months, and have been in no position to go on the offensive in terms of territory or demands. Serbia has done nothing to help them, and its President Milosevic has been instrumental in agreeing to the peace talks.
The international implications of the deal are no more encouraging. The US feels that it has done well in Bosnia. Peter Galbraith describes the Croat-Muslim federation as ‘the cornerstone of our policy in the region’. [22] But there is unease among many of the other powers. Russia in particular has felt completely squeezed from an area where previously it had some influence. It also feels that NATO is playing too big a role in the area. Russian nationalists have urged Russian President Yeltsin to do more to help ethnic Serbs, and the Russian Duma has passed a resolution calling for the lifting of UN sanctions against Serbia and for imposing an embargo on Croatia. Hence the West’s desire to pull Russia in more closely to the proposed peace, expressing a wish to use Russian troops in the Peace Implementation Force.
Britain has been dragged along in the wake of the NATO air strikes and US diplomacy, but is disturbed by the diminished role of the UN, and its own lack of an independent voice in the maelstrom which is Bosnian politics. France under Chirac has taken a more aggressive stand than under the Mitterrand presidency. But both powers find themselves unhappy to be in the shadow of the US.
None of the powers, except possibly the Americans, are at all certain that the latest deal will succeed. But they see no real alternatives. The collapse of the former Yugoslavia has been aided and abetted by the various Western powers using incredibly cynical manoeuvres. Recognition of the independent states of Slovenia and Croatia by the most powerful EU state, Germany, at the end of 1991 helped to push the different republics to all out war and ensure that Bosnia would be carved up. This recognition came despite warnings that it was premature from, among others, the UN secretary general, Perez de Cuellar. Although Germany’s decision was allegedly based on recognising the independence of any who wanted it, in fact the German government refused to recognise another ex-Yugoslav republic, Macedonia, because fellow EU partner Greece was opposed to such a move.
Britain was persuaded to support the recognition of Croatia in return for generous German backing on the Maastricht Treaty opt out. [23] So the recognition came from a newly united Germany determined to make its diplomatic mark on the European scene, backed by a British Tory prime minister desperate to appease his own party and convince them that he was not making too many concessions to a federal Europe!
Since then the various Western powers have backed different warlords for their own particular ends. They have backed Milosevic and the Serbs when they thought this was the chance of holding the former Yugoslavia together – under however nasty a nationalist regime. Now the major powers are prepared to back Croatian expansionism as a means of preserving ‘peace’ in the area, and all in the name of the underdog, the Bosnian Muslims. However, this means ignoring the atrocities committed by their current allies. So it is that an EU report about widespread Croat atrocities in Krajina is unlikely to be made public. As The Guardian says:
Croatia is seen as a potential partner and is expected to join the Council of Europe next year. ‘I think that at the end of the day, there’s enough of an understanding with Croatia to let sleeping dogs lie’, a European diplomat said. ‘It does leave a bad taste in people’s mouths but if one of the prices of a peaceful settlement will be closer relations between the EU, Croatia and the others, then so be it’. [24]
The UN has taken a similar double standard approach. A recent statement on atrocities in Krajina ‘was mild, saying only that the UN was “seriously concerned” for ethnic Serbs left in Krajina. A diplomatic source had an explanation for the tone: “Croatia is far too important geopolitically at the moment for the UN to make a fuss”.’ [25]
These statements simply sum up the complete cynicism with which the West has intervened. It has brought the region no nearer to real peace, and has been prepared to tolerate atrocities as long as they fit in with Western interests. The result of Western intervention has meant that things have become much worse. The latest peace deal presents no answer to those in the region who want a multi-ethnic and peaceful solution.
 
The biggest bully in the Balkans
The increasingly dominant and most ruthless player in the whole region is the US government. The latest stage of the war has been engineered and directed by and in its interests. The US ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith – son of the establishment liberal J K Galbraith – has played an absolutely central role in getting the Croatian and Bosnian governments together, persuading them into military alliance and then federation, ensuring that the Western powers are prepared to back this federation while keeping the Russians on board in the whole peace process. Galbraith has acquiesced and indeed encouraged the invasion of Krajina. His reference in the Croatian airlines magazine (!) to the Krajina Serbs as ‘so called local Serbs’, despite their having lived in the area for hundreds of years, gives some feel of the US determination to ride roughshod over reality in order to get their way, regardless of the human cost. According to the Washington Post:
US officials, concerned with providing a counterweight to Serbia, helped Croatia avoid sanctions in 1993. Ambassador Peter Galbraith led the US effort to stop the Muslim Croat war and helped hammer out a new mandate for the UN peacekeeping force in Croatia earlier this year. As part of the mandate, the UN Security Council passed a resolution recognising Croatia’s territorial integrity. Croatia used that ... resolution as a legal justification for launching Operation Storm. [26]
It is clear that the present US envoy who has brokered the peace, Richard Holbrooke, has only been able to do so because the ground has been laid by the brutal escalation of the war in recent months. In short, the Bosnian Serb leaders have been forced to the negotiating table very largely by US efforts aimed at strengthening their opponents and putting pressure on their allies. So while Milosevic put pressure on the Bosnian Serbs up to two years ago, limiting their supplies from Serbia, at the same time, ‘Mr Galbraith cracked Muslim and Croat heads together and told them they would never recover territory lost to the Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia unless they stopped fighting each other and formed a common front ... with Mr Galbraith’s encouragement, Croatia built up a well-trained and well-equipped army capable of taking on the Serbs’. [27]
The US has been busy elsewhere in the region. It again was responsible for the deal in September this year between Greece and the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia. The region has been a source of anxiety and instability since the break up of Yugoslavia, when Greece, backed by Serbia, refused to recognise any state taking the name of Macedonia. The new deal allows Greece to recognise the republic, but under a different name. The US, which has 1,000 of its troops stationed on Macedonia’s border with Serbia, is also linking the Bosnian peace deal with recognition.
The US tactic is to deploy a combination of bribery and brute force which will make all the players accept the existing division of land in Bosnia which corresponds relatively closely to the peace plan. US military superiority will do the rest. They fear what they call a ‘Berlin style solution’ in Bosnia where different segments are policed by their respective international supporters – for example, the Russians in Bosnian Serb territories. To this end, they are willing to pull the Russians onto their side – even talking about creating a NATO peacekeeping body which consists of the 16 NATO countries plus Russia. Peace through strength seems to be the US slogan. It and its allies want:
the dispatch of a powerful force early on to deter last minute grabs for extra land by one side or other... Once this force is in place, the alliance hopes it can persuade the better armed belligerents to reduce their own forces. Otherwise, Washington would be happy to see the less well-equipped Muslim army ‘professionalised and retrained’. [28]
The Financial Times reported recently that Richard Holbrooke ‘does not see any contradiction... in mediating the peace while... training, and even re-equipping, the Bosnian army.’ At the same time, he is trying to get the Muslim fundamentalist volunteers inside the Bosnian army to leave the country. [29]
Whether the US and its allies will be able to enforce the deal remains an open question. But there is no doubt that the misery, chaos and divisions which at present exist in former Yugoslavia will not be helped by such intervention. Rather it is likely to strengthen many of the nastier elements in each respective ethnic group. Certainly the US has had no qualms about backing policies and methods which are a very long way from the peace and democracy which it publicly professes.
 
Should the left take sides?
The demand to take the side of Bosnia in this dispute has been widespread on the left. But any serious evaluation of the various Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian authorities reveals similar features: politicians and party bosses who have been prepared to use nationalist rhetoric in order to bolster their support and to strengthen their own and their supporters’ positions; relatively small if extremely unpleasant groups of brutal nationalists and ethnic cleansers who have used rape, torture and killing to get their way and who have often been at least covertly sanctioned by their ‘respectable’ political leaders; and the mass of ordinary people who have lived in some sort of peaceful coexistence with members of other ethnic groups for decades, and who now face the choice of fleeing for their lives, leaving homes and possessions behind, or of seeing their erstwhile neighbours and friends having to flee.
These are the real victims of this war and theirs is a suffering of which the Western rulers know little and care even less. Given this, it is astonishing how even now there are individual stories of decency and humanity. But any chance of nurturing that decency is rapidly and surely being squeezed out in the name of revenge, or ‘sticking with one’s own’, or having to back one particular ethnic group.
Those media commentators who only highlight the atrocities of one group and ignore those of the others are simply helping to shore up the nationalism and ethnic hatred. Misha Glenny begins one of the chapters of his The Fall of Yugoslavia with three separate personal descriptions from a Croat refugee in Zagreb, a Muslim refugee in Sarajevo and a Serb refugee in Belgrade. All are completely horrific and all could apply to any of the ethnic groups. [30] Glenny is extremely critical of the nationalists on all sides, and has a strong distaste for the Serb nationalists, but this does not cloud his judgement about the facts. Indeed, he argues repeatedly that the Serbs are systematically treated unfairly in the Western media.
He points out, for example, that despite the idea that the Serbs are the main aggressors in the region, the Croats too should have had UN sanctions imposed on them in 1992, since they were in violation of a UN resolution. Instead they received only a slap on the wrist, enabling their economy to perform much better than Serbia’s. [31] He also points out that ‘the majority of UNPROFOR members and aid workers who have died during this conflict have been the victims of Muslim units and, to a lesser extent, Croat ones’. [32] The reason they have got away with this, says Glenny, is that they have won the propaganda war in the Western media. They have constantly used this sympathy to launch attacks which are barely reported; when Serbian nationalists have retaliated – often in a brutal fashion – this is condemned by the West without the original attack being mentioned. [33] The same is true when it comes to questions of killings, rapes and other atrocities, when much more space in Western newspapers is devoted to the crimes of the Bosnian Serbs than to any other. But what of the various regimes themselves?
 
Serbia
It is commonplace on the left to regard the Serbian state as by far the most dictatorial of the three players in the war. Indeed some even regard it as fascist. Actually the regime is unpleasant, right wing and nationalistic – although this does not distinguish it in qualitative terms from that of Tudjman in Croatia. But it is far from being a fascist regime, where the working class movement has been totally crushed. Its leader, Slobodan Milosevic, is a nasty, right wing, careerist politician who has used nationalism and war in order to strengthen his position and to isolate liberal or left wing opponents. But the nationalism of Milosevic is much more opportunist than it is deeply ideological. In the late 1980s he managed to deflect political and industrial protest which was resulting from the economic crisis in the former Yugoslavia by playing the nationalist card. When the crisis caused by trying to hold the confederation together led to moves for independence from the various republics, Milosevic greatly exacerbated fears that Serbs within Croatia and Bosnia were under the most dire threat and so helped to fuel further national antagonisms. However, he also took a pragmatic view towards the independence of the republics. By January 1991:
Milosevic had already decided; if Yugoslavia could not be salvaged and centralised, then the Croats, like the Slovenes, would be allowed to go. But they would not be allowed to take with them those parts of their republic that Milosevic’s men considered Serb territory. [34]
It was to this end that he held a meeting with Tudjman, before war broke out where the two men agreed secretly to partition Bosnia between them, and after which Tudjman triumphantly claimed that he had doubled the size of Croatia. [35] Now, four years later, many people believe that there has been a further understanding between the two men, as a result of which Milosevic has ‘turned a deaf ear to calls for help’ from the Krajina and Bosnian Serbs. [36] Before the Croat invasion of Krajina, tanks, artillery and top officers controlled by the Krajina Serb military were withdrawn, leaving the population defenceless. Whether this was with the collusion of Milosevic or the Yugoslav army, the JNA, is not known. But certainly Milosevic has done little in recent months to help the Serb refugees and has been extremely compliant with Western demands over the peace process.
However, Milosevic may be pushed to the limit by the refusal of Croatia and Bosnia to accept the agreed parameters of the peace plan, with the Croat army still threatening invasion of Eastern Slavonia as this journal went to press, while both Bosnian and Croat armies are pushing for further territories up to and including the Serb stronghold and now teeming refugee centre of Banja Luka. ‘The despatch [to Banja Luka] from Belgrade of the warlord Zeljko “Arkan” Raznjatovic and his ferocious Tigers, suggests that ... Milosevic finally has drawn a line in the sand around Bosnia’s second city’. [37] Whether this turns out to be the case, support for the Bosnian Serb leadership now comes much more from the far right and the Orthodox church patriarchy than from Milosevic and his supporters. The church has described the president as a ‘godless communist’ and last year Milosevic vetoed a church sponsored bill to restrict abortion. [38]
The state over which Milosevic presides is by no means the monolithic Serb nationalist entity that is often portrayed as being. As the Washington Post puts it:
Compared to Croatia, Milosevic’s Serbia, with an estimated 6.4 million Serbs, 1.7 million Albanians, 345,000 Hungarians, 235,000 Muslims and 130,000 Croats, is a multi-ethnic state. According to the 1991 census, only 65 percent of Serbia’s 9.8 million population is Serb. [39]
Milosevic senses that people in Serbia are war weary, and that they want sanctions against them to be lifted. The fall in the level of GDP per head among the Serbian population has been dramatic since the war began. This has had serious effects on living standards, with many people forced to sell smuggled goods on the streets of Belgrade to make any sort of living. [40] There are severe food, fuel and medicine shortages and a 50 percent unemployment rate. [41]
But the impact of the huge number of refugees flooding into Serbia itself, plus the sense that the Serbs are getting less and less out of the peace deal and that they are constantly reviled in the Western media, plus the fact that economic sanctions are bringing real hardship to millions of people, all means that Milosevic can strengthen his support.
 
Croatia
Croatia today enjoys favoured status with both the US and the EU. It is on the fast track to membership of the EU, which means that it receives military, financial and other material help from the Western powers. Its leader, the former Communist boss Franjo Tudjman, is determined to establish a dominant Croatia in the region at the expense of the Serbian state’s influence, but also no doubt at the cost of his current allies, the Bosnian Muslims. Tudjman, egged on by Croatian émigrés who returned at the time of independence four years ago, has been willing to use the trappings of the pro-Nazi wartime Ustashe regime which spent four years battling against the partisans in the very same areas in which fighting now takes place. In particular, the chequerboard flag is enough to strike terror into the hearts of many Serbs who suffered terrible repression at the hands of the Ustashe during the Second World War.
This does not seem to cause Tudjman much disquiet. He is known for his view that the Holocaust was much exaggerated and for his statement, ‘Thank God my wife is not a Jew or a Serb’. [42] The well known Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal has said that Croatia’s 1,200 Jews are living in fear. [43] A recent video issued in Zagreb, entitled Five Years of Croatian Freedom portrays him in a white uniform with huge epaulettes reviewing military hardware from the back of a jeep. The video describes Tudjman, as the ‘igniter of the drowsing spirit of the fatherland’. [44]
The state over which Tudjman presides is now the most ‘ethnically clean’ state in the former Yugoslavia. It is estimated that over 90 percent of its population are now Croats, compared with 78 percent in 1991. [45] Not only have the vast majority of the country’s Serbs now left but there are also signs that Croatia is putting up barriers to Muslim refugees, despite its alliance with the Bosnian government. Muslims attempting to escape Bosnian Serb areas have been refused entry into Croatia and so have been trapped on the Bosnian side of the border. Those forced out of areas such as Banja Luka by the Bosnian Serbs have received little help from Croatia. A report in late August said that:
Non-Serbs in Banja Luka and other parts of north western Bosnia have been subjected to a renewed campaign of terror in recent days as Serb refugees from Krajina have been physically dislodged from their homes. Roman Catholic Croats who are victims of this campaign have been allowed into Croatia, but the Zagreb authorities are much less keen to accept Muslims. [46]
Recently Tudjman, told the French paper Le Figaro that Croatia would gladly assume the burden of ‘civilising the Muslims’ after the war, and that Tito’s greatest mistake was to grant the Muslims national rights in the 1960s. [47]
The Croatian state has very limited opposition within it. The editor of one of the country’s newspapers, Globus, was ousted after the invasion of Krajina. The editor claimed that the reason for this was the paper’s ‘lack of sufficient patriotism’ in covering Operation Storm. [48] It is clearly hard for dissenting voices to be heard in the atmosphere of jingoism that has existed in Croatia in recent months. The state dominates the media. Although there are opposition parties, ‘for the time being at least they are all singing the same tune. The Social Liberals’ leader, Drazen Budisa, declared it was not the time to criticise, but a “time to rejoice”.’ [49]
Yet this militaristic and nationalist state – described by an opposition political commentator as a modern Sparta – is one which has been feted and aided by the West and which is being groomed for membership of the EU. The IMF and World Bank, as well as the EU, are willing to lend Croatia money. And funds have already been flowing into the coffers of Croatia’s reserves from rich returning émigrés. Last May the country’s national bank reported $1.6 billion foreign reserves, compared with $600 million in 1993. [50] The fact that Croatia has avoided Western sanctions and has been able to quite openly flout the arms embargo – creaming off an estimated 20 to 30 percent of weapons designed for the Bosnian government – has widened the gap between it and its rival Serbia:
In 1991, Serbia had a per capita gross domestic product of $2,330, about the same as Croatia. In 1993... that number sank in Serbia to $1,225. Croatia’s jumped to $3,048 in 1993 and $3,132 in 1994. [51]
Even so, unemployment is rising and military spending this year is estimated to run at 41 percent of government expenditure. [52] Tudjman, called an election a year early to improve the majority of the ruling HDZ (Croatian Democratic Union), making it more dominant in parliament. Just to try to make sure, Tudjman, pushed through a new law which allows Croats abroad – mainly in Bosnia – to vote. At the same time, the electoral status of Croatian Serbs has been reduced, since only three seats for national minorities are guaranteed in the parliament, as opposed to the previous 13. [53] Even US observers have been appalled at the lack of democracy in Croatia. ‘Reserving almost 10 percent of all seats to people living permanently outside of a state is unprecedented’ according to Washington’s National Democratic Institute’s report on the election. [54] In the event, Tudjman’s HDZ did not get the required two thirds majority to make constitutional changes, thus showing that there is less support for Tudjman, than has been thought.
 
Bosnia
The Bosnian state is seen as the underdog by many in the West because it seems sandwiched between two aggressive warring powers. Yet there are crucial peculiarities in the make up of Bosnia which helps to explain some of its recent history. Before the war most people living in the region referred to themselves simply as Bosnians rather than adding Serb, Croat or Muslim. [55]
The multi-ethnic make up of Bosnia meant that any attempt at independence would create major problems. As Misha Glenny says:
Bosnia’s national mix ensures that it cannot be divided without war. At the same time, Bosnia has never existed, since the medieval kingdom, as an independent state ... Bosnia has always survived by dint of a protective shield provided either by a Yugoslav state or the Austrian or Ottoman empires. [56]
The Bosnian Muslims found the choice of either staying in a much reduced Yugoslavia or being partitioned between Serbia and Croatia profoundly unattractive. They were therefore caught between a rock and a hard place when the former Yugoslavia broke up.
However, the idea that the Bosnian government is an innocent victim of aggression is impossible to sustain. In fact, the Bosnian president, Alia Izetbegovic, was the first to organise a political party for the Muslims along nationalist lines when the SDA was formed in 1990. It was described at the time as ‘a political alliance of Yugoslav citizens belonging to Muslim cultural and historical traditions’. [57] The SDA campaigned for the break up of the former Yugoslavia and for recognition of all six Yugoslav republics, saying that Bosnia could not remain in a Serb dominated federation. [58]
Various Muslim paramilitary organisations were formed in Bosnia once the war started, such as the Patriotic League and the Green Berets, who wore the official Bosnian coat of arms. Misha Glenny wrote of the Green Berets in 1992 that they ‘have recruited from the criminal classes and the lumpen proletariat and they have already injected their own brand of corruption into Sarajevo’s enforced war economy’. [59]
The Muslims have suffered, and continue to suffer, terrible atrocities. But they too have been guilty of ethnic cleansing, killing and rape. [60] There is evidence that the state run from Sarajevo is decreasingly multiethnic. Bosnian television is run by an SDA member who is fervently in favour of a Muslim identity for Bosnia. Only Muslims in the SDA are able to rise high in the administration, media, army or business. [61] The war’s development has meant an influx into the towns of refugees from rural areas, who have very different values from many of the liberal ideals which dominated Sarajevo, and the return of exiles who have come back to fight for Bosnia and who reflect strong feelings of nationalism and ethnic identity. [62]
In recent months the Bosnian government and its supporters have become increasingly vocal and aggressive in their demands. It has long understood that it can get away with a great deal because of US backing and the way in which the Western governments see the Bosnian Muslims as innocent victims. ‘Throughout the war, they have used this perception to undertake offensive actions and then portray themselves as victims’. [63] But since the latest phase of the war brought the military alliance with Croatia, they have been even more confident.
Most recently, Bosnian government forces have been involved in continuing fighting in north west Bosnia, despite the ceasefire. Their aim is clearly to control the whole area up to and including Banja Luka. The army is determined to press the advantage it gained with the help of the stronger Croat army and the NATO air strikes. One of its generals was quoted as saying around the time of the ceasefire, ‘Of course, we will respect the orders of our political leadership if they tell us to stop, but if we give up on going home, our people will never accept it’. [64] But some of the area being fought over is land which was never ‘home’ to the Bosnian Muslims. ‘Mrkonjic Grad, which fell [in October] was 77 percent Serb; Petrovac, Drvar and Grahovo, which fell to the Croats earlier on, were more than 95 percent Serb’. [65]
Recently the Bosnian vice-president demanded more than the 51 percent of territory offered to the Croat-Muslim federation under the peace plan, arguing that the Bosnian Serbs inside the Serb controlled areas now amounted to only 400,000 people – or 11 percent of the pre-war population, compared to the 32 percent they had comprised before the war. [66]
These attitudes reflect the harder line taken by Bosnian leaders in recent months and mark a move away from multi-ethnicity and towards the Bosnian government trying to carve a bigger share of territory and influence. The government crisis which arose temporarily when the prime minister Haris Silazdic tried (unsuccessfully) to resign in the summer seemed to be caused by his resistance to this hard line, which is epitomised by his rival, the Bosnian foreign minister, Mohamed Sacirbey. Sacirbey is a Wall Street lawyer who was born in Sarajevo but has lived most of his life in the US. This former vice-president of the merchant bankers Security Pacific has made it his mission, first as Bosnian ambassador to the UN and then as foreign minister, to portray Bosnia as the underdog while at the same time pulling the US into the war on its side. ‘He aims to “Americanise” the Bosnian conflict, drawing the US into a full scale war against the Serbs’. [67] He has clearly been successful.
The Bosnian government quite rightly fears the expansionist intent of Croatia, but government leaders have opened the door to a Greater Croatia, in which eventually they too will prove the losers.
 
Conclusion
The various states involved in the conflict are all, to one degree or another, nationalistic and increasingly ethnically based. Socialists can find nothing to support in these regimes, and those who make the mistake of backing one side are increasingly finding themselves faced with contradictions as the supposedly multi-ethnic states become more ‘cleansed’ and more narrowly based. They also miss out on a range of opposition among the populations of each state who have reacted against being sold the empty promise of national glory and military success.
One of the most hideous aspects of war is the way in which governments, media and top military tend to act and speak on the assumption that ‘their’ population is totally behind them in the war, and that the ‘enemy’ population is equally behind its own rulers. The reality is usually very different. Of course it is true that there are times when jingoism and pro-war sentiments prevail among the mass of people, but for the majority of the time among the majority of people there is no glorification of war.
It is easy to understand why this should be when we look at the situation in former Yugoslavia. War there has involved the displacement of an estimated 2 million people, the death, rape, torture and other forms of barbarism inflicted on many thousands. Even for those who have escaped these horrors, day to day life for workers has been hard. And the threat of war is ever present.
But there has been opposition to the war. Indeed it can be argued that the war itself started as an attempt to dampen class struggle directed at the country’s rulers and to turn workers against other workers and peasants of a different ethnic background. As the war began in March 1991, tens of thousands of students and workers marched in Belgrade against repression and for democracy; up to half a million occupied the city centre. After war spread to Bosnia in 1992, the anti-war movement in Belgrade organised a demonstration and a 100,000 strong concert against the war. In 1993 in the Serbian capital, 1,500 people demonstrated on the first anniversary of the siege of Sarajevo.’ [68]
War weariness has also been evident in Croatia, where the Anti-War Campaign of Croatia was formed in 1991, and where there have been strikes including a half hour general strike against lower living standards in 1993. There has also been a rash of short strikes recently to recover unpaid wages. [69]
None of these adds up to a major campaign against the war, but that is hardly surprising given the terrible suffering in recent years, the destruction of lives and livelihoods. Equally, it is no wonder that nationalist and right wing ideas come to dominate among a wider layer of the population. But these ideas are not all powerful. But as grievances begin to build up, so many ordinary workers and peasants question the role of their leaders and the nationalist politics on which they are based. It is then that there is the possibility of alternative ideas coming to the fore, then that people begin to look to their interests as similar to those of other workers even across the ethnic divides. A recent Assignment television programme, introduced by the journalist Allan Little, showed one Krajina Serb who had been displaced to Serbia sending a video message to two middle aged Croats, themselves ethnically cleansed from Banja Luka, who were trying to take over his house. The message said that they should not feel guilty, because they were just victims – as were all ordinary Serbs, Croats and Muslims – of the nationalist rulers, and now they were having to pay the bill. [70] It was a powerful testimony to ordinary people’s ability to see through the nationalist propaganda of their rulers.
Perhaps this is not a typical sentiment, but the horrors of former Yugoslavia are drawing people to thinking about alternatives. Imagine the buffeting, physical and ideological, which has been the lot of the Krajina Serbs. They believed much of the nationalist rhetoric from their own leaders and the Serbian leaders. Now they are homeless, jobless, split up from their families, forced to live in the isolated province of Kosovo. This does not mean that all or most of them will draw socialist or left wing conclusions – but it does mean that the old certainties have broken down. For example, one Krajina Serb from Knin, now living in a Belgrade tower block, was quoted as saying: ‘I don’t want to throw any Croats out of their homes, but I would throw Milosevic out of his house for what he has done to us.’ [71]
In the big cities of Belgrade and Zagreb there is opposition to the rulers from a wide spectrum of people. But the nature of war in its early and successful phase is that it silences much opposition. That can begin to change as circumstances change, and it is then that we can hold out hope for an alternative, class based solution to the problems of the region. We know already that, despite the warmongering, most people do not want war. For example, there are many recent reports of Bosnian Serbs of call-up age moving to Serbia to avoid the draft. Up to 60,000 have fled to Montenegro.
But the nationalist leaders, the UN and NATO, the Western powers have all acted to ensure that war has endured. As one commentator put it:
The UN has failed. NATO, the European Union and even the Red Cross have failed. Diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping, humanitarianism and the new world order have all failed. Brute force has succeeded. [72]
It need not be that way. But the alternative lies in the ordinary people who are suffering so much in this war understanding that their interests do not lie in backing their own ruling classes along national lines, but in fighting for a democratic, multi-ethnic society – which means fighting their own ruling classes, the cynical interventions of the Western powers, and all those (such as the far right and religious organisations) who want to divide them on ethnic or national lines. The Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky was a journalist in the Balkans before the First World War, when, as now, war tore the area to pieces. In 1910 he wrote:
State unity of the Balkan Peninsula can be achieved in two ways: either from above, by expanding one Balkan state, whichever proves strongest, at the expense of the weaker ones – this is the road of wars of extermination and oppression of weak nations, a road that consolidates monarchism and militarism; or from below, through the peoples themselves coming together – this is the road of revolution, the road that means overthrowing the Balkan dynasties and unfurling the banner of a Balkan federal republic. [73]
These are the options facing workers and peasants in the area. At present the first road is being followed, but with disastrous consequences. The only way to win democracy and multi-ethnicity is for socialists to reject the national solutions and to argue that only the second road provides any real solution to the problems that the Balkan people face.

Notes
1. Croatia’s Blitzkrieg, Economist, London, 12 August 1995.
2. S. Crawshaw, East Slavonia braces for the final battle, Independent, 30 September 1995.
3. See M. Glenny, The Fall of Yugoslavia (2nd ed., London 1993), p. 86, where he describes how left wingers he spoke to in London seemed to have a totally uncritical view of Croatian nationalism.
4. Independent, 7 August 1995.
5. M. Foot, New Hope in the Balkans, Tribune, London, 25 August 1995.
6. Momentum Shifts in Balkan War, Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
7. UN Says Croats Putting Krajina to Torch, Financial Times, London, 22 August 1995.
8. The flight of the Krajina Serbs, Economist, 12 August 1995.
9. UN Reports Looting in ex-Serb Area, Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
10. R. Fisk, quoted in Croats Burn and Kill with a Vengeance, Independent, 4 September 1995.
11. See R. Fisk, Croats Slaughter Elderly by the Dozen, Independent, 10 September 1995, and Face to Face with Ethnic Cleansers, 14 September 1995.
12. In Balkans, Imbalance of Power, USA Today, 14 August 1995.
13. See T. Barber, Brute force reshapes Balkans, Independent on Sunday, 17 September 1995.
14. C. Bellamy, How NATO Paralysed Serb Command, Independent on Sunday, 17 September 1995.
15. E. Daly, Double Vision Blurs Peace Map, Independent on Sunday, 17 September 1995.
16. Quoted in C. Eagar, Future Bosnia Shot to Pieces, Observer, 8 October 1995.
17. Ibid.
18. Bosnia Ceasefire is Finally Agreed by All Sides, Independent, 12 October 1995.
19. A. Hamilton, Cost of a Bosnian Peace Made in America May be Too High a Price to Pay, Observer, 8 October 1995.
20. Bosnia Ceasefire Plan Fails at Last Minute, Financial Times, 10 October 1995.
21. Serbs and Croats Strike East Slavonia Deal, Independent, 4 October 1995.
22. US Optimism Over Ceasefire Deal in Bosnia, Independent, 30 September 1995.
23. See M. Glenny The Fall of Yugoslavia, op. cit., p 192.
24. J. Borger, EU Report Accuses Croatia of Atrocities Against Rebel Serbs, Guardian, 30 September 1995.
25. C. Eagar, Future Bosnia Shot to Pieces, op. cit.
26. Momentum Shifts in Balkan War, Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
27. T. Barber, Brute Force Reshapes Balkans, Independent on Sunday, 17 September 1995.
28. Rupert Cornwell, US Woos Russia for Peace Force, Independent, 7 October 1995.
29. US Sets Out to Give Peace its Best Shot by Quentin Peel, Financial Times 30 October 1995.
30. See M. Glenny, op. cit., pp. 181–182.
31. Ibid., p. 211.
32. Ibid., pp. 201–202.
33. See ibid. for example, p. 221.
34. L. Silber and A. Little, The Death of Yugoslavia (London 1995), p. 127.
35. Ibid., p. 143.
36. See for example E. Mortimer, Slicing up the Bosnian Cake, Financial Times, 8 August 1995.
37. M. Tanner, A Farewell to Arms – but for How Long?, Independent on Sunday, 15 October 1995.
38. P. Hockenos, Letter from Belgrade, New Statesman and Society, 14 July 1995.
39. Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
40. Ibid.
41. See S. Sagall, Reluctant Soldiers, Socialist Review, September 1995.
42. See L. Silber and A Little, op. cit., p. 92.
43. Poll blow for “corrupt” Croat chief by Sue Masterman, Evening Standard, 31 October 1995.
44. J. Borger Victorious Croatia Closes Doors to Ethnic Minorities, Guardian, 21 August 1995.
45. Momentum Shifts in Balkan War, Washington Post, op. cit.
46. UN says Croats Putting Krajina to Torch, Financial Times, 22 August 1995.
47. Heading Home, New Statesman and Society, 13 October 1995.
48. Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
49. J. Borger, op. cit., Guardian.
50. Washington Post, 22 August 1995.
51. Ibid.
52. See S. Sagall, Socialist Review, op. cit.
53. Tudjman Expects Poll Win by Laura Silber, Financial Times, 30 October 1995.
54. T. Barber Croat Army Poised to Grab East Slavonia, Independent. 17 October 1995.
55. M. Glenny, op. cit., p. 143.
56. Ibid.. p. 144.
57. L. Silber and A. Little, op. cit., p. 228.
58. Ibid.. p. 238.
59. M. Glenny, op. cit., p. 161.
60. See for example ibid., pp. 161, 218, 221.
61. The Coffee Cup State, Economist, 26 August 1995.
62. See for example L. Bryant, Heading Home, New Statesman and Society, 13 October 1995.
63. M. Glenny, op. cit., p. 201.
64. L. Bryant. Heading home, New Statesman and Society, op. cit.
65. M. Tanner, Independent on Sunday, op. cit.
66. Tony Barber, Land Claim Upsets Peace Plan, Independent, 18 October 1995.
67. B. Webb and S. Guirao, From Wall Street to Sarajevo, New Statesman and Society, 28 July 1995.
68. S. Sagall, Socialist Review, op. cit.
69. Ibid.
70. Assignment, BBC2, 21 October 1995.
71. Letter from Belgrade by Peter Morgan, New Statesman, 27 October 1995.
72. E. Mortimer, Slicing up the Bosnian Cake, Financial Times, 8 August 1995.
73. L. Trotsky, The Balkan Wars 1912–13 (New York 1980).
 



“BY THE patriarchy we mean a system in which all women are oppressed, an oppression which is total, affecting all aspects of our lives. Just as class oppression preceded capitalism so does our oppression.” Scarlet Women
Most socialists and feminists believe that women’s oppression is separate from class exploitation. Class, they will argue, can explain certain aspects of the society in which we live – poverty, inequality, the economic system of capitalism.
But it offers no explanation for why half the human race is specifically oppressed and discriminated against as women. This explanation lies in the existence of a system running parallel to various forms of class society, the system of patriarchy.
Class and patriarchy, it is said, are dual systems which have to be fought separately. So feminists argue that the fight against patriarchy cannot be part of the struggle for socialism (against class society). Instead it has to consist of a separate struggle of women against men in order to defeat patriarchy.
What is meant by the term “patriarchy”? Literally it means “rule of the father”. Sometimes it is used to describe certain early forms of family. Karl Marx used it specifically to apply to one sort of family, the domestic household system where the usually male head of the household controlled the whole family and what they produced.
But this is rarely what feminists mean when they use the term. Sometimes they use patriarchy to describe male chauvinist ideas. It is merely the thoughts in men’s heads, or perhaps the social definition of gender – the way boys and girls learn their respective sex roles.
This definition is not based on any material factors, but simply on forms of false consciousness. So in order to overcome patriarchy an ideological struggle is required.
The conclusions of the analysis are familiar – women need more consciousness raising in order to understand their oppression. Men need educating out of their sexism. This, coupled with a fairer distribution of housework and childcare, can help to overcome patriarchy as an ideological system.
If the conclusions are unsatisfactory, it is because they are rooted in an unsatisfactory theory. Women’s oppression is very often expressed and sometimes even perpetrated in terms of ideas. But these ideas are not free floating. They stem from the material conditions in which people live and work. The problem with placing patriarchy simply in the realm of ideas is that it doesn’t explain where the ideas come from.
The limitation of the theory is that it is completely idealist. It divorces material circumstances from the way in which ideas change, and therefore implies that women’s oppression and male domination is unchanging, regardless of what social upheavals take place.
Although this idea is the kernel of the theory, most socialist feminists also try to put patriarchy in a historical context. They understand that women’s oppression in, for example, feudal society takes a different form from that in capitalist society. They therefore attempt a materialist analysis of why women’s oppression endures despite changes from one mode of production to another.
One of their most common explanations is that whereas the transition from feudalism to capitalism involves the destruction of old class relations and the creation of new ones, the family survives this transition more or less intact.
Sheila Rowbotham argues in Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, that labour within the family is in fact a “mode within a mode” of production, and that the wife’s relationship to her husband under capitalism is comparable to that of the bondsman and his master in feudal society.
Sally Alexander locates it in another way, by saying that the pre-capitalist division of labour within the family is transferred onto the capitalist labour market.
And the French separatist feminist Christine Delphy argues that there are two distinct modes of production, industry and the family. Within the family women are completely subordinated to men, who she believes form a distinct class from women.
The practical conclusion is simple: whereas men and women have to organise to fight capitalist exploitation, women have to fight a second separate struggle against male domination.
The problem with this argument is that the family of the working class during and after the industrial revolution is not, in all essentials, the same family which existed before. The domestic household system was one where the family was productive, both of items for the family’s own consumption and of commodities for the market.
The destruction of the English peasantry, much accelerated in the late 18th century, brought with it the destruction of domestic production, which was transferred to the factory and the mill. This brought about a major weakening of patriarchal power within the family as die old domestic relationships were turned upside down.
Male handloom weavers at home were undercut by factory production, which was performed by women and children. Every member of the family was thrown onto the labour market as individual wage labourers.
The family as a unit of domestic production disappeared. Vagrancy increased, especially among women. Enclosures and clearances denied the peasantry any means of livelihood from the land so they were forced into the cities. The establishment of the Poor Law “bastilles”, the workhouses, from the 1830s on, was a further incentive for every member of the family to work and for low wages.
The old family was smashed in a very brutal way. Such was its disintegration that contemporary observers including Marx and Engels in the 1840s believed that it would disappear completely. Infant mortality (as high as one in four) and the lack of any home life were cited as evidence. The growth of a number of peripheral industries round the Lancashire cotton industry to service working women, from child-minding to pudding making, further strengthened the case.
It is inconceivable that such social transformations could take place without there also being fundamental changes in the family itself. Far from the family mode of production remaining feudal, a distinctly capitalist form of family grew. What were, and are, its major features?
Firstly, there is less and less connection with production. Work and home were synonymous in most forms of class society. One of the features of capitalism is their almost total separation.
Secondly, as domestic production decreases and virtually disappears, more and more goods once produced in the home are bought as commodities. This is true of clothes making, baking and brewing, which are now usually only performed in the home as hobbies.
Thirdly, the most important feature of the family today is the reproduction of labour power, ensuring a fit, healthy and socialised working class to be exploited by the capitalist class. Therefore, domestic labour in the home is not performed to service individual men but to contribute indirectly to the production of surplus value for the capitalist.
The family under capitalism is not a distinct mode of production, or a mode of reproduction, but an integral part of the capitalist process itself. But if the family can be explained by the needs of capitalist society, can this also explain the oppression of women? Again most feminists would argue that it cannot.
An increasingly familiar view is that oppression is locked into capitalism through the actions of men themselves. The American feminist Heidi Hartmann says that oppression is rooted in a division of labour which either excludes women from social production altogether or puts them at a disadvantage within it.
This discrimination is brought about by a patriarchal alliance between male workers and capital.
“We define patriarchy as a set of social relations which has a material base and in which there are hierarchical relations between men and solidarity among them which enable them in turn to dominate women. The material base of patriarchy is men’s control over women’s labour power. That control is maintained by excluding women from access to necessary economically productive resources and by restricting women’s sexuality.”
The alliance between capitalists and working class men took the form of only men having access – through their trade unions – to the highest valued skilled work. Men also had protective legislation which excluded women and children from certain sorts of work and secured the granting of a family wage which ensured that the woman would be dependent on the man.
But Hartmann’s argument, although widely accepted, is simply fallacious. Throughout virtually the whole of the nineteenth century most men were not even in trade unions. Only the small minority of skilled workers were. The rest, unskilled, immigrant or female, were excluded.
Although there were examples of crassly male chauvinist attitudes towards women workers it is quite unnecessary to resort to sexist ideas to explain this exclusion. It can be explained by the fact that entry of women into traditional trades was very often accompanied by a worsening of conditions and reduction in wages.
Defence of working conditions is a much more likely explanation than patriarchy. Pay for bookbinders in the mid-nineteenth century for example, was lower in Edinburgh where women had undercut the rates than anywhere else in Britain.
The same is true of protective legislation. Originally introduced to stop the horror of child labour in the mills and factories, it was quickly extended to exclude women from coal mining altogether and from most night work.
Often it did not directly benefit men. Women in coal mines were not in direct competition with men because they did different jobs. Women’s jobs often entailed working longer hours for less money. Men had little to gain by displacing women from these jobs. Again there is evidence that the exclusion was very much a defence mechanism by the working class as a whole to ensure the continuation of the working class family.
As Jane Humphries has put it, legislation was seen as a means of protecting the working class family itself. The reasons for this are entirely understandable. The family had suffered the ravages of industrialisation and was virtually in danger of dying out by the 1840s. Both men and women workers saw its consolidation as a means of preserving their own livelihoods and improving their living standards.
Humphries argues that the working class family persisted because it reflected “a struggle by the working class for popular ways of meeting the needs of non-labouring comrades within a capitalist environment.” In addition the family structure gave the working class some control over the supply of labour power, particularly that of married women.
Even the demand for a family wage was explicable in these terms. A wage to cover the costs of reproduction of the whole family rather than just that of the individual wage earner was regarded as preferable to a situation where all members of the family worked.
The interests of the working class in maintaining the family coincided, for different reasons, with the interests of the capitalist class. They wanted a healthier, better educated and more skilled workforce to meet the changing needs of capitalist production, but they were loathe to take on the fundamental restructuring which any major socialisation of the family would require.
Even so, the reality was that most male workers did not receive the family wage. Other members of the family continued to work. The pattern was often that women continued to work while their children were very young and only stayed in the home once the older children could also earn a wage. The number of married women working increased throughout the nineteenth century.
So the patriarchal plot on which Hartmann bases her theory did not in reality result in benefits for the man. But the defence of the working class family clearly had its limitations, and these limitations acted to the detriment of women. As Jane Humphries puts it:
“The tragedy is that action could not be controlled on a class basis, but had to be regulated systematically on the basis of female labour, and theoretically of married female labour, so reinforcing sex-based relations of dominance and subordination.”
Nonetheless the continuation of the working class family was not about the maintenance of male power at the expense of the female half of the working class. Rather it was about the creation of a defence mechanism for the whole of the working class.
The alleged benefits to men of the sexual division of labour are even less apparent today. Women’s increased participation in the labour market has been one of the major features of the past forty years. Married women have been a growing section of the female labour market. Future surveys predict that far from women’s participation lessening, their jobs – and especially full time jobs – are likely to be the major employment expansion area in the 1990s.
So Heidi Hartmann’s picture looks increasingly outdated when she argues that:
“The family wage is still, we argue, the cornerstone of the present sexual division of labour – in which women are primarily responsible for housework and men primarily for wage work ... The family, supported by the family wage, thus allows the control of women’s labour by men both within and without the family.”
Most families which have to exist on the man’s wages alone are among the poorest. That is, after all, why nine million women in Britain are engaged in some sort of paid work outside the home. Women are wage workers and their work is not under the patriarchal control of their husbands. Like men, they sell their labour power on the market. It is capital which exploits them, not men.
But despite women’s waged work, the oppression of women is still a major feature of our lives. It is structured through the family, which ensures that women work for lower wages, that they are the bulk of part time workers, and that they still have the major responsibility for childcare.
The continued existence of the family rests on two planks. The importance working class men and women themselves place on the family as a relief from the world of work, and on the needs of the capitalist class to reproduce the next generation of workers and maintain the existing one as smoothly as possible. This is the material basis for the family and so for women’s oppression.
Theoretically, the family could be abolished under capitalism and its functions socialised to release more women onto the labour market and so increase the total extraction of surplus value. But, the social, ideological and economic costs of such restructuring would be so immense that any individual capitalist class would be highly unlikely to undertake such a task, especially as it is not really necessary for them.
The family is an oppressive institution and a decidedly imperfect one for both employers and workers. But it is probably better and safer than any alternatives under capitalism.
The oppression of women is therefore connected to capitalism in two crucial ways. The means whereby women are exploited as workers structures their oppression, through the sorts of jobs they do, or the wages they earn. The family also structures their exploitation. Both oppression and exploitation, work and the family, are created not by patriarchy but by the demands of the capitalist system itself.
Patriarchy theory leads either to the idea that individuals can change their sexist or male chauvinist ideas without changing the wider society, or else it leads to separatism from men. Both fit quite neatly with reformist ideas.
People who hold such ideas may be unhappy with the status quo, but provide no recipe for change. If on the other hand we locate women’s oppression in class society and particularly in capitalism, then we can understand that the fight for women’s liberation is part of the fight for socialism.

References
Sheila Rowbotham, Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, Penguin 1973
Sally Alexander, Women’s Work in Nineteenth Century London, Journeyman 1983
Christine Delphy, Close to Home
Heidi Hartmann, The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism: towards a more progressive union, reprinted Pluto 1981
Jane Humphries, Class Struggle and the Persistence of the Working Class Family, reprinted in Alice Amsden (ed.), The Economics of Women and Work, Penguin 1980
 



The campaign against David Alton’s bill to restrict abortion has once again put women’s issues at the centre of the political scene. At the same time it raises a number of issues about the women’s movement, and its inability to organise large numbers of women. [1]
 
The early women’s movement
Today the women’s movement is accepted as part of the political scene, not only by the left, but also by a significant section of bourgeois, pro-capitalist parties. The SDP includes within its ranks many feminists such as journalist Polly Toynbee or ex-NUS president Sue Slipman. Even the Tory party maintains a paper commitment to women’s rights.
The impact of feminism on the Labour Party and trade union movement is marked. Most major unions now have a commitment to promoting equality. Some have equality officers or reserved women’s places on their executives. The Labour Party at national and local level also has paper commitments to support for equality. Nearly everyone on the left talks about the women’s movement in a totally uncritical way, hiding its real history behind a cloud of myth. This superficial commitment to the ideas of women’s liberation hides the inadequacy of a movement which cannot begin to respond to the problems facing working-class women today. In order to understand why, we need to look at the history and origins of the movement itself, and why it has taken the direction that it has. The women’s movement has existed for around twenty years. Its birth in the United States in the late 1960s was the result of very specific historical circumstances. Although there was a continuity of ideas between the modern women’s movement and the campaign for women’s suffrage around the turn of the century, the modern movement was in major respects unique. Three factors lay behind its founding. The first was the changed position of women at work. Women as workers – and especially as (sometimes) well-paid workers – demonstrated some of the contradictions of women’s role in capitalist society. They were increasingly expected to carry a role in the world outside the home, but they were also treated as second-class citizens. Women’s inequality was there for everyone to see – demonstrated through low wages, ‘women’s jobs’ or part-time work. Even where women had access to their own income, they were all too often treated as children, rather than responsible adults. So throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, for example, it was extremely hard for women to make any major credit purchase – such as a house or even a washing machine – without the permission and financial backing of a man.
This created a sense of grievance among many women, particularly those of the professional and middle classes. These women not only resented their lack of financial and legal equality with men, but also expressed a sense of lack of fulfilment, of boredom with what even middle-class marriage – and its material comforts – had to offer. Betty Friedan spoke for a generation of such American women when she called this feeling ‘the problem which has no name’. [2]
The problem for these women was no doubt compounded by a second factor which, whilst of real benefit to a layer of women, nonetheless tended to increase their frustration: the expansion of higher education in the post-war years. A quite substantial layer of women – including a number from working-class backgrounds – gained access to higher education and consequently, often, to better paid and higher status jobs. By the late 1960s, there were 150,000 full-time students in Britain [3] and the number was steadily rising. [4]
Greater educational opportunity was a stairway to much better prospects than even most middle-class women would have thought possible a generation earlier. But it also demonstrated how inferior the position of women really was. So women found that they were disproportionately at the bottom of the pile inside higher education itself, and that when they obtained jobs such as teaching, they were again disproportionately in the lower grades. The grievances of Betty Friedan’s ‘problem with no name’ continued to grow.
Education itself fuelled this process. Despite the real limitations of the education system, young men and women found their horizons widened. They discussed ideas and concepts which in some small ways began to challenge the ideas they had grown up with. Some of these new ideas tended to bring them into conflict with some of the basic tenets of capitalist society.
The third factor in the birth of the women’s movement was a product of the changing structure of capitalism itself: the political explosion of the mid and late 1960s and the growth of what became known as the movements. It is impossible to understand the growth of the demand for women’s liberation, and the flourishing of women’s groups, without understanding this explosion – and particularly its effect in the United States, birthplace of the women’s movement.
 
The founding of the American women’s movement
The US movement was a product of similar factors to those in Britain. There are however a couple of major differences between the two, which had a major bearing on the different developments of women’s liberation in each country.
The expansion of higher education was much greater in the much richer United States – and the academic milieu was, and remains, an important feature of American political life. Also the impact of the organised working class on the women’s liberation movement, or on the student or anti-war movements – which was very great in Britain – was virtually non-existent in the US.
This was particularly true of the student left. It had no real connection with the working class or with working-class organisation in any real sense. That organisation was in any case extremely weak. It had been dealt major blows in the late 1940s and 1950s through a combination of McCarthyism and the Taft-Hartley anti-union laws. Union membership there was much lower, there was no workers’ party even on a par with the Labour Party, and the level of class struggle was relatively low. Any working-class ‘political’ tradition – such as that represented by the Communist Party or the Trotsky-ists – had been severely weakened and effectively wiped out in many parts of the country. All these features combined meant that anyone struggling against their own oppression tended to look for support anywhere but to the only force capable of ending that oppression – the working class. The consequences of this orientation still weigh heavily on American politics.
The student new left was also a product of its time, and its class composition. Its members were the children of Betty Friedan’s generation. They had grown up in the middle-class prosperity of the boom. Sara Evans in Personal Politics, her invaluable book about women and the left in the 1960s, describes what this meant. For the left, despite its radical and liberal approach to the question of civil rights, had much worse ideas on women than the previous generation of Marxist-influenced left-wingers:
the new left embodied the heritage of the feminine mystique far more strongly than the older left had. [5]
The two main organisations from which the women’s movement grew were the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). SNCC involved blacks and whites in attempting to fight for civil rights in the southern states. Both organisations developed from people with little or no experience of politics. White students from SDS who became radicalised looked for constituencies of support. They saw their support coming from the ‘poor people’. Their methods of organising meant living in the community, and hence they absorbed many of their ideas and attitudes – including sexism.
The politics of these students was egalitarian. They often lived lifestyles based on those of poor southern blacks. ‘Let the people decide’ was a favourite slogan. But their egalitarianism didn’t extend to women. Women took a secondary role, although many able women organisers went south.
Discontent with some of the male leaders of SNCC grew among some of the women members. The inferior position of women in the organisation, and the growing alienation from the male leaders, prompted some black and white women in SNCC to write a conference paper in late 1964 cataloguing instances of sexual inequality in the movement. The response from a leading black SNCC member, Stokeley Carmichael, was the now notorious: ‘the only position for women in SNCC is prone’. [6]
Things were changing in SNCC in different ways, however. The civil rights movement was becoming eclipsed. Against a background of riots in Harlem and Watts, and the growth of black nationalism around Malcolm X, whites became much more marginal in SNCC. Two white women, Casey Hayden and Mary King, wrote a paper in 1965 considering what black and white women had in common. [7] But increasingly the movement was splitting on grounds of race, partly as a result of the frustration of failure inside the campaign. Students continued to want to campaign over rights for blacks – though they now concentrated their attention on the northern black ghettos and the appalling conditions which existed there. They also turned increasingly to the movement against the Vietnam war. The vehicle for this protest tended to be SDS. It involved itself in campaigns on a number of issues, but was marred by its practice in all sorts of ways. Students in SDS tended to direct their liberal guilt towards the oppressed of the ghettos, where they set out to organise the economically marginal. In doing so they ignored the working class as a force for change and concentrated instead on those with no economic or political power to change society.
They also based their politics increasingly on personal experience. An SDS leader, Tom Hayden, argued as far back as 1962 that, ‘the time has come for a reassertion of the personal’. [8] But the personal politics came to mean living the same ghetto lifestyles as the most oppressed urban poor. This meant, among other things accepting some of their most backward cultural and political ideas, including a thoroughly sexist attitude to women. The identification of these radical students with the struggles of the oppressed did not extend to any understanding of the oppression of women, who continued to be treated as second class within the movement.
Despite this, the oppression of women gradually became an issue inside the movement: at the ‘We won’t go’ Conference against the Vietnam war, at SDS meetings and at the 1967 SDS conference, where a Women’s Liberation Workshop developed. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the first theorising of women’s subordinate position from this conference equated women’s oppression with the colonial oppression of the blacks in Africa or the Vietnamese.
Women are in a colonial relationship to men and we recognise ourselves as part of the Third World. [9]
This clearly absurd political position was derided by the bulk of the conference – but usually for the wrong reasons. Women were ridiculed at the conference, an offensive and sexist cartoon deriding women’s rights appeared in the next issue of New Left Notes, and, in Sara Evans’s words: ‘SDS had blown its last chance’. [10]
The general fragmentation of the various movements by 1967–8 led the women further along the path to the founding of women’s liberation. Jo (Joreen) Freeman called a meeting in Chicago in 1967 to organise a women’s intervention in the forthcoming National Conference for the New Politics (NCNP). The conference, held in August that year,
provided the final precipitant in an independent women’s movement when white men, engaged in a wave of guilty liberal capitulation to black demands, patronised and ridiculed women making similar demands. [11]
Jo Freeman and Shulamith Firestone, who tried to raise these demands at the conference, were told that there were more important things to discuss than women’s liberation. But for these and other women activists, the women’s issue was the most important. The following week a number of women in Chicago produced a paper ‘To the women of the left’ which raised the idea of women’s liberation with a layer of women disaffected by the new left. Within a year, there were women’s liberation groups in most major US cities.
 
The nature of the movement
The American women’s movement was therefore not born in a vacuum. Its politics and its practice was a very definite product of the American left. The movement was founded as a left-wing, radical movement, by women who had learned many of their ideas in the student politics in which they were active. So the National Organisation of Women (NOW) founded in 1966 by Betty Friedan, was regarded (quite rightly) as thoroughly middle-class and very limited in its fight for reforms. Celestine Ware, an early participant in women’s liberation, described NOW as: ‘regarded much as black militants regard the civil rights organisations. The typical NOW member is middle-class, employed full-time, and married’. [12]
Women’s Liberation Movement members tended to be very different from this. They often challenged the notion of marriage, stressed the importance of alternative lifestyles, and – even if only in a small way – tried to challenge the whole basis of capitalist society itself. They also often identified with other radical political issues. They protested at state persecution of the Black Panthers. One group organised a protest demonstration over Nixon’s inauguration in 1969. The WLM was anti-war. And as befitted a movement for women’s liberation, it organised a famous protest against the Miss America contest in Atlantic City.
The women’s movement was much weaker than the other movements, however. It never succeeded in organising mass actions. And the numbers involved in it were surprisingly small. Far from there being a large and unlimited sisterhood of women, the movement was diffuse and fragmented from the start. Its political ideas were also very limited. Soft Maoism – characterised by a cheering of spontaneity, a lack of orientation on the working class, a contempt for theory – or else forms of libertarianism dominated. The old slogan ‘let the people decide’ summed up the attitude of much of the new left and also of the women’s movement.
There were other close similarities. Massive stress was put on the expression of personal feelings and on the process of consciousness-raising. Today, these are practices which are considered unique to the women’s movement. But in reality, they did not originate from the women’s movement, but were already established in the student movement from which it came. Sara Evans has pointed to a number of common features of the two movements: the anti-leadership bias; the emphasis on personal experience (SDS meetings in the mid-1960s began with the campus organiser describing his or her background and how they became radicalised); the emphasis on the internal procedure of the meetings. [13] Women’s consciousness-raising – the central tenet of the women’s movement – was the logical conclusion of this practice. There may also have been a Maoist influence in its development: consciousness-raising has been likened to the process of ‘speaking bitterness’ during the Chinese Revolution.
The weakness of even the most radical politics showed very quickly. As women’s oppression became the deciding factor of everything, so all other political problems were subordinated. The 1969 statement of principles of the New York Radical Women put it like this:
We ask not if something is ‘reformist’, ‘radical’, ‘revolutionary’ or ‘moral’. We ask: is it good for women or bad for women? We ask not if something is ‘political’. We ask: is it effective? Does it get us closest to what we really want to do in the fastest way? [14]
New York Radical Women soon split. A group which emerged from its three-way division was Redstockings. It continued and developed this view in its own statement of principles:
We are critical of all past ideology, literature and philosophy, products as they are of male supremacist culture ... we take as our source the hitherto unrecognised culture of women, a culture which from long experience of oppression developed an intense appreciation of life, a sensitivity to unspoken thoughts and the complexity of simple things, a powerful knowledge of human needs and feelings. [15]
This anti-intellectual approach, raising individual feelings to the level of theory, was to become the ‘common sense’ of the women’s movement. Overt political positions tended to go out of the window. Women who had never felt that they really ‘belonged’ in the black, student or anti-war movements, now had a movement of their own. The women’s movement became a natural home for those women who both wanted to work round the question of women but also, and just as importantly, felt left out of the existing political scene. An atmosphere and the beginnings of a theory had to be created which would justify this movement of all women.
An example of the confused thinking which prevailed can be seen from the statement of Judy Laws, quoted in 1970 in Mademoiselle magazine. Laws was sacked from the University of Chicago for wanting to do research into the sociology of women’s oppression.
I see the woman problem as the greatest neglected ill. I’m pessimistic about our impact on the war, and I’m convinced that white people can’t participate in the black movement, but I’m not a socialist, and I’m not a revolutionary, I mean – I wear a bra. [16]
But if politics was not a word which guided the early women’s liberation movement, nonetheless political differences soon emerged which caused all manner of divisions inside it. Redstockings, already the most important splinter from New York Radical Women, confirmed the consciousness-raising approach to fighting women’s oppression.
Redstockings believes that liberating women has priority above every other idea; it dispenses with formal political language and finds the key to a woman’s liberation in her own experience. [17]
In 1969, the New York Radical Feminists was founded from a combination of the feminists and the Redstockings. It included in its membership Shulamith Firestone, Anne Koedt and Celestine Ware. These people moved increasingly and quite explicitly away from any notion of socialist politics. So the NYRF manifesto declared: ‘the political oppression of women has its own class dynamic’. [18] Firestone developed this view in her book The Dialectic of Sex. [19] Some took the logic of a separate female class dynamic even further. Valerie Solanis in the SCUM (Society for Cutting Up Men) Manifesto stated: ‘the male is an increasingly incomplete female, a walking abortion, aborted at the gene state’. [20]
Any idea that there might have been of a strong, collective and centralised movement against women’s oppression was beginning to disappear. A Congress to Unite Women in 1969 came to nothing. Even the ultra-respectable NOW ran into problems, when its New York branch was nearly destroyed in 1970 over the question of lesbianism. The writer Rita Mae Brown, who was a NOW member at the time, argued that:
Lesbianism is the one word which gives the New York NOW executive committee a collective heart attack. [21]
The movement was therefore diffuse and splintered: because of its legacy from the movements, because of its avoidance of political argument, and because of its orientation on personal lifestyles. Increasingly real political differences manifested themselves in supposedly personal disagreements, which just led to the setting up of more groups. The story of the citywide Women’s Liberation Coalition which met weekly in New York is an illustration of the fragility of the groups at this time. It had a left-wing, pro-working class orientation and tried to attract working-class women. It supported a Panther demonstration in November 1969 against the terrible jail conditions of pregnant Panther women in New Haven. But some Coalition women felt that the demonstration was too pro-Panther, and there was a split over the extent of left involvement. By December 1969 the Coalition had ceased to meet. [22]
The movement faced one further contradiction. On the one hand, its influence grew to a massive scale. By 1971, there were over 100 women’s liberation publications. The mainstream feminist magazine Ms had a circulation of 350,000 by 1973. By 1974, there were women’s studies programmes at 78 educational institutions – with another 500 campuses offering 2,000 courses. [23] But the number of activists involved in the movement remained relatively small in comparison with the general influence of feminist ideas. NOW claimed 30,000 members by 1973 – hardly a mass movement and, given the limited nature of NOW’s demands, a very small number. The more radical wing of the movement fared no better. The WL coalition attracted only 150 women weekly from the whole of New York City. The 1969 Congress to Unite Women attracted 200. [24] Even a socialist feminist conference in 1978 had an attendance of only 2,000. [25]
These figures reflected a problem which still exists for the women’s movement today: vast but passive support for some of the ideas of women’s liberation, but no connection between these ideas and any activity. Passivity in turn leads to tokenism, and to a sectarian refusal on the part of the women’s movement to acknowledge anyone other than itself as having the right to speak on behalf of women, or to act in the interests of women.
The American women’s movement was from the beginning by far the largest and most influential of any women’s movement in the world. It exported its ideas, especially to Europe, and thereby ensured that many of its preoccupations and problems – although sometimes not its vitality – would emerge elsewhere.
 
The early women’s movement in Britain
The existence of women’s liberation in Britain is usually dated from 1968. It was in that year that the first modern equal pay strike – by women machinists at Ford – took place. In 1968, too, a body with the unwieldy title of the National Joint Action Committee for Women’s Equal Rights (NJACWER) was set up. This committee was based on the unions and in 1969 organised a demonstration in support of the demand for equal pay. Throughout 1969, a number of women’s liberation groups sprang up. They were often comprised of women who were involved in some way with existing left-wing politics. But as Sheila Rowbotham has written,
It was really from the Oxford Conference in February 1970 that a movement could be said to exist. [26]
Over 500 women attended that first conference. It was generally considered an exhilarating experience. For the first time women in Britain were organising along the lines that American women had already been doing for over two years. There were, however, major political differences between the early British movement and its American counterpart right from the outset.
Those other movements, which in the US had exerted such a strong and often negative influence on the women’s movement there, were much less influential in Britain, where the civil rights and black power movements hardly existed. Here, the student movement was important but limited in its impact, and the mass anti-war movement, whilst politicising many, did not have the same cutting edge as its counterpart in the United States – at the heart of the aggressor nation.
The mainstream political situation in Britain was also much more favourable. The second half of the 1960s saw the passage of liberalising laws on divorce, abortion, gay rights and equal pay. The very high rate of unionisation in Britain (about half of all workers as opposed to under a fifth in the US) led many of those on the left and in the women’s movement to see working-class struggle – through the trade unions – as a major feature of the fight for women’s liberation. This conviction was strengthened by the very high level of class struggle in the years of the early women’s movement. Many strikes involved women. The Leeds clothing workers (1970), post office telephonists (1971), and May Hobbs’ struggle to organise the London office night cleaners are all examples.
Sometimes socialists and women’s liberationists were instrumental in helping the disputes, as in the case of the night cleaners. As one contemporary report describes:
A combined picket was set up of cleaners, IS and Camden Women’s Action Group, Socialist Women and the Workshop, which was joined by cleaners of another building which came out in sympathy. As a result of these actions a representative of the TGWU negotiated with the cleaning company and it was agreed that the two shop stewards were to be reinstated; the company was forced to recognise the union, and to agree that there would be no intimidation against union members. [27]
It is hardly surprising that these sorts of results encouraged women to look towards the working class and to the unions as vehicles of struggle. In the same year as the night cleaners, 1971, International Women’s Day (originally organised by the socialist movement near the beginning of the century) was celebrated by a demonstration around the four demands of the women’s movement: free abortion and contraception on demand; equal educational and job opportunities; free 24-hour nurseries; and equal pay. [28]
So the movement in its early years had a lively and outward-looking orientation. One of its first major successes was the picket of Miss World at the Albert Hall in 1971 which caught the imagination of many women. But, as in America, the freshness and vitality of a few early activities were quickly drained by problems and difficulties.
The movement’s core idea was that it was capable of uniting all women to fight against their oppression. At first it seemed possible to win women to this fight through working-class struggle. But as the political differences inside the movement became clearer, this possibility became more remote. Major problems, unaddressed at the Oxford Conference, came out during the Women’s Liberation Conference at Skegness just over a year later. The conference has become somewhat notorious in recent years. Dissent started over the structure of the conference itself. Some women walked out of the Saturday plenary to discuss on their own. It was agreed that evening that there would be more small group discussion the next day. In the plenary the following afternoon, however, a row broke out involving some Maoists and separatists. A Maoist woman was removed from the chair, and a male Maoist ejected from the meeting for disruption. The conference then proceeded to vote to disband the Women’s National Coordinating Committee (WNCC) which had been set up at the Oxford conference, at least partly on the grounds that it was wracked by sectarian division. Skegness marked a turning point. From then on, men were not welcome at such gatherings. And the already existing hostility to socialists was becoming more marked.
‘It is clear from the outcome of this conference that the apparent agreement in the Women’s Liberation Movement which was sometimes seen at WNCC’s does not exist in reality’, said Socialist Woman. [29]
Another report of the conference, in the Women’s Liberation Workshop magazine, Shrew, pointed to some of the problems:
We were worried by the widespread opposition that there seemed to be to any form of organisation ... Organisation and intellectual analysis are too simply seen as authoritarian and therefore masculine; hence bad. [30]
Even here, however, the authors agreed that men should in future be excluded from such conferences. This argument continued at the Manchester conference in March 1972, where it centred on whether men should be allowed to attend the conference social on the Saturday night. The next day the conference split for or against men. One delegate encapsulated the anti-men position:
If there is one woman present who would like to be with her sisters for two days of the year and not be oppressed by the presence of men, surely we could respect that sister’s wish and have a conference for women without men. [31]
The victory of this position was important in two respects. Firstly it showed that the movement was becoming far more internalised, and concerned with the structure and form of meetings themselves, rather than with what the meetings decided. Secondly, it marked a step away from any orientation upon the working class, from the notion that men, as part of the working class, can be part of the solution to the fight against oppression. Instead men were increasingly seen as part of the problem; by the late 1970s this idea was increasingly dominant in the women’s movement.
The argument about men was a reflection of much greater divisions – between those who wanted socialist change and those who subscribed in some way to a ‘women’s revolution’. An interesting report in Shrew tells of a public meeting held in Ealing, West London, in 1971 on women’s liberation – where the argument got round to whether changes in personal lifestyles were enough or whether social change was needed. A speaker from the Women’s Liberation Workshop stated:
there is nothing in socialism in which women are freed. If women are viewed as conservative they would be suppressed in a socialist system. [32]
These arguments were similar to ones being repeated in groups around the country. Increasingly socialist ideas were losing out. In some ways this was partly the fault of the socialists themselves. Socialist Woman, a magazine produced by the orthodox Trotskyist International Marxist Group, stressed class issues but did so in a remarkably formalistic way. Increasingly their theoretical debates hinged round the question of women’s domestic labour – a sometimes sterile and often obscure debate conducted at an abstract level. [33] Their concrete intervention was round the Working Women’s Charter, a list of demands for women at work. This campaign was, however, aimed at influencing the lower levels of the union bureaucracy rather than at mobilising working women. The women’s paper of the IS (forerunner of the SWP), Women’s Voice, had a consistently working-class and activist orientation. But it tended to ignore any arguments taking place within the women’s movement, and so in practice did not challenge the anti-socialist ideas which were coming forward.
But the main reason for the growing weakness of socialist ideas inside the movement lay in the distorted view of socialism which predominated. Most feminists’ view of socialism was a completely eclectic variety of ideas, as one veteran feminist – late of the Spare Rib collective – articulates:
By the late 1960s the politics coming out of [such] struggles included observations, analysis and practice which women in turn seized hold of to help them define themselves ... Mao, black power, Fanon, Vietnam, Reich, libertarianism, sexual liberation. [34]
This political confusion coloured the new women’s liberation movement, which adopted the voluntarism of Mao, the cheerleading of the oppressed from the national liberation movements, sexual radicalism and individualism from the libertarians. Because the politics were so unclear and eclectic, there were many things which these women could not begin to explain. If, following Stalin and Mao, one third of the world was already socialist, why were women in these countries still oppressed? Why did women’s liberation not come about as a result of colonial revolution?
The questioning of ‘socialist’ theory grew, especially in the mid-1970s. The failure of the late 1960s and early 1970s struggles to shift anything fundamentally had its effects on many women. For them, the women’s movement provided a convenient stepping stone out of organised socialist politics.
Involvement in left-wing groups was regarded as increasingly unacceptable to many feminists, and left-wing organisations were accused of sexism, as if they had been in any way comparable with the Tom Haydens and Stokeley Carmichaels of the US left. In reality many of the women articulating these ideas had always been hostile to left groups – and had at best been on the margins of them. There were even some who had shown little interest in ideas of women’s liberation while in left groups, who now turned against the left. It was widely accepted that all left-wing men were the problem. Some left-wing feminists went along with this and some – at first tentatively – asserted that they were feminists first. Red Rag, produced by a collective of various left-wing women but increasingly under the influence of the Communist Party, stated in its first issue:
The organised labour movement – that is, the trade unions, the co-ops and the left political parties – is the decisive force in this country for social progress and for socialism. [35]
The language could have come straight from Stalin himself, but at least the commitment was to working within mixed working-class organisations. By the fourth issue of the magazine a change was under way: ‘our first commitment is to the Women’s Liberation Movement’. [36]
As the socialists moved closer to a cross-class feminism, so the non-socialist feminists became more confident. A Women and Socialism conference was held in Birmingham in the autumn of 1974. Even here radical feminists went on the offensive against socialist feminists:
socialist women were challenged to demonstrate their commitment to women, all women even ‘fascist’ women, and to put women above their ‘polities’. Violent statements about men have appeared in the [Women’s Liberation] Newsletter unsigned; women with boy children have been turned away from the Kingsgate women’s centre; women in the office have refused to speak to men over the phone. [37]
Although such antics were greeted with a sense of outrage, they became more and more common as radical feminists tried to impose much greater separatism on the movement. The politics of the socialist feminists was such that they were incapable of taking the radical feminists on. Eventually, as we shall see, they were to capitulate on a theoretical and a practical level.
But the political weakness of the movement did not lie simply in the politics of the individual women involved; it was shaped by the social composition of the movement itself, and of its underlying basis. Like its American counterpart, the British movement was not based on working-class women. It attracted women from that thin layer who were educated, aware, higher earners if they were in work. [38] Sheila Rowbotham describes one group:
They were predominantly American and in their mid-20s. Some of them had been active in Camden Vietnam Solidarity Campaign, most of them had husbands who were very deeply involved in revolutionary politics. Many of them too had small children and felt very isolated both as housewives and as foreigners. They started to meet in Tufnell Park and were later to have an extremely important influence. [39]
A survey in Shrew in 1972 gives a very similar picture. A student interviewed seven out of 12 women in a London group. Four were over 30, and only one under 25. They were all from middle-class backgrounds. Three had been born in North America and four in Britain. [40] Their political views were as usual diverse: ‘there was no one coherent radical ideology that was expressed. We had not sorted out the relationship between the class struggle and women’s struggle.’ [41] But this lack of coherence was beginning to show a negative side. ‘Only one of us was optimistic about the future. The most pessimistic of us felt that the movement, because of its lack of concrete purpose, might fizzle out and felt it necessary for us to work for concrete, goals.’ [42]
This study, together with Sheila Rowbotham’s recollections of the Tufnell Park group, is impressionistic but fascinating. Two points are worth making: the women were not particularly young or new to the political milieu. They had been around the left and clearly looked to the movement to provide them with a political purpose greater than that of passive spectators. In this they were quite different from the people who tended to gravitate to the revolutionary left at the time. In addition, there was also a very high proportional involvement of Americans in the early British movement. This is evidence of the huge influence of the American movement on the British, and explains how many of the political ideas got carried into the women’s movement in Britain in a very direct way.
The nature of the movement – the fact that it was not linked to struggle, the fact that it could at best only relate to a very small number of working-class women on an individual basis, led to the sense of powerlessness and pessimism, experienced by the women above. Into such a movement, the central perspective of consciousness-raising fitted perfectly: middle-class women could spend endless hours talking about what was oppressing them as individuals. Inevitably the concept led away from class struggle. An article in Shrew in 1971 entitled Organising Ourselves described what a women’s liberation group was like. Each group would be small – 10 to 15 members – and locally based. The point of the group was to act as ‘a model for political work and a microcosm of a future good society’. [43] So the group was not there primarily to organise in the outside world but to raise the level of ideas of its own members – and therefore to create a pleasant, feminist consciousness regardless of the objective circumstances in the wider world.
This attitude had an effect on the practice of the women’s movement in more ways than one. The groups became more and more inward-looking. Some became closed to new members, which meant that the movement really was developing into an internalised, charmed circle. [44] Because ‘the personal is political’ became the accepted slogan, discussion of personal problems became as valid as fighting for social change. The orientation on the personal also meant the movement stayed small. It seems that there were never more than 60 women’s liberation groups in London [45] and given the optimum size of 10–15, these could only have organised a few hundred women. Conferences and demonstrations also tended to be small: the International Women’s Day demonstration in 1971 attracted 2,000 people – of whom a quarter were men. [46] The publications fared a little better. Spare Rib was launched in 1972 and quickly built up a large, though not a mass circulation. But even in December 1971, Shrew was bemoaning the fact that ‘we don’t even sell the 3,000 copies that are printed each month. ‘ [47] Red Rag, Women’s Voice, Socialist Woman, Wires and the others did no better.
By 1974 signs of crisis were everywhere. The initial enthusiasm of the movement had gone, many of the activists had run out of steam, the radical feminists were going on the offensive. That year Socialist Woman wrote: ‘most working-class militants do not turn to the WLM to centralise and coordinate their struggles’. [48] Shrew did not produce an issue for two years from late 1974 to 1976. [49]
Yet this period was one of significant struggles among women. Equal pay was the impetus for many: SEI and Wingrove and Rogers in 1974, Electrolux in 1975. But there was a long list of struggles which flared up over other causes: Asian women at Kenilworth Components; teachers in Hackney; Rolls Royce and Dunlop workers in Coventry. Individual members of the women’s movement related to the strikes as individuals. There was no sign of a mass movement of women committed to helping these women win their fights. Instead, where struggles were successful, it tended to be where fellow trade unionists had played a key role. [50]
 
The abortion campaign
In 1975, surprisingly, a new struggle developed. If anything was a key ‘women’s issue’, this was. It provided the opportunity for mass mobilisation for the first time since the formation of the movement. But, when it was tested, the movement was found wanting.
The issue was abortion. In 1967, an Abortion Act had been passed which allowed for legal abortion for women if continuing with the pregnancy would affect the mental or physical health of the woman. Although this criterion obviously imposed restrictions, it also allowed far more women to obtain safe and legal abortions. The rate of abortions shot up. In 1969 there were 53,000 legal abortions. By the mid-1970s this figure had reached well over 100,000. [51] The anti-abortion lobby – unhappy with the original Act – attempted to restrict the law still further. A right-wing Labour MP from Glasgow, James White, introduced a private members’ bill reducing the grounds for abortion and attacking the clinics which provided essential back-up to the NHS in enabling women to have abortions.
A meeting at the House of Commons in April 1975 heralded the beginning of the National Abortion Campaign, set up to fight White’s bill and to defend the 1967 Act. From the start the campaign was heavily influenced by socialists, who carried a lot of the work. Members of the International Marxist Group in particular (then numbering several hundred) were involved in the national structure of NAC. The International Socialists were very active in the campaign, especially at a local level. The largest left organisation at the time, the Communist Party, supported the campaign, but was much more passive in its approach. The campaign had great success in its early months. The NAC petition was used to organise street meetings, factory gate meetings and local activities. Labour MPs were pressurised to oppose the White bill. Most importantly, the issue was taken up in workplaces and in union branches. This line was particularly pushed by IS, who argued that the issue was essentially a class issue, since rich women always had the money for safe and legal abortion – it was the poor who were penalised by restrictive abortion laws.
The right to abortion proved surprisingly popular. Petitioners experienced a lot of support from many sources – that of middle-aged and older women (many of whom would have experienced illegal abortion) was particularly noticeable. Where the issue was raised among workers, it was clearly getting a good response. Even all-male workplaces or union branches could be committed to support for the campaign. In June 1975, NAC’s first national demonstration in London mobilised 40,000. A further 700 marched in Glasgow and 100 in Dundee. On the London demo, banners included the Hull Docks Shop Stewards Committee, a couple of AUEW branches, and branch banners from the UPW (post office workers), NUJ, COHSE, NUT, ASTMS, NALGO and eighteen trades councils. [52] Beth Stone, a member of the NUT executive and of IS, got a good response when she told the demonstration that White’s bill was ‘part of a concentrated attack on working people’. [53] The demonstration was a great success. But divisions arose on the question of what to do next, which reflected the growing divisions in the movement itself. Women inside IS who attended the NAC steering committee argued that the June success should be built on and repeated as the most effective way of defeating White. Others in NAC put increasing faith in the capacity of sympathetic Labour MPs to win their case. Yet despite a Labour government, the abortion issue continued to be regarded as an issue of individual conscience by Labour, and a substantial minority of Labour MPs continued to support White.
At a NAC planning meeting in September 1975 a split opened. Representatives of the IMG, the Communist Party and Labour Party opposed the call for another national demo. As an article in Women’s Voice put it, they were ‘effectively arguing for the burial of the campaign’. [54] Similar divisions occurred at NAC’s conference in October that year. Women grouped around IS and Women’s Voice argued for and successfully won the adoption of the slogan ‘Free abortion on demand – a woman’s right to choose’ as that of the campaign. But a mass demo by the anti-abortion SPUC was consciously ignored by the conference organisers. It was left to a Women’s Voice initiative to call a picket of SPUC. Two hundred women left the conference and joined the picket. [55]
Revolutionary politics could clearly appeal to a minority of the activists. But the main direction of the campaign was going elsewhere. It tended to reflect a growing inclination for much of the left to look to the Labour Party for change. So the IMG put more and more faith in MPs like Jo Richardson (even though Labour minister Barbara Castle was already trying to restrict private abortion ‘abuses’ – thereby throwing a sop to the anti-abortionists). [56] The fact that James White’s bill was ultimately defeated by parliamentary means – although very largely because of extra-parliamentary pressure – increased this orientation. The socialists in the campaign tended to be on the defensive. Individuals on the steering committee had as much weight as whole political or union organisations, and the atmosphere was always against the socialists. Any attempts by socialists to raise the political level of the campaign were denounced as attempts to split the movement. The bulk of women in organisations like the IMG or CP tended to tail-end, and sometimes to encourage, these sentiments. So instead of NAC becoming a campaign which could genuinely involve large numbers of workers and so transform the nature and priorities of the women’s movement, it became just one small – and increasingly marginal – part.
The movement itself had come a very long way. Its unresolved political problems were partially and temporarily concealed by the growth of NAC. But by the mid-1970s, the excitement of the new movement had died. Sisterhood was revealed to contain all sorts of contradictions and as many political differences. By the mid-1970s, too, radical feminists’ attitudes were hardening. Their ‘common sense’ views were to crystallise around the theory of patriarchy – a theory which was increasingly adopted by the socialist feminists to explain women’s oppression.
The hopes of the early years of women’s liberation quickly turned sour. By the mid-1970s and into the 1980s, the women’s movement and the feminist ideas which underpinned it were charted on a very different course. Yet it was precisely in the mid-1970s – and not in its early period – that feminism became a dominant idea on the left in Britain. Two separate trends – which reinforced each other as time went on – began to dominate the movement from then on. The first was the sheer respectability of much of the movement, which led to its incorporation into the system at all sorts of levels. The second was the development of radical feminism as the dominant trend within the movement as a whole.
Respectability became a hallmark of the United States movement, a thin layer of women moved up into top jobs or into newly created ‘equality’ posts. An interview with Robin Morgan, a leading US feminist, in 1978 showed the extent to which this had happened. She herself worked on Ms magazine, a mainstream women’s magazine and saw no contradiction between this and her feminist politics. She spoke approvingly of the acceptance into mainstream politics of a friend of hers,
Eleanor Holmes Norton whom I first met almost fifteen years ago when she was counsel to the black women’s liberation committee of SNCC. We have been teargassed together. She now heads the Equal Opportunities Commission, and I would stake my life that she is not selling out. [57]
American capitalism was well able to incorporate a layer of former radicals from the women’s, black and student movements into working within the system, and set out consciously to do so. Private industry provided similar openings. Today 44 per cent of accountants in the US are women, compared to only 16 per cent in 1960. In 1986, 30 per cent of MBA degrees were awarded to women, as against 8.4 per cent in 1975. [58] This trend was accompanied by a level of ideological conservatism. In particular, some women returned to the traditional roles that many of them had eschewed only ten years before. The feminist historian Linda Gordon described herself in 1978 as ‘very alarmed’ about the baby boom then taking place among many feminists. They seemed to be valuing all the things – marriage, the family and motherhood – which they had always believed were at least part of the causes of women’s oppression.
I know a million women here with babies, and I’m the only one who is working full-time. Everyone else is living in families with a restoration of straight sex-roles ... practically every one of them has got married. I’ve experienced the conservatising effect on myself; having a baby throws me in more and more on the little quasi-family that I live in. [59]
A sure sign of the incorporation of much of the movement lay in the designation by the United Nations of 1975 as International Women’s Year. As is the case with all the unfortunate causes singled out by the UN for special attentions, International Women’s Year did nothing to alter the unequal position of working women within society. It did, however, produce a massive jamboree – a conference in Mexico. The conference served only to highlight the massive class differences which existed between its different participants. These class differences were particularly accentuated by the presence of third world women, such as the wife of a Bolivian tin miner, Domitila Chungara. Tin miners in Bolivia worked in the most appalling conditions and died at an average age of 34. The main struggle of these workers and of their wives was against the mineowners and the government, not against each other.
Domitila was shocked at the priorities of the bourgeois feminists at the conference. Betty Friedan, leader of the National Organisation of Women, criticised her and other women like her for talking about politics too much. Discussion of politics clearly demonstrated too sharply for Betty Friedan’s liking the divisions which existed. Domitila answered the bourgeois women:
Every morning you show up in a different outfit and on the other hand, I don’t. Every day you show up all made up and combed like someone who has time to spend in an elegant beauty parlour and who can spend money on that, and yet I don’t. I see that each afternoon you have a chauffeur in a car waiting at the door of this place to take you home, and yet I don’t ... Now, señora, tell me: is your situation at all similar to mine? Is my situation at all similar to yours? So what equality are we going to speak of between the two of us? If you and I aren’t alike, if you and I are so different? We can’t, at this moment, be equal, even as women, don’t you think? [60]
Two years later another massive women’s conference took place, this time in Houston, Texas, in 1977. The Equal Rights conference was, like Mexico, hailed as a huge success by many feminists. Yet it marked the degree of rightward drift of the American movement. It was graced by the presence of three First Ladies (wives of American presidents): Rosalynn Carter, Betty Ford and Lady Bird Johnson. All three were extremely rich members of the ruling class, who could know nothing of the problems of ordinary women. The conference attracted 15,000 people. But an estimated 20 per cent of delegates were ‘pro-family’ conservatives who were opposed to abortion, lesbian rights and the Equal Rights Amendment. An all-white delegation from the racially segregated state of Mississippi, which included four male members of the Nazi party, was admitted to the conference. [61]
The idea that politics could be forgotten as feminists celebrated the sisterhood of all women proved totally false. The conference, far from being a force for change, was able to become a reaffirmation of the most conservative and traditional values. This was something which most feminists didn’t understand at all. So Robin Morgan could herald it as a breakthrough because it attracted so many women:
Women came who had never been involved in the women’s movement, in politics or anything of the sort. They came because they were angry about a traffic island on the corner for their kids, or a job, or because they’d been raped. They discovered that feminists were against pornography, and that was a big shock. [62]
But the breakthrough was in fact going in the opposite direction from women’s liberation. The mass of women Robin Morgan talked about were not adopting the ideas of women’s liberation; instead one-time women’s liberationists were making concessions to the right. The net effect was a shift to the right which has continued ever since.
Those who did not swim with the current tended, in the US at least, to move into lifestyle politics as an attempt to build a feminist culture and society in the here and now. This lifestyle feminism was often built around lesbianism as a political theory and practice. Women could build a lifestyle – at least in a few big cities – which cut men out of politics, of social life, of sexuality – sometimes even out of work. Jan Clausen’s novel Sinking, Stealing, about a lesbian’s fight for custody of her dead lover’s daughter, paints a vivid picture of this separatist world in her descriptions of lesbian communes or of the political scene in New York:
Rather like someone embarking on a moderate exercise programme, I decide to start going to demos. A call comes through soon enough from Lesbians for Reproductive Freedom, a group on whose phone tree I remain an honorary twig even though I haven’t attended a meeting in two years. A five p.m. picket and rally are scheduled three days hence in front of the Waldorf Astoria to protest the arrival of a certain right-wing Central American leader ... LRF feels it’s particularly important to support this action given the US role in victimising women throughout Central and South America. [63]
Although this form of lifestyle politics was far preferable to the open careerism of some ex-feminists, it was essentially a retreat into a cosy environment which ignored the realities of the society outside. In Britain, it was much harder for feminists to go as far as their American counterparts along the paths of respectability or complete lifestylism. But nonetheless the two developments were repeated in Britain, although in less extreme form. And the theory behind much of the lifestylism increasingly challenged and eventually displaced socialist feminism as the dominant set of ideas inside the women’s movement. The most notable feature of the British movement in the mid and late 1970s was, therefore, the rise of radical feminism.
This was not obvious at first. It was hidden primarily by the continuingly high level of class struggle, which helped those still arguing for socialist ideas within the women’s movement to win an audience. There were, for example, major strikes involving women of which Trico – in 1976 for equal pay – and Grunwicks over union recognition a year later are the two best known. There were fights against cuts in public spending or against hospital closures, such as that over the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson hospital in London. And there was another attempt to restrict abortion – the Benyon bill – which had to be fought off in 1977. [64] But the direction in which the movement was going became increasingly clear. It had raised four demands – for equal pay, education and job opportunities, contraception and abortion, and nurseries. In 1975, the demand for legal and financial independence was added, and in 1978 an end to discrimination against lesbians and an end to violence. These new demands were the logical conclusion of the direction the movement was travelling: away from collective struggle, and towards individual and lifestyle feminism.
Violence against women first became an issue inside the movement in 1974, when Women’s Aid came into being. By 1975 there were 90 refuges around the country. [65] They were mainly funded and run by volunteers. Women’s Aid served to highlight a major scandal: that many women lived in fear of physical beating from the men they lived with, and that the capitalist state itself colluded in this situation. The police would not normally interfere in domestic disputes, and local councils would not rehouse women made homeless through violence. The idea of the refuges was that women would at least have somewhere safe to go where they could be safe from battering. Very quickly they became accepted, even by some Tory councils.
Similar arguments arose over issues like rape and pornography. There were a number of controversial rape cases at the time, and in 1975 the first Rape Crisis Centre was set up. The following year saw the establishment of Women Against Rape. WAR was dominated by the same people who had set up the Wages for Housework campaign two years previously. It therefore combined a strongly anti-men radical feminism, a location of women’s oppression in the home and a level of activism which ensured that it gained some support. [66]
Pornography was provoking similarly strong responses. The movement to Reclaim the Night took off in 1977. Its aim was to reclaim the streets for women, especially in areas like Soho, where sex shops and porn cinemas abounded. Tactics were often extremely militant – and the women clearly annoyed the porn racketeers. A demonstration through Soho in December 1978 was brutally attacked by the police, and sixteen women arrested. Many women continued to march in different cities around the country, however by the late 1970s, Reclaim the Night was one of the most dynamic features of the women’s movement.
But this change in orientation – towards individual problems of race or violence, and away from collective struggle – was not an accident. It resulted from the increased adoption of a theory which saw not capital or class society as the enemy, but all men. So the women arrested for reclaiming the night were described as ‘the victims of men’s defence of pornography’. [67] An extremely influential and cogently argued book, Against Our Will by Susan Brownmiller, stated as its main thesis that rape is ‘a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all women in a state of fear. ‘ [68] Theories of violence were ideal from a radical feminist point of view. They did not fit neatly into a class analysis; the ruling class was not obviously culpable; indeed a more direct guilt appeared to lie with individual men. Hence the need, so the argument went, for a separate ‘women’s revolution’ against male power and dominance. A whole spate of radical feminist theory backed up these ideas. Women like Mary Daly and Dale Spender represented a new and forceful trend in radical feminist ideas, as they denounced all things male and recreated their own parallel of bourgeois history in the history of bourgeois women. [69] The socialist feminists, who had been in the ascendancy in the early days of the women’s movement – at least in Britain – now found themselves pushed very much onto the defensive and challenged in every area of basic theory.
The development of the theory of patriarchy as a major force in the movement dates from this time. It marked the defeat of socialist feminism. The term patriarchy had always been in use, and ‘patriarchal’ has also been used to describe various sorts of feudal and peasant families, where the ‘patriarch’ (often the grandfather) dominated socially and economically within the family and oppressed all other members of it. (This sort of patriarchal family was, of course, unlike the capitalist family a productive one.) But the term came to take on a much wider usage. By 1979 Sheila Rowbotham could write:
The term has been used in a great variety of ways. ‘Patriarchy’ has been discussed as an ideology which arose out of men’s power to exchange women between kinship groups; as a symbolic male principle; and as the power of the father (its literal meaning). It has been used to express men’s control over women’s sexuality and fertility; and to describe the institutional structure of male domination. Recently the phrase ‘capitalist patriarchy’ has suggested a form peculiar to capitalism. [70]
By the late 1970s it came to mean virtually anything to do with male domination. It had tended already to replace theories of the family as the root of women’s oppression. But the conclusions from their theory were, however, fairly uniform: that male domination is not simply a product of class society or specifically capitalism, but is something quite separate which will endure after the overthrow of capitalism. It is this which provides the theoretical justification for women’s separate organisation.
The problem of how to explain patriarchy was at first simply wished away. Many feminists, subscribing in any case to the idea that women’s oppression and its structures were quite autonomous from class society, regarded patriarchy as simply a separate sphere. ‘We are dealing with two autonomous areas, the economic mode oil capitalism and the ideological mode of patriarchy’, argued Juliet Mitchell. [71] Two socialist feminist historians, Sally Alexander and Barbara Taylor, embraced this view in 1980:
It was precisely because a Marxist theory of class conflict, however elaborated, could not answer all our questions about sexual conflict that we tried to develop an alternative. If we need to keep the two areas of analysis apart for a time, then so be it. [72]
On this definition, the dominance of patriarchy was ideological, and therefore could be challenged simply through ideological struggle. This implied autonomous groups of women fighting against patriarchy through consciousness-raising and thus defeating it on the level of ideas. The strength of patriarchy theory among socialist feminists meant that many of them were already making major concessions towards idealist and non-materialist theories. But the theory still presented a problem for socialist feminists. Patriarchy did, after all, have to be rooted in some material reality, if socialist feminists were to retain any credibility as Marxists.
Marx himself had stated in the German Ideology that ideas did not have an independent existence, but were rooted in the circumstances in which men and women lived and worked:
Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development; but men, developing their material production and their material intercourse alter, along with their real existence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life. [73]
Patriarchy could not therefore be explained simply as existing. There had to be reasons for those patriarchal ideas coming into existence and – more importantly – for their continued existence from feudalism to capitalism, despite the fundamental changes in society which had accompanied the transition from one mode of production to another. It was this essentially idealist and ahistorical approach that to some socialist feminists to question the theory of patriarchy. Sheila Rowbotham pointed to various periods of struggle in history when women have acted together with men to achieve their aims, when
women’s public political action has often challenged not only the ruling class, the invader or the coloniser, but also the men’s idea of women’s role. [74]
And she argued that at least Marxist theory took account of historical changes and their implications, whereas patriarchy was a static concept:
Within Marxism there is at least a possibility of a dialectical unity of transience and moment. But it seems to me that the concept of ‘patriarchy’ offers no such prospect. [75]
But she was already fighting a losing battle. A major and influential attack on Marxist ideas in the form of an article by the American feminist Heidi Hartmann, became the justification for a generation of socialist feminists accepting wholeheartedly the theory of patriarchy. Hartmann’s thesis in The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism [76] was a persuasive one. She argued that patriarchy had a material base, which ‘lies most fundamentally in men’s control over women’s labour power’. [77] So women are denied access to the economically productive resources of capitalism. In order to achieve this, men go into an alliance with capital, by raising and winning demands for protective legislation and the family wage. Hartmann was expressing what was to become a very common view among socialist feminists: that men, and especially male trade unionists, have colluded with capital to keep women down. This view was popularised by a number of arguments relating to the family wage and was used as a justification for some quite reactionary ideas such as support for a feminist incomes policy.
A number of serious historians have provided a challenge to this view. They have pointed to the fact that most working women and men accepted and welcomed protective legislation; that the family wage only applied to a minority of working-class families; and that the overwhelming majority of men weren’t even in unions at the time. [78] But the dominant view became the crude and simply erroneous one outlined above. This had two serious implications for socialist feminists. It led firstly to a rejection of male workers as part of the struggle for women’s liberation. If men were indeed in alliance with capital, then at least part of the struggle had to be against men. The second implication was an acceptance of more radical feminist ideas. After all, the early radical feminists in America had identified men as a major enemy, on the basis of biological differences. Here was a theory which once again stressed the biological difference between men and women as a major source of oppression, rather than the social system within which they existed.
From the late 1970s onwards, theories of the family as the root of women’s oppression, which explained it in class terms, were increasingly replaced by patriarchal theories based not on class but on gender. By 1982, two socialist feminists could, while defending socialist feminism, demonstrate how far it had strayed from basic Marxist ideas. Beatrix Campbell and Anna Coote’s Sweet Freedom pointed to aspects of women’s oppression which ‘cannot be accounted for in Marxist theory of class exploitation’. [79] For them, ‘socialist feminists have begun to develop an exacting critique of theories of class exploitation. They insist on the centrality of ideological struggle, which has been all too glibly nudged to the periphery of politics by much of the left.’ Reproduction and family relations are placed at the heart of social and economic theory and strategy.
It is at this point that the gap between radical feminism (in its non-biological determinist form) and socialist feminism is at its narrowest. What distinguishes the two is that socialist feminists’ politics entail neither a rejection of men nor a withdrawal from them, but an urgent necessity to fight both in and against male-dominated power relations. [80]
Campbell and Coote were right to say that the gap between radical and socialist feminist theory was growing narrower. But what they didn’t understand at all was how the balance of forces between the two had shifted, and what the implications for the future were. The wholesale adoption of patriarchy theory only served to strengthen the radical feminist wing of the movement.
Things were in any case moving very fast. The national Women’s Liberation Conference in Birmingham in 1978 was an indication of that. The conference is remembered – somewhat notoriously – as the last to be held in Britain. Its debates were so acrimonious that no one individual or grouping has taken it upon themselves to organise a repeat. Over 3,000 women attended the conference. All the different wings of the movement were represented there – but some were more dominant than others. Many radical feminists were becoming increasingly impatient with any strategy of change which involved men or socialist (therefore by implication male-defined) politics. Among them were the Revolutionary Feminists – so called not because of any adoption of socialist ideas, but because of their uncompromising hostility to any collaboration with men.
Revolutionary feminism had emerged at the previous year’s women’s liberation conference, when Sheila Jeffreys organised a workshop entitled The Need for Revolutionary Feminism – against the liberal takeover of the Women’s Liberation Movement. Two hundred women turned up to discuss
a political feminism. There was sex-rolism, lifestylism, and socialist feminism. I was in a desperate search for radical feminist theory which talked of the power of men and how to take it from them. Politics was taken to mean socialism, and theory the extension of Marxism. [81]
Jeffreys hit a nerve. By the time of the 1978 conference anti-socialist ideas were much more widespread. The conference was split on every major issue. The report in Spare Rib gave some indication of this. The conference was divided into workshops which discussed three issues: how do we oppress each other? what is the nature of campaigns, how effective are they and what is the alternative? and how do we come together in terms of our own internal organisation? The atmosphere was acrimonious. As the report’s writers, Anny Bracx, Gail Chester and Sara Ranee put it:
one concept which we have developed hardly surfaced in this set up: sisterhood ... there was little sympathetic listening; it was mainly a question of attack and defence. [82]
Debate centred around the phrasing of the new seventh demand of the movement. Should it be preceded by the phrase ‘male violence against women is an expression of male supremacy and political control of women’?
After a protracted shouting match, it was voted to delete the incriminating sentence from the new seventh demand. [83]
But the damage had been done. Women who had gone to the conference hoping to experience the movement as a real sisterhood of women were bitterly disappointed. This was reflected in Spare Rib’s letters pages in the following months. A Birmingham woman wrote:
the threatening stances, arrogant posturings and self-indulgent introspection I and my friends witnessed at conference have ensured that none of us will ever try to establish contact with the movement again. [84]
A number of feminist groups including Lesbian Left, Rights of Women and Women against Racism and Fascism wrote, on the other hand, that the movement had to be ‘broad enough to accommodate our differences’. [85] And members of Brighton Women’s Liberation wrote defending those who had argued:
While the plenary was disastrous and upsetting it revealed genuine political differences within the movement which we have been afraid of facing up to.
This statement was undoubtedly true. There were real political differences. The letter described them thus:
Our politics are feminist. We analyse our oppression as due to male supremacy, to the patriarchy. Men are our oppressors, the enemy, and not some abstract ‘system’. The system is created and perpetuated by men for the benefit of all men. Capitalism, class, racism, fascism, colonialism and imperialism are all male institutions, current manifestations of male rule – the patriarchy. [86]
These feminists were absolutely clear about their politics, and they were developing more confidence in expressing them: oppression came from the patriarchy; it could be fought not by focussing on issues like class or imperialism but by fixing on male rule as the primary source of women’s oppression. Such an analysis clearly left no room for any political activity which involved men. This analysis was miles away from the established socialist feminism – Sheila Rowbotham’s writing on history, the domestic labour debate, issues like the night cleaners, the National Abortion Campaign or Trico. But the socialist feminists had a problem. They had conceded the theory of patriarchy and therefore at least some of its conclusions. Now many feminists were taking these conclusions much further than the socialist feminists had wanted.
It was at this time that socialist feminism really went into crisis. But instead of reasserting any sort of Marxist tradition, they responded by attacking at least some of the socialist ideas that they had previously embraced. This in turn reflected how far the socialist feminists had moved over the years. A telling comment on this came from a leading American socialist feminist, Kathie Sarachild – a former founder of Redstockings. Interviewed in Spare Rib in 1978, Sarachild said:
New York Radical Women had always contained a contradiction between what then were called the politicos and the feminists; later you would call it the socialist feminists and the radical feminists. But then, the politicos didn’t call themselves feminists. They were against feminism. [87]
By the late 1970s the ‘politicos’ certainly weren’t against feminism. Their defensiveness at being socialists was indeed reflected in nearly all the socialist feminist publications. Red Rag – by now totally dominated by Communist Party feminists – went through a crisis in 1980. Its editorial stated:
Our crisis ... came from our assumption as socialist feminists that because the WLM existed, men would change. But the pain of our personal and political lives over the past couple of years has been the discovery that the second doesn’t follow from the first. [88]
The editorial continued: ‘socialism has not only failed to confront patriarchy, but socialism in Britain has just about killed off socialism.’ [89] Socialist Woman went through a similar crisis in 1978, over whether to organise a socialist feminist current; [90] and the SWP’s Women’s Voice saw in the bitterly divided 1978 Women’s Liberation Conference a sad betrayal of the earlier unity of the movement. In an open letter issued after the conference it looked back to the 1970 founding conference in Oxford and said:
There we were, not knowing how our movement would develop, not knowing each other, not yet having proved that we could build any campaigns among the masses of women who hadn’t even heard of us. But there was far more sisterhood and solidarity and sense of purpose in that meeting than there was in Birmingham. Is this what we’ve achieved in our eight years? [91]
All these statements provided evidence of the deep crisis in which socialist feminism found itself. But the solutions to this crisis weren’t forthcoming. Or if they were, they tended in every direction other than towards an attack on radical or separatist feminism. Feminists around Red Rag, particularly Beatrix Campbell, increasingly adapted radical feminist theory to attack the male working class and the trade unions – with predictably reactionary results. The SWP and Women’s Voice went through its own internal crisis, partly at least centred on the need to resolve the relationship between Marxism and feminism. Other feminists turned to a form of organisation which did not exclude men and indeed welcomed them. But they did so by launching a major attack on Leninist organisation, which allegedly had nothing useful to say or offer to women. Sheila Rowbotham, Lynne Segal and Hilary Wainwright published their influential book, Beyond the Fragments in 1979. [92] It drew strongly on libertarian politics and polemicised against Leninist forms of organisation. Its main thesis, however, was that left politics had to be transformed by women and by the experience of the women’s movement. Beyond the Fragments was praised by nearly everybody on the left. It was even the subject of an adulatory article written by Jill Tweedie on the Guardian women’s page. Tweedie stated in support of the book that
political and industrial jargon is too often used to make people feel inferior, ignorant, powerless. Godheads like Lenin and Marx are invoked to put you in your place and the ordinary person fights back in the only way possible – by dropping out. [93]
This really was standing things on their head. Women’s liberation started as a movement against oppression which was caused by the system, and perpetrated through the dominant ideas in the system – those of the ruling class. Here, so the argument went, women’s oppression was maintained not just by men, but by socialist men – the very ones committed to ending this oppressive system! Just to rub the argument in, the article was accompanied by a picture of two women pensioners captioned ‘waiting for the revolution: are they failed by the organised left?’ [94] This was the message which many would-be socialists took from Beyond the Fragments. As Lynne Segal later admitted, some saw it as justifying abandonment of class politics – others as the green light for joining the Labour Party. [95] This may not have been the intention of its authors, but it was nonetheless the reality. The fragment conference in Leeds in 1980 was hugely popular. Yet little came out of it. Attempts to set up local fragment organisation foundered on two things: the decline of local ‘fragment-type’ groups around the end of the 1970s; and the massive influx of those influenced by fragment-type arguments into the Labour Party. This was the key political direction for socialist feminists in the 1980s.
 
Women and Labour – a force for change?
The election of Margaret Thatcher in 1979 led to a flood of activists into the Labour Party. Thousands of socialists and activists, frustrated and disillusioned that their years of operating in left groups, movements or campaigns had not resulted in any real social change, now saw transforming Labour as the alternative. Nowhere was this more true than among a layer of feminists, who by the late 1970s accelerated the already growing trend into the Labour Party.
The guru of Labour’s new left was Tony Benn, a former cabinet minister who moved to the left in opposition. A sign of the rise of the Labour left was the major interview with Benn carried in Spare Rib’s hundredth issue in 1980. Benn argued, in the face of some hostile questioning, for a form of socialist feminism, operating through the Labour Party. [96] There were increased demands among Labour women for change inside the party which reflected this feminism. There were calls for the revival of women’s sections, for women’s committees attached to local councils to ensure that women’s demands were met, and for positive discrimination to create more women MPs, women council leaders and so on. Labour made a party political broadcast on the question of women in 1981, and in 1982 there was a women’s festival in London organised by the Labour Party. The GLC in particular was identified with trying to bring change for women, and its women’s committee attracted a great deal of publicity.
What was the attraction of the Labour Party for so many feminists? It had, after all, a particularly poor record on fighting for women’s rights. Indeed the Callaghan government, which fell in 1979, had gone out of its way to stress the virtues of traditional family values, and at one time had even proposed a Minister for Marriage. [97] At least part of Labour’s attraction lay in the nature of the party itself. An editorial in Feminist Review put it like this:
A number of features peculiar to the Labour Party and its left wing may have made it attractive to feminist ‘entryism’ in the past year or so ... the Labour Party seems more like a forum than a political party and it is not, of course, a democratic centralist party. It is not a party that’s claimed to have a worked out line on the emancipation of women or a worked out policy for them. Women may therefore have expected less of the Labour Party than they did from Marxist groups, and perhaps also felt that their feminism was less under attack – or remained more intact, simply because the Labour Party is less ‘ideological’. [98]
The Labour Party had always been a ‘broad church’ in that it contained wide divergences of opinion – and sometimes directly contradictory views – within its midst. In the late 1970s and early 1980s in particular, when the left in the Labour Party was on the ascendant, this made it a much more attractive option than a more rigorous Leninist organisation, especially to that layer of educated women in high paid full-time work who – along with their male counterparts – have tended to become the backbone of the party in recent years. But perhaps the most compelling reason for the feminist move into the Labour Party was the sense that direct actions and struggles had failed, and that the only solution for women – as for the working class – lay in the election of a Labour government! This meant, in particular, that many socialist feminists could ignore the fact that the women’s movement was now dominated by ideas which were totally anti-men. Indeed they could subscribe to at least some of these ideas, whilst continuing to feel that they were doing something practical in the here and now to help women. So, for example, women flooded onto the massive Labour Party demonstrations against unemployment in Liverpool and Glasgow in 1980–81.
This support for Labour showed many contradictions, however. The occupation for jobs by women at Lee Jeans in Greenock, which started in 1981, was largely ignored by Labour, as were most industrial disputes. And the same day that 80,000 marched against unemployment in Glasgow, 2,000 women joined a London Reclaim the Night march. The 2,000 were composed of a strange amalgam of strongly anti-men radical feminists and the SWP’s student women who argued class politics against much hostility. [99]
The passivity of Labour Party feminists was also shown by the incident which marked the biggest demonstration yet in defence of abortion rights – against the Corrie bill in 1979. The massive demonstration was called by the TUC, which in itself was an unprecedented step. It was built for in trade union branches up and down the country, and on the day 80,000 women and men turned up. Union and workplace banners were well represented. The TUC had, however, called the demonstration for its own ends, and was determined to control it. In this, the National Abortion Campaign, led by Labour Party women – many of them ex-revolutionaries – was all too happy to comply. A number of women activists – many of them radical feminists – objected to men leading the march. Several hundred of them spontaneously took over the front of the march, to the fury of the TUC bureaucrats.
The socialist/radical split once again came to the fore. Women bureaucrats and Communist Party members Judith Hunt and Terry Marsland defended the march order in Spare Rib; Susan Hemmings justified the breakaway in the same issue. [100] The outcome of the demo was to lead to an increased alienation from what was seen as the left. A letter in Spare Rib from Lesbian Left said that they had met after the march to discuss their future. At the meeting they talked of
the contradiction between feminist politics on the one hand and male-defined left politics on the other. Most of us decided at the meeting that we can no longer accept the term ‘Left’ because its politics does nothing to challenge Patriarchy. [101]
Yet both sides in the argument were wrong. The march should have been led by women, but women rank-and-file trade unionists – not by male (or a few female) bureaucrats. Nor should it have been led by the radical feminists, who had no interests in involving working-class women in their struggle, and still less conception of the need to win working-class men to support for abortion rights. This one incident encapsulated much of what was wrong with the involvement by the early 1980s. Socialist feminists looked passively to Labour and to the trade union bureaucracy to deliver reforms for women. In practice this usually took the form of advancement for themselves and women like them, in the employ of the GLC or other left councils – or as women councillors or MPs. Radical feminists tended to remain the activists in the movement but were totally removed from any notion of class struggle. The two reached a synthesis in the extreme separatist action of the Greenham Common peace women, and in the extremely uncritical support for it from feminists inside the Labour Party.
Greenham Common was one of the major influences on politics in the early 1980s. The women were part of a gigantic, if largely passive, movement for peace which swept Europe in response to US plans to site Cruise missiles there. Its motivation was opposition to the view that Europe could be used by the superpowers as a ‘contained’ or ‘limited’ theatre of war. The Greenham women originated in a march organised by one woman to the proposed missile base in Berkshire in 1981. Once there, they set up a women’s peace camp. The camp sparked very strong support from CND members and others concerned with the threat of war. The privations suffered by the women, and their brutal treatment at the hands of military personnel and the local council, only added to this support. Demonstrations around the base attracted many thousands. Tony Benn in particular added his support and stressed that the actions of the Greenham women should be followed. Here once again was an issue where a women’s campaign could attract mass support.
But the campaign had two major weaknesses. The first was that it relied on a small number of women to act on behalf of others. This only added to the passivity of the movement, which could cheer on the actions at Greenham, while doing virtually nothing itself. The second weakness lay in the politics of the campaign. The protest was a form of non-violence. But the non-violence was celebrated as a particularly female thing. Such ideas were extended to include the belief that nuclear weapons were a product not of the capitalist drive to war, but of male aggressive values. ‘Take the toys from the boys’ was a popular slogan at the time. As one view put it:
Our present hierarchies are based on the need to control and feel superior. The model for this is men’s domination of women ... women have a different consciousness. Although we have believed in our own passivity and helplessness, few of us are really taken in by male heroic values. [102]
But what were the values which were to replace the male heroic? values? Essentially they were that women’s traditional role as wives and mothers equipped them for campaigning for peace. Theirs were almost by definition peace-loving occupations. Such a view was embellished by a whole series of mystical and semi-religious ideas: the idea of female goddesses; of dragons; of weaving webs around the base. This last action was inspired by women who wove a web round the Pentagon in Washington as a protest against war.
There were cheers, chants, and whistles, and women sang as we wove, Generals minced their way through woman-made webs, amidst laughs and admonitions about their daily work. At the end there was a braid around the Pentagon, and beautiful weavings at all the entrances. Women who were not arrested held a closing ritual circle. [103]
Women looked back to pre-capitalist times in order to celebrate their femaleness, and following Mary Daly in Gyn/Ecology [104] adopted the term ‘spinster’ with pride. A peace group in Vermont, USA, called itself the Spinsters and used spinning and weaving as a means of combatting male violence. A leaflet they issued started like this:
We will meet, all of us women of every kind,
we will meet in the center, make a circle;
we will weave a world web to entangle the powers that bury our children. [105]
These politics were ultimately reactionary. They harked back to a mythical golden age and, because they did not confront the power of the capitalist state, in the end could not point a way forward in terms of getting rid of nuclear weapons. What the movement around Greenham Common did do, however, was to underline the dominance of radical feminist ideas inside the women’s movement – and at the same time to deny the validity of any form of class analysis in fighting women’s oppression.
 
The present day
Events were on the side of this radical feminist analysis. The level of class struggle was low, unlike the early 1970s. By the early years of Thatcher rule the picture looked very different. There were, it is true, a number of quite significant strikes involving women. In 1981 women textile workers at Lee Jeans in the west of Scotland occupied to prevent closure. Typists employed by Liverpool City Council embarked on a long strike over regrading in the same year. Asian women at Chix in Slough struck for union recognition in 1980, again beginning a dispute which was to bring them widespread support. In 1982 hospital workers took action over pay. But all the disputes eventually ended in at least partial defeat, and none of them generalised to such an extent that other workers took up their example.
Fragmentation was the order of the day. The movement took dozens of different directions. One indication of this was the crisis undergone by the collective which produced Spare Rib. The magazine had always been hailed as one of the great successes of the movement, and had been produced monthly since 1972. It was by and large an approachable and lively magazine. But as its 100th issue approached in 1980, the collective was forced to bring in a group counsellor to sort out its problems. These were caused by bitter political divisions in the collective. Initially these took the form of whether or not to publish an article which criticised lesbians. As Spare Rib put it:
Publication was blocked. Personal rifts and political disagreements opened up that had until then lain relatively dormant. Since then it has been difficult to produce work and get along in a sisterly spirit. [106]
The group counsellor did not work, as was admitted in a later issue. Further splits continued, especially on grounds of race. Allegations were made that white feminists were oppressing their black sisters. A row broke out over whether by supporting Palestinians and attacking the state of Israel, some feminists were not also oppressing Jewish women. The net result was an almost total turnover in the composition of the collective, and the dominance of a much stronger third worldist approach – pushed specially by many of the black women who now comprised much of the collective.
The black/white split was characteristic of the movement’s fragmentation. The logic of seeing oppression as the central determining factor in society, and therefore concentration on organising round oppression, meant that different oppressed groups became more concerned with how others oppressed them than with fighting that oppression. The establishment of the Organisation of Women of African and Asian Descent (OWAAD) in 1979 as a separate black women’s organisation was a sign of this. But OWAAD was dogged from the beginning by sectarianism. It always looked to what separated it from the rest of the left and the rest of the movement. This can be seen, for example, in the statement issued at its second Black Women’s National Conference in 1980:
those of us who tried to involve ourselves in the anti-racist/fascist movement (primarily the Anti-Nazi League) found that the mainly white membership was ignoring institutionalised racism (e.g. racist immigration laws, SUS, etc.), preferring instead to channel its energies into combating the symptoms rather than the cause. [107]
This simply wasn’t true, as the record of the ANL and the groups participating in it shows. All too often, indeed, campaigns on issues like immigration laws or SUS were set up and found little or no resonance among the black communities. But it was a convenient peg on which to hang separatism. This is what happened, and the result was still more fragmentation and internalisation inside the movement.
There was only one beacon of light during these years for women who had a socialist approach to organising, and who believed that working women had to organise as part of their class to achieve liberation. The movement of miners’ wives in support of the strike of 1984–5 took everyone by surprise. Women Against Pit Closures showed the strength and solidarity of the wives and families of the miners. Women started by duplicating their traditional roles in the home – cooking, buying food – but they quickly went on to do much more. Women were involved in speaking at meetings, collecting money and picketing. They travelled the country in the process. A national demo in London in August 1984 attracted thousands, as did a rally in Chesterfield at the end of the strike.
The women were an inspiration for socialists and feminists. Many feminists were, in any case, involved in building support for the strike, and socialist feminists like Jean McCrindle were instrumental in building WAPC. But the campaign was inevitably bound up with the fate of the strike and so could not really be sustained after its defeat. Attempts by the women to win affiliation to the NUM at its 1985 conference failed following the opposition of the so-called soft left in the union. And although the campaign represented a real advance for many of the women concerned, it remained firmly in the control of the union leaders. It was led by Betty Heathfield and Ann Scargill. Nonetheless, it offered a glimpse of the strengths of women workers. And it helped at least temporarily to win the argument that the key division in society was one of class, not of gender. Unfortunately the defeat of the strike not only led to the dominance of much more right-wing feminist ideas. It also dealt a blow to the idea of class struggle as a means of changing the world. This in turn affected the development of the women’s movement – for the worse.
 
The women’s movement today
We are told that today the movement is going from strength to strength. Feminist ideas, according to the gurus of the movement, have never been stronger. Alleged proof of this assertion is cited as the success of feminist publishing, or the plethora of women’s studies courses. Women are in more positions of power than ever before – from private industry to the prime minister herself. Even the Church of England is bowing to pressure for women priests. Some socialist feminists who should know better are even influenced by these types of argument, which can only be sustained by totally abandoning the original principles of the women’s movement. For although there have undoubtedly been major advances for women in the past decades, these have been nearly all advances for bourgeois women. They have been about a minority of middle- and upper-class women gaining access to the once closed worlds of men – in business, finance, journalism or higher education. These sorts of advance have in fact led to the dominant ideas inside the women’s movement being more right-wing than ever. At the same time there are less real gains for working women, and indeed some major attacks on hard-won rights.
As usual, it is in the United States movement that these features are most apparent. Sylvia Ann Hewlett’s book on the women’s movement, A Lesser Life [108], shows how most women’s rights groups are supporting a court case – the Garland case – which denies women the right to reinstatement following maternity leave, and so effectively denies maternity leave. She quotes Dianne Feinstein, the San Francisco mayor and a feminist, as supporting Garland on the grounds that if women want equality, they have to be treated equally with men and not expect any special privileges!
What we were asking was to create a special group of workers that, in essence, is pregnant women and new mothers. I just don’t happen to agree with that. I don’t think the work market has to accommodate itself to women having children. [109]
This is also apparently the position of the National Organisation of Women. As Hewlett points out, this results in women having less right to leave for childbirth than if they are incapacitated in a skiing accident – because only women can have children, whereas anyone can have an accident. The position is an astonishing one for anyone who calls themselves a feminist to take. Yet it shows precisely the contradiction of American feminism. On the one hand it is extremely widespread, on the other it is moulded and limited by the society in which it exists. Therefore in Reagan’s America, with less than a fifth of workers in unions, it adapts to all sorts of backward and anti-working class ideas. Under Reagan, the Equal Rights Amendment to the constitution also fell. ERA was passed in the US Senate in 1972 by 84 votes to 8. But ten years later the deadline for ratification passed with only 35 of the necessary 38 states having ratified it. [110]
ERA had been the hope of the mainstream feminists. It had been a central plank of the strategy at the Houston conference. Yet the support for women’s liberation had been frittered away. What remained was only the chance of self-advancement for a sizeable minority of women – while poverty, unemployment and discrimination remained, and remain, the lot of most women workers.
In Britain, once again, things are not quite so extreme. But the patterns are nonetheless clearly repeated. Activity inside the women’s movement over recent years has virtually ground to a halt. The campaign against Victoria Gillick – the reactionary who won a court case in 1985 preventing doctors and clinics from giving contraceptive advice to under-16s – attracted only a pathetic three thousand women to its demonstrations. And of these half were brought by the SWP on one occasion. Luckily the Gillick ruling was reversed – but had it not been, there was little evidence of the women’s movement’s ability to mobilise against it. [111] The same was true more recently when an anti-abortion male student tried to use the courts to prevent his girlfriend from having an abortion. The women’s movement response was nil. Greenham Common has also sunk into sectarian arguments, with the Wages for Housework women now also representing the Greenham Yellow Gate.
Neither are the International Women’s Day demonstrations serving as any sort of focus for feminists. In some years they have been virtually non-existent. In 1986 the demonstration was at Wapping in support of the printers’ wives and families. It was composed mainly of striking women and wives, and left-wing groups. Feminism had little organised expression on the march. In 1987, the demo was unpublicised and tiny. Publicity went instead to International Women’s Week – a series of events spreading over a week or even longer, usually organised by Labour councils in London and funded by them. Once again, municipal feminism became a substitute for any serious mobilisation.
Of course the FAB (Fight Alton’s Bill) campaign will make a difference. There are already signs that the campaign has widespread support. But there are also signs that the past few years have taken their toll in terms of mobilisation. Socialists should not be complacent about the need to actively involve women in the campaign.
Why is the movement today in such a sorry state? The answer lies in a combination of organisation and politics. The decline in class struggle over the past ten years has led to major crises among socialists and feminists. They have faced defeat and a massive ideological shift to the right. They have seen their ranks depleted. But the socialist organisations have survived this process incomparably better than the women’s movement. Although some groups have disappeared completely and the Communist Party has totally lost its once-dominant industrial role, there are still many thousands of socialist activists – in the SWP, in Militant and many non-aligned socialists inside the Labour Party. The very structurelessness of the women’s movement – so beloved by the authors of Beyond the Fragments – has resulted in disintegration and decay. This is in many ways a logical conclusion of the movement’s politics. If you believe that the purpose of liberation is consciousness-raising, then why not carry on with that in the privacy of your own home? If academic feminism is equally as valid as struggling to change the world, then why engage in activity?
But the women’s movement nonetheless survives. Its ideas are widely accepted inside whole sections of society today – in academia, in local government, in bourgeois politics and even in some private industry. Further it has an ideal life support system – the Labour Party. The past eight years of Thatcher rule have seen an increase in women candidates standing for Labour – although the proportion still remains pitifully small. Positive discrimination has meant a number of women winning positions previously held by men. Two black women – Merle Amory and Linda Bellos – have led Brent and Lambeth Labour councils in London. Another woman, Margaret Hodge, leads Islington. Labour made the creation of a Ministry for Women a major plank of its election campaign. It is committed to improving women’s safety from violent attack in the streets.
Labour is today a major prop for feminism. Funding for local council women’s committees ensures that a level of feminist activity is maintained in many of the inner-city areas – because professional feminists are paid to ensure that this happens. There are therefore a number of high-salaried jobs earmarked for feminists, at least in London. Publications like Spare Rib and Outwrite would appear to be at least partly subsidised by advertisements for these same jobs, and for other activities of the women’s committees. Until the abolition of the GLC, they also received direct grants from its Women’s Committee. [112]
’Feminism on the rates’ is not just a right-wing slur, but an actuality. However, given the crisis of British capitalism – and given the reformist and gradualist nature of the Labour Party – this brand of feminism becomes less and less able to deliver. Since the failure of the fight against ratecapping in 1985, this inability to deliver has become more acute. Women’s units can deliver nothing in terms of real change for women. More and more they talk about their role as ‘listening to women’ and attempting to patch up a very shaky system. Little different is promised on a national level. Jo Richardson has promised that her women’s ministry will be a listening ministry. Listening is probably all that it will be able to do.
 
The crisis of socialist feminism
The dominance of either bourgeois or radical feminism – or a combination of both – inside the movement provides a problem for socialist feminists. How do they resolve the dilemma of the relationship between class and gender? Can they comfortably remain in left-wing organisations? These are major questions which have not yet been settled. And because they have been thrown onto the defensive by the dominance of anti-working class ideas, many socialist feminists, too, accept that a large part of the problem lies with men – and especially working-class men. Indeed such is the strength of this argument that it has become the accepted common sense of the movement. Its chief and most polemical propagator is the Eurocommunist journalist Beatrix Campbell. She has been on the offensive over the question for ten years now. In an influential article, Work to Rule, written with Valerie Charlton in 1978 [113], she attacked the
craft-defensive male trade union movement in excluding women from the labour process. A singular feature of this process seems to have been men’s assertion of their wage as the family wage. [114]
The article argued that men’s and women’s interests as workers are basically antagonistic, attacked the notion of free collective bargaining and called for a redistribution of wages in favour of women. She took this argument further in another Red Rag article in 1980, typically entitled United We Fall. [115] Again in Sweet Freedom, with Anna Coote, she returned to the theme. [116]
Over the years, Campbell’s attitude to male workers and to the trade union movement has become more hostile. We have dealt with the substance of the arguments elsewhere. What is important here is to stress their impact on an already retreating and fragmented movement. They served to strengthen the arguments of those who were moving away from socialist politics and towards a cross-class feminism. After all, if men had traditionally been as great a problem as the capitalist system itself, then there was surely little point in engaging in struggle alongside them. This indeed was the conclusion of many feminists, who regarded the trade unions as the ‘men’s movement’.
Other socialist feminists sometimes found all this too much to stomach. Some, like Angela Weir and Elizabeth Wilson, tried seriously to bring the question of women’s liberation back to that of class and in the process aimed some effective blows at Campbell’s theories on feminist incomes policy and the family wage. [117] Others, like Anne Philips, sat on the fence – vacillating about class, gender and much more besides. [118] None the less, the theory has become widely accepted. It is propagated with ceaseless and monotonous regularity by Campbell through City Limits and Marxism Today. Yet studies which seriously challenge the theory remain locked into an academic debate and are not publicised in the same sort of way. [119] The net effect has been that these theories are used to bash the left.
One feminist who has tried to come to terms with this crisis of socialist feminism is Lynne Segal, a co-author of Beyond the Fragments. In a recent book, Is the future female? she begins by stating her worries over the direction of the women’s movement:
I wanted to write this book because I was disturbed by what has been emerging as the public face of feminism in the eighties ... What is most troubling to some older feminists such as myself is the turnaround in feminist writing from an initial denial of fundamental difference between women and men in the early seventies to a celebration of difference by the close of that decade. [120]
She goes on to lambast currently widespread theories, such as those concerning rape, pornography and violence. She is scathing of those who present men as the enemy. It isn’t as simple as that, she argues. Men aren’t an undifferentiated biological mass. Are those who are socialists or pro-feminist to be treated in the same way as those who want to keep women in the home? She pleads for a real socialist feminism which can direct its energies to fighting the real enemy. Lynne Segal’s approach is – compared to most of her contemporaries – a breath of fresh air. But her analysis, too, is flawed by two major features which, in their different ways, affect Weir and Wilson too. The first is that all accept variations of the patriarchy theory as being the key to women’s oppression. This is, as I have tried to show earlier, both wrong theoretically and a major tactical mistake in allowing ground to anti-working class and anti-socialist theory. In the case of socialist feminists like these writers, who want to remain true to the name of socialist feminist, this leads to, at best, a contradictory consciousness in order to end their oppression.
The second problem is the nature of the socialism itself. Weir and Wilson support the Stalinist wing of the Communist Party. Their view of socialism and women’s liberation is therefore distorted by their support for the ‘socialist’ countries. Segal is a libertarian socialist, which means that she swings the other way, rejecting all forms of party organisation (except of course for the Labour Party which puts no demands on anyone) in favour of autonomous movements. Yet today one thing at least is absolutely clear: the movements have not grown, often they have not even held together, and are farther away from their aims than ever before.
Only a political organisation which attempts to present a challenge to the whole of class society can lead to the successful overthrow of capitalism and therefore to laying the basis for the complete liberation of women. The failure to understand this means that even the best of the socialist feminists cannot see a way out of the problems of women’s oppression today. That is why those seeking genuine liberation through the women’s movement will be increasingly forced to look elsewhere – to socialist organisation.

Notes
1. This article is based on chapters in a forthcoming book. It therefore omits or skates over a range of questions: the theoretical basis of the women’s movement, the detailed relationship of the left to the women’s movement, etc.
2. B. Friedan, The Feminine Mystique
3. Social Trends, 1970.
4. Social Trends, 1986.
5. S. Evans, Personal Politics (New York 1979).
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. C. Ware, Women Power (New York 1970).
13. S. Evans, Personal Politics.
14. Principles of New York Radical Women, in R. Morgan, ed., Sisterhood is Powerful (1971).
15. C. Ware, op. cit.
16. Quoted in C. Ware, op. cit.
17. C. Ware, op. cit.
18. C. Ware, op. cit.
19. S. Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex.
20. V. Solanis, The SCUM Manifesto, in Sisterhood is Powerful.
21. B. Sinclair Deckard, The Women’s Movement (Harper and Row, 1979).
22. C. Ware, op. cit.
23. B. Sinclair Deckard, op. cit.
24. C. Ware, op. cit.
25. B. Sinclair Deckard, op. cit.
26. S. Rowbotham, The beginnings of women’s liberation in Britain, in The Body Politic (London 1972, stage 1).
27. Report in Shrew, vol. 3, no. 1, February 1971.
28. S. Rowbotham, 1972.
29. Socialist Woman, no. 1, 1972.
30. Report in Shrew, vol. 3, no. 9, December 1971, by J. Mitchell and A. de Winter, from the N7 Women’s Liberation Workshop.
31. Shrew, vol. 4, no. 3, June 1972.
32. Shrew, vol. 3, no. 9, December 1971.
33. See for example Socialist Woman, Autumn 1974. Also debate in New Left Review.
34. S. O’Sullivan, Passionate Beginnings: Ideological Politics 1969-72, in Feminist Review 11, 1982.
35. Red Rag, no. 1, 1973.
36. Red Rag, no. 4, 1974.
37. S. Alexander and S. O’Sullivan, Sisterhood under Stress, in Red Rag, no. 8, February 1975.
38. See on this, S. Rowbotham interviewed by E. Dallas and A. Hatchett, Socialist Review, no. 3, June 1978.
39. S. Rowbotham, The beginnings of women’s liberation in Britain, 1972.
40. Shrew, vol. 4, no. 1, 1972.
41. Shrew, vol. 4, no. 1, 1972.
42. Shrew, vol. 4, no. 1, 1972.
43. Shrew, vol. 3, no. 2, March 1971.
44. Of 41 groups listed in Shrew in 1972, 28 were open to new members, 13 were closed. Shrew, vol. 4, no. 5, October 1972.
45. S. Rowbotham, 1972. Figures for groups listed in Shrew tend to be much lower, so this is a generous estimate.
46. Shrew, vol. 3, no. 3, April 1971.
47. Shrew, vol. 3, no. 9, December 1971.
48. Shrew, autumn 1976.
49. Socialist Woman, autumn 1974.
50. For example at Wingrove and Rogers, EP strikes in Glasgow and Coventry (TASS AUEW).
51. Abortion Statistics 1985, OPCS.
52. Women’s Voice, no. 19, July 1975.
53. Women’s Voice, no. 19, July 1975.
54. Women’s Voice, no. 21, September 1975.
55. Women’s Voice, no. 23, November 1975.
56. Women’s Voice, no. 23, November 1975.
57. Interview with Robin Morgan in Spare Rib, no. 77, December 1978.
58. The Economist, 14 March 1987.
59. Interview with Linda Gordon in Spare Rib, no. 75, October 1978.
60. Domitila Barrios de Chungara with Moema Viezzer, Let Me Speak (Monthly Review Press, New York and London 1978).
61. Spare Rib, no. 68, March 1978.
62. Interview with Robin Morgan, op. cit.
63. J. Clausen, Sinking, Stealing (The Women’s Press, London 1985).
64. See Women’s Voice no. 2 (new series), February 1977.
65. Women’s Aid Federation, Battered Women Need Refuges (1975). (Reproduced in No Turning Back, The Women’s Press, London 1978.)
66. See Women at WAR (Falling Wall Press, 1978).
67. The Soho Sixteen and Reclaim the Night, 1978 leaflet reproduced in No Turning Back, op. cit.
68. S. Brownmiller, Against Our Will (New York, 1975; Harmondsworth 1976).
69. See, for example, D. Spender, Women of Ideas (RKP, London 1982).
70. S. Rowbotham, The trouble with “patriarchy”, in New Statesman, 28 December 1979.
71. J. Mitchell, Psychoanalysis and feminism (London 1975).
72. S. Alexander and B. Taylor, In defence of “patriarchy”, in New Statesman, 1 February 1980.
73. Karl Marx, The German Ideology (Moscow 1964).
74. S. Rowbotham, 1979, op. cit.
75. S. Rowbotham, 1979, op. cit.
76. H. Hartmann, The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism, in Capital & Class, no. 8, Summer 1979.
77. Ibid.
78. See for example J. Humphries, Class Struggle and the Persistence of the Working Class Family, in Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 1, no. 3, September 1977; and B. Taylor, Eve and the New Jerusalem (Virago, London 1983).
79. Beatrix Campbell and Anna Coote, Sweet Freedom (Picador, London 1982).
80. Campbell and Coote.
81. Women’s Liberation 1977, in Spare Rib, no. 58, May 1977.
82. Spare Rib, no. 70, May 1978.
83. Spare Rib, no. 70, May 1978.
84. Letter in Spare Rib, no. 71, June 1978.
85. Letter in Spare Rib, no. 71, June 1978.
86. Letter in Spare Rib, no. 73, August 1978.
87. Spare Rib, no. 79, February 1979.
88. Red Rag, August 1980.
89. Red Rag, August 1980.
90. Socialist Woman, Spring 1978.
91. Women’s Voice, no. 17, May 1978.
92. S. Rowbotham, L. Segal and H. Wainwright, Beyond the Fragments (Merlin, London 1979).
93. J. Tweedie, What every fragment knows, The Guardian, 29 January 1980.
94. The Guardian, 29 January 1980.
95. L. Segal, Is the future female? (Virago, London 1987).
96. Talking with Tony Benn, interview in Spare Rib, no. 100, November 1980.
97. Spare Rib, no. 75, October 1978.
98. Feminist Review, no. 12,1982.
99. Women’s Voice, no. 50, March 1981.
100. Spare Rib, no. 89, December 1979.
101. Spare Rib, no. 89, December 1979.
102. Nottingham Women Oppose the Nuclear Threat, in L. Jones, ed., Keeping the Peace (London 1983).
103. Y. King, All is connectedness: Scenes from the Women’s Pentagon Action, USA, in Keeping the Peace.
104. M. Daly, Gyn/Ecology (Boston 1978).
105. C. Reid, Reweaving the web of life, in Pam McAllister, ed., Reweaving the web of life: Feminism and non-violence (New Society Publishers, Philadelphia 1982).
106. Spare Rib, no. 98, September 1980.
107. Spare Rib, no. 95, June 1980.
108. S.A. Hewlett, A lesser life (New York 1986), p. 146.
109. Ibid.
110. J.J. Mansbridge, Why we lost the ERA (Chicago 1986).
111. See Socialist Worker, May/June 1985.
112. Indeed Outwrite seems to be in danger of closing as a result of not getting this grant. See Outwrite, April 1987.
113. B. Campbell and V. Charlton, Work to Rule, in Red Rag, no. 14, November 1978.
114. Work to Rule.
115. B. Campbell, United We Fall, in Red Rag, August 1980.
116. Campbell and Coote, Sweet Freedom.
117. A. Weir and E. Wilson, The British Women’s Movement, in New Left Review, reprinted in Hidden Agendas (Tavistock, London 1986).
118. A. Philips, Divided Loyalties (Virago, London 1987).
119. See J. Humphries, Class Struggle and the Persistence of the Working Class Family.
120. L. Segal, Is the future female?.
 



Beyond The Fragments
Sheila Rowbotham, Lynn Segal and Hilary Wainwright
Second printing forthcoming from the Merlin Press. £1.25
‘Publishing event of the year for all of us pondering the problems of “the way forward” must be Beyond the Fragments, by Sheila Rowbotham, Lynn Segal and Hilary Wainwright. “The movement for socialism must accept an autonomous feminist movement. And it must itself be changed by the demands and insights of that movement”, say the authors. Well, every once in a while, someone sits down and draws together all the things that we’ve all been thinking about and puts them down in one book, which then becomes our book. So it is with Beyond the Fragments. It’s absolutely essential reading for any socialist, whether feminist or libertarian (and, for Leveller readers, it really describes what the Leveller is, or should be all about).’
The Leveller, August 1979 issue.
Many socialists and would-be socialists are seeing this book as the answer, the way out of the fragmentation of the left, the solution to building a new socialist movement. In fact this book, written by three socialist feminists, is none of these things, although it is a significant contribution to the debate.
The author of the main essay The Women’s Movement and Organising for Socialism is Sheila Rowbotham, who puts forward three main aims for the book:
‘How I think some of the approaches to organising which go under the heading of Leninism and Trotskyism are flawed; how I think the assumptions of what it means to be a socialist carried within Leninism and Trotskyism and which prevail on the left now block our energy and self-activity and make it harder for most people; why I think the women’s movement suggests certain ways of reopening the possibility of a strong and popular socialist movement.’
The aim of the book is to take the experience of the Women’s movement and to generalise from it on the question of building socialist organisation and socialism, in other words to see the women’s movement as a model for socialist organisation.
It is impossible to take up all the points raised in the book. Many of them are examples of personal experiences to which it is impossible to reply; many others contain distortions and, in one or two cases, dishonesty, which aren’t worth replying to point by point. The aim of this review is to look at the propositions Sheila advances and to look at her strategy for socialism. The first question is whether leninist and trotskyist approaches to organisation are flawed as Sheila says. By this she is referring to the emphasis that Leninists put on the workplace as the centre for organising the working class ‘certainly it is still possible to find among Trotskyists an assumption that class consciousness comes solely from the experience of work. There is still a preoccupation with the moments of confrontation – 1917, or the betrayals of the trade union leadership aided by the CP in the general strike for instance. The problem of why workers accepted such leaders is evaded.’
Sheila feels that firstly the workplace is not the sole or even major source of class consciousness, or secondly that it is wrong to focus on the major events in history as the means of developing and changing consciousness. Her analysis is of course typical of the women’s movement in that it seeks to justify methods of organising outside the workplace and the whole concept of consciousness raising.
Yet what is the reality? Class consciousness can be and is derived from many complex sources. It derives from the whole pattern of people’s lives – their culture, background and so on. But that is not the key question. We know that most people do not grow up with revolutionary, or even reformist, socialist consciousness. So the problem is, how does consciousness change?
What is it that transforms the ideas of tens of thousands of workers and makes them challenge the whole of bourgeois society, instead of being dominated by bourgeois society’s ideas. Some individuals change their ideas by reading or by argument on a one to one basis. Most do not. Most people change their views when their own preconceived ideas come into conflict with reality. That usually only happens when they are involved in activity which is out of the ordinary – strikes, elections, evictions etc which begin to show to them the way in which society works – and their power to change society rather than be passive spectators.
Examples abound of changes in consciousness – on a very wide scale; Portugal 1974/5, Iran for the last year, France 1968. Or, on a more modest scale, a whole series of strikes involving firemen, hospital workers or lorry drivers, with many of those striking not part of traditionally strong sectors.
Now of course that change of consciousness isn’t static. Unless those workers see a clear alternative to present society, and unless they think that alternative can be won, they can easily sink back into accepting the old ideas. The role of revolutionary socialists has always been to try to provide a view of that alternative and show how it can be won.
That is why Leninists place emphasis on the ‘high points of history’ as Sheila calls them; that is where large numbers of people change their consciousness in ways that cannot be done on an individual basis. That too is why the emphasis for Leninists has to be on the workplace.
Not only is the working class the only class with the power as a class to change society, but also the way in which workplace organisation encourages collectivity means that the potential for workers binding together to fight common grievances is greater, and that the potential to change consciousness is also greater.
The second area where Sheila seeks to prove that leninist and trotskyist forms of organisation do not work is where she tries to show ‘how leninist and trotskyist assumptions of what it means to be a socialist block our energy and self-activity and make it harder for socialism to communicate to most people.’ Here she focuses on two things; democratic centralism and the concept of leaders and cadres.
Sheila argues that democratic centralism is not a neutral form to be adopted in certain circumstances, but is inherently undemocratic. She cites as evidence of this the Communist Party, and the arguments of those who left the CP in 1956. She continues:
‘If you accept a high degree of centralism and define yourselves as professionals concentrating above everything upon the central task of seizing power you necessarily diminish the development of the self-activity and self-confidence of most of the people involved.’
Yet it is clear that Sheila doesn’t really understand what democratic centralism is all about. She is right about one thing: democratic centralism is not neutral. The concept as formulated by the Bolshevik Party and by Lenin could not for them be separated from the type of organisation that they were trying to build. For them, the party did not represent the class, nor was it a substitute for the class. The party learnt from the class, from class struggle, and also tried to lead the class, through developing its theory and practice in relation to the experiences of the class.
The only form of organisation which could fit such a party was democratic centralism. Democracy had to exist for maximum debate of the issues facing the class, centralism to try to obtain the maximum unity in practice, to implement the democratically decided perspectives of the party.
That form of organisation doesn’t fit any other type of party. If you try to substitute for the class then the experiences of the class don’t matter to you anyway. If you believe that party and class are synonymous then there is no need for centralist organisation. It is no wonder that CP members in 1956 felt that their manipulative and substitutionist party was not democratic – they were right. Neither was it democratic centralist, nor was it Leninist. It had a high degree of centralisation, and no democratic debate. The neutrality of democratic centralism is a nonsense, as is the idea of applying the form to organisations which are non-Leninist. The alternative which Sheila puts forward is that of participatory democracy. She herself condemns this form of organisation.
‘The problems of participatory democracy are evident. If you are not able to be present you can’t participate. Whoever turns up next time can reverse the previous decision. If very few people turn up they are lumbered with the responsibility. It is a very open situation and anyone with the gift for either emotional blackmail of a conviction of the need to intervene can do so without being checked by any accepted procedure.’
Despite all this, she claims that ‘it does assert the idea that everyone is responsible equally and that everyone should participate. It concedes no legitimating respect for permanent leaders of spokespeople.’
Yet there are leaders in the Women’s Movement and in other participatory democracy bodies like NAC. They are usually women who have some time to spare for working in the group, a certain level of education and articulacy, and sometimes a certain recognition through being journalists, writers and so on.
These people are seen as representing, as speaking for, the movement as a whole, both inside and outside it. There is therefore a legitimating respect for permanent spokespeople. I would far rather argue about and vote for people I wanted to represent my views.
A further point which needs to be taken up; do revolutionaries and the structures of their organisations put people off? Do they stop workers – or anyone else from joining the socialist movement? As far as I can see, most working class people regard most socialists and members of the women’s movement as a little odd. That is hardly surprising in a non-revolutionary period, particularly in a country where political consciousness is fairly low.
Yet what prevents them from joining is not that. Rather it is the fact that the gap between what we are arguing and what most workers perceive as the reality of their lives is large. That can change very quickly. But that is the problem. Sheila, by posing the problem as the behaviour or attitudes of revolutionaries is actually falling into the dangerous misconception that if we appeared ‘nicer’ or more ‘normal’ more people would become revolutionaries. It simply is not true.
Sheila’s third proposition is that the women’s movement suggests certain ways of reopening the possibility of a strong and popular socialist movement. She criticises the party for trying to manipulate spontaneous struggles and for having a fixed concept of the vanguard. As earlier, she feels that there is an obsession with the workplace.
Most movements erupt spontaneously. Any number of contributing factors may trigger off a movement, or a strike, or a revolution. They may be the most unexpected things. Often those spontaneous upsurges do not come from sections of traditional trade union militants or from the political party. It is often true that such a movement or upsurge may take party members – who have argued with their fellow workers so long they feel nothing can change them – by surprise, and that their consciousness may lag behind.
This process of course makes total nonsense of a fixed or permanent vanguard. In such situations the leadership of the class becomes a very fluid thing. But such situations do not last forever. So it is no good socialists merely cheering on some sections of the class which have suddenly shown the will to fight, whether against the boss or against the state.
The role of the party is to absorb the experiences of these struggles, to learn from them and to generalise from them. For socialists the question is not who is going to erupt next, but how do we weld together different sections of the class in order to advance the fight against capitalism.
The position of Sheila and the women’s movement is instead to tail these struggles, not to advance them.
What then is Sheila’s strategy for socialism?
‘The recognition which was present within pre-leninist radical movements of the importance of making values and culture which could sustain the spirit and help to move our feelings towards the future, has been reasserted by the women’s movement. This means we can begin to think again about the problem of how we move towards socialism. Leninism has been particularly weak in relation to the actual transition to socialism.’
She quotes Sarah Benton in Red Rag approvingly.
‘It’s not enough for the individual woman to “know” she is possessed or dominated, indeed in order not to want to be, there must be an alternative culture in which such values are seen to be dominant and to be practised.’
What Sheila is arguing for is a ‘prefigurative political form’, one which contains at least something of the socialist future we want, ‘such forms would seek both to consolidate existing practice and release the imagination of what could be.’
It seems to me that this form of organising, whatever its other points, contains two serious misconceptions. Firstly it allows for a large amount of individual choice. Most workers, men and women, do not have the choice as to where they live or work, or spend their leisure time. Such choice is not open to them.
Secondly the idea could only work if you believed in a war of attrition against capitalism. That brings us to the question of state power. Can socialism be the minds of more individuals, by building counter-hegemonic blocks, or by taking over certain sectors of society without challenging the capitalist state at a global level? What will happen then? Will this war of attrition continue, or will the capitalist class attempt to smash any emergent socialist movement?
I believe the latter, which is the experience of revolutions throughout capitalism, culminating in the bloodbath of Chile. It is not enough for workers to assert their rights – they also have to wrest control of society from those who possess it at present. They have to seize the factories and destroy the institutions of the state. They have to smash the army and the police and anything else that fights for the old order.
Workers will have to build their own organisations, their own society, on the ruins of the old. All that requires determination, organisation and a clear idea of what workers have to do, and the lengths to which the ruling class will go to hang on to their power.
Sheila doesn’t accept any of this. She doesn’t accept the need to organise in this way to take control. Nor does she appear to recognize the centrality of taking on the state in order to achieve socialism. She believes in a form of organisation which simply tries to change ideas, and doesn’t recognise that the working class has to show itself capable of leading in order to build up the confidence of itself and of other oppressed sectors of society to win.
It is because she never comes to terms with this problem that in the end the only strategy she has for socialism is one which does not go beyond the reform of individuals within capitalist society.
 



Women are more visible than they have ever been in history. They
perform much of the paid labour of the world and the majority of the
unpaid labour. Women work the majority of total hours in the world,
but work much less than men do for pay – and when they are paid
they receive less wages. [1] Women’s role in working outside the
home raises their profile in all sorts of ways: they work in
factories, in offices, driving buses and taxis. They socialise
outside their home and family. They travel on public transport. They
join unions and go on strike. And where there is protest there are
likely to be women. In Britain the number of young women taking part
strikes everyone who has been on the huge anti-war and
anti-capitalist demonstrations. Women wearing the Muslim hijab mingle
with those in miniskirts and fcuk tops. Picket lines of nursery
nurses and council workers, but also of firefighters and post office
workers, have strong representations of women. British Airways
workers at Heathrow who went on strike showed that workers can wear
uniforms and make-up and still be militant. School students who
struck against the war in Iraq were usually led by women who showed
themselves to be the most articulate and intelligent of the new
generation. The new movements that we are witnessing are also
movements of women. They stand in strong contrast to many of the
older women who purport to represent them. The female cabinet
ministers like Patricia Hewitt, the women executives and
professionals who claim to represent the advance of feminism, have
nothing to offer these women and are usually totally hostile to their
aspirations and political views.
But women’s public profile has not led to equality or an end to
oppression. More freedom about sex has all too often meant
exploitation rather than liberation. The obsession with the body
which dominates society leads to women starving themselves and then
binging on food, or paying large sums of money to enlarge breasts,
straighten noses and temporarily banish wrinkles. Lapdancing clubs
and lad magazines have become the new symbols of male chauvinism. The
awareness of rape fostered by the women’s movement in the 1970s
created at least some understanding that ‘whatever we say, wherever
we go, yes means yes and no means no’. Now we are again confronted
with the view that women’s behaviour means that they ‘asked for
it’ in some appalling rape cases. While far more women report rape
now than in the late 1970s, the rate of conviction has fallen from 32
percent to 10 percent. [2] Women are constantly told that they can’t
have it all, but they are expected to do it all: be successful career
women, devoted mothers, gourmet cooks, intelligent conversationalists
and fantastic lovers. Financial independence remains an illusion when
women earn at least a fifth less than men for the same jobs.
Political equality is distant: women were very much at the heart of
leading the anti-war movement in Britain, but in many campaigns men
are over-represented. Platforms at events such as the European Social
Forum are still heavily dominated by older white men. And while
society may look equal in some areas, the closer you get to the
powerful capitalist institutions like parliament or the City of
London, the more male dominated they are.
Women in Britain are no longer expected to be sexually docile.
They are encouraged by advertising and by a series of glamorous and
high-profile images of women to make their sex lives exotic and
adventurous. They are expected to have children at some point in
their lives, but are not usually frowned upon if they do not. They
are more likely than not to experience sexual relations before
marriage, and are also likely to divorce. They marry later and have
fewer children than their grandparents or great-grandparents. Girls
are encouraged to prepare themselves for a career on the same basis
as boys. But they carry their oppression into these changed sexual
and social relations. Men are still on top metaphorically if not
physically. Greater sexual freedom is a huge step forward for many
women but it is still very far from genuine freedom and equality.
We have reached a stage in women’s social development which
would have been unthinkable only 50 years ago. Yet liberation is as
far away as ever in the sense that it was developed as a theory and a
strategy more than 30 years ago. That early movement was not mainly
or even at all concerned with establishing more women managers or
even female MPs. Instead it aimed to bring a greater sexual equality
linked with what was widely recognised as the necessity of social
change which could allow the development of women’s liberation.
The women’s movement began in the US and grew out of the great
movements for social justice which dominated the 1960s there. Women
had been involved in the civil rights movement, in the movement
against the Vietnam War, in the ‘new left’ and in the student
movement. They could not help but analyse their own oppression in
similar terms to these other movements. The ‘women’s liberation
workshop’ which met in June 1967 articulated women’s position as
‘a colonial relationship to men’, drawing an analogy with the
Vietnamese or blacks in Africa, and concluding that therefore they
had to fight for their independence: ‘Only the independent woman
can be truly effective in the larger revolutionary struggle’. [3]
The women’s movement was seen as part of bringing wider social change.
This was even more true in Britain. Who now remembers that women’s
liberation in Britain was very closely linked to the working class
movement and to strikes? The dispute of Ford women workers for equal
pay and that of the London night cleaners became well known, and
celebrated as signs of women taking action to achieve equality. There
were many other strikes at the time involving women: the teachers in
1969, the post office telephonists in 1971, and the Leeds clothing
workers in 1970. It was the time of a growing and militant working
class movement, and although the really big battles of that movement
mainly involved men such as the miners and dockers, women’s
new-found militancy could not be ignored. [4]
The women’s movement in Britain, unlike its much larger
counterpart in the US, was influenced by this level of class struggle
and by the working class movement. The input of socialists and trade
unionists was much more apparent and more dominant in the movement as
a whole than in the US. The movement also had as its backdrop the
substantial legislative changes of the late 1960s and early 1970s:
the legalisation of abortion, the easing of divorce, the
decriminalisation of gay sex between consenting adults, and the laws
introduced to implement equal pay and an end to sex discrimination.
Why has the early promise of liberation not been fulfilled, as
many expected it would be? Women’s entry into the workforce and
their achievement of greater sexual freedom were rightly seen as
striking great blows against women’s oppression. But within
capitalism the conditions under which these changes were achieved and
the wider society in which they have developed tell us everything
about why they fell far short of liberation. There has been a huge
change in women’s work worldwide: in countries such as China,
Thailand and Indonesia rapid industrialisation has turned women into
workers in factories and sweatshops in a modern parallel of the
industrial revolution which transformed Britain 200 years ago. But
many women from the poorer countries have to travel much further than
from the country to the city. As well as making up a high proportion
of the working class in their native countries, they all too often
have to travel across the world in order to make a living. Migrant
labour, much of it female, has brought women to work cleaning the
houses of, caring for the children of or servicing sexually the
Western middle classes. In the richest countries, women have been
pulled into clerical work and retail work on an unprecedented scale,
reflecting the growth of service industries in these countries over
the past half-century. [5] All of these situations may have led to
higher incomes or more independence (although this is by no means
always the case) but they have all too often increased pressures on
women, making their lives in some ways closer to men’s, with all
the stresses that entails.
 
A woman’s work
Women’s work has changed forever in the past 30 years and there
seems to be no turning back. Women can no longer be seen as a
peripheral part of the workforce. During the 1970s and early 1980s it
was commonly claimed that women had been brought into the workforce
in a time of boom and that when recession hit these workers would be
the first to be made redundant. Women, it was said, were disposable
workers in a way that men were not, and would be pushed back into the
home. Their role in domestic labour and the part time nature of
women’s work would ensure that they were used as a reserve army of
labour, content to stay outside the labour market in times of
recession. So Anna Coote and Beatrix Campbell could write in 1982
that ‘the great post-war boom in female employment has been
abruptly halted and thrown into reverse’. Women, they argued,
‘still represent a “reserve army of labour”, to be called up
and disbanded again, according to the vagaries of the economic and
political climate’. To Coote and Campbell, ‘Men are designated
“real” workers. Women are not. Not only is their “right” to
work illusory, but their foothold in the labour market is far more
tenuous than they have supposed’. [6]
While this analysis has proved to be wrong, women have become a
workforce characterised by low pay. And the working conditions of men
and women, part time and full time, have noticeably worsened during
the 1990s. The labour market has proved to be sex blind in the sense
that women continued to be drawn into the workforce at an increasing
rate while the bulk of job losses fell in areas which were heavily
male dominated. The reasons for this were twofold: the structural
changes in British employment led to a decline in manufacturing
employment and a growth in various forms of service industry. Because
of the occupational segregation of work in Britain, new jobs were
increasingly likely to go to women. The second reason, however, was
that the employers saw women as a pliant and flexible workforce.
By the beginning of the 21st century 70 percent of British women
were in paid jobs, the largest proportion ever. This amounted to 12.5
million, an increase of nearly a million on ten years previously. [7]
This increase in women working has only been made possible by more
and more mothers going back to paid work rather than staying at home
to look after their children. So a majority of women with children
under five now work outside the home, and 65 percent of all women
with dependent children do so. Nearly half of all single mothers are
in work and almost a third of single mothers with children under five
have some sort of paid work. [8] Of those women born in the first
decade of the 20th century, only 30 percent who had children were
working at the age of 30. Of those born between 1960 and 1963, 54
percent of those with children were. Sixty seven percent of all women
aged 30 worked in 1993 (compared to 48 percent in 1963). [9]
While historically the biggest constraint on women continuing to
work throughout their lives was motherhood, this is less and less the
case. The maintenance of full time work patterns for large numbers of
mothers is one of the biggest changes that has taken place: ‘The
number of women who work during pregnancy and return to work within
nine to 11 months of the birth of their child has increased
dramatically in recent years’. [10] Women with children are also
working longer hours than previously, and the rate of increase for
those with dependent children has grown faster than for those without
children, with mothers of children under five increasing their
average weekly work by four hours between 1984 and 1994. [11] There
is no single reason why this change – which shows absolutely no
sign of reversing – came about. The greater availability and
acceptance by employers of maternity leave, women’s desire or need
for continuous employment especially in certain competitive work, and
the desire to return for personal and social reasons are some.
However, the main reason that mothers go out to work is economic. The
importance of women’s earnings to family income increased markedly
in the post-war boom. [12] This increasing dependence on the female
wage at least in part explains the increase in full time working for mothers.
Women in lower income groups have gone out to work to compensate
for the low and sometimes falling wages of many working class men.
Whereas before the 1980s the wives of higher-income men saw their
employment increase most rapidly, from the 1980s onwards it was those
wives of lower-income men who increased their employment fastest. The
share of family income contributed by women grew fastest among
families where men had low or median earnings. Without women’s pay,
the rate of poverty among married or cohabiting couples in the early
1990s would have been more than 50 percent higher than it actually
was. [13]
The 1980s and 1990s marked an increase in the rate of exploitation
for very large numbers of working people. Conditions worsened
dramatically in some areas: people worked longer hours or were forced
to accept split shifts which took up a great deal of what should have
been leisure time in the working day. The introduction of greater
‘flexibility’ in the workplace led to the abolition of certain
rights such as tea breaks. In some industries wages were actually cut
– for example as a result of privatisation, where public sector
jobs were reassigned at lower rates of pay, or in industries such as
printing and journalism where the union-busting operations of Rupert
Murdoch and Eddie Shah led to a general lowering of wages and
worsening of conditions across the whole sector. Women were moving
into work at precisely the time when unions were being weakened and
established conditions and agreements were being torn up. The
prospect of universal and affordable childcare, of decent conditions
and of real improvements in women’s lives appeared even more remote
than it had done one or two decades previously. Now women were being
told that they had to work, that childcare while they worked was
their responsibility, and that it was also their responsibility to
equip themselves to enter the labour market. On top of that they
still had their family responsibility. The term ‘double burden’
doesn’t begin to describe this situation.
 
Childcare
If the health service was run on the same basis as childcare in
Britain, people would be lying bleeding to death in the streets and
the vast majority of patients would have to rely on relatives or paid
volunteers who already had to care for other sick people. Yet we
expect millions of children of working mothers to be cared for by
grandparents and other relatives, friends and other unpaid carers.
The bulk of paid childcare is performed by registered childminders,
often themselves mothers who cannot work outside the home. Only a
small minority are cared for in nurseries or other childcare
institutions. The post-war retreat on nursery provision and the ease
with which part time work could be fitted in with childcare meant
that publicly funded childcare provision never accompanied the
post-war boom. Since the mid-1970s the consistent attempts to cut
back on public spending have also meant that any universal and
publicly provided childcare system has been denied to the millions of
working women who could benefit from it. A major reason for mothers
not working is lack of affordable childcare. One study showed that a
third of women who did not return to work after having a baby said
they could not earn enough to pay for childcare. Of mothers who did
not work, nearly a quarter said they would work full time with the
childcare of their choice and a further 55 percent said they would
work part time. Only 19 percent of non-working mothers said they
would not work even with the childcare of their choice. [14] The gap
between supply and demand has been calculated by the Daycare Trust as
one registered childcare place for every 7.5 children under eight
years old in England. [15] Although the vast majority of three and
four year olds now have some form of nursery education, this is
mostly not full time. The market rules in childcare, with miserly
levels of full time state provision and with the onus placed on
parents to find the resources – both family and financial – to
pay for it. Childcare costs in Britain are the highest in Europe. At
mid-1990s levels it was estimated that the cost of childcare for two
children, one pre-school and one older, was Â£6,000 a year. It is
estimated that parents meet 93 percent of childcare costs. Single
parents who worked in the early 1990s were spending nearly a quarter
of their earnings on childcare. [16] A typical nursery place now
costs Â£6,200 a year. [17]
Promises by the Labour government to dramatically increase the
amount and quality of childcare have not materialised. The shortfall
in childcare is worse than in any other EU country, and the expense
of what provision is available puts a heavy burden on working
mothers, with some spending a quarter of their wages on care. There
are just eight day nursery places for every 100 children under five.
In the case of 62 percent of pre-school children and 77 percent of
school-age children, parents use informal childcare by neighbours,
friends and relatives. [18] After-school clubs are available for only
one in 14 of school-age children. [19] The solution to this problem
was that ‘grandmothers would be paid for looking after their
grandchildren under plans being drawn up by ministers to get more
single parents back to work’, according to the Financial Times.
[20] One of the consequences of the failure of childcare has been the
much lower level of workforce participation of single mothers
compared with mothers in relationships. While, as we have seen above,
mothers in couples have dramatically increased their work
participation, this has not been the case for single mothers. A major
reason for this is the lack of free or cheap childcare, making paid
work barely worth doing for single women who cannot command an
above-average salary. So 61 percent of single mothers do not work,
and the problem barely changes when children first attend school,
since mothers are still responsible for childcare before and after
the school day and cannot work full time. [21] However, it is
especially acute for mothers of under-fives, with less than a third
of these single mothers in paid work. [22] Funding of childcare
demonstrates the problems of scarcity, inefficiency and high cost:
the vast majority comes from private individuals. Of total sector
funding, Â£190 million comes from private companies, Â£50 million
from miscellaneous sources, Â£150 million directly from the
government and a gigantic Â£1,655 million from private individuals
(of which Â£110 million is from government indirect subsidies). [23]
So childcare becomes a tax on working men and women, which is often
simply too onerous for them to afford.
Decent professional childcare over long hours is very expensive,
making it a struggle even for many professionals. Live-in childcare
is concentrated among the rich. ‘The scarcity of nannies has driven
up salaries and perks, making them the preserve of the very wealthy’.
[24] A study that took place in 1990 drew the conclusion that
‘practically all nannies or mothers’ helps looked after children
of professionals, employers and managers’. [25] The director of a
charity, earning with her partner more than the Â£58,000 a year which
would allow them tax credits, was quoted in the Financial Times
as paying her nanny Â£250 a week to look after her two children full
time. It is estimated that parents living in London have to set aside
Â£35,000 gross income to pay for a professional nanny – as much as
or more than the combined income of most working couples. [26]
Nannies tend to care for pre-school children for the longest hours in
any particular day, followed by registered childminders. Nannies are
more likely to start early, finish late, and work five days a week.
‘Informal’ (or unpaid) childcare with neighbours or friends is
much more likely to be for shorter hours during the day and for one
or two days a week. [27] Income plays a large part in securing
childcare and for many women this determines the work that they do:
commuting and long hours are obviously much more difficult for women
with young children unless they have sufficient income to pay for
professional care over a long period of the day. Lack of childcare
therefore often means relying on unpaid sources or limited paid
provision, which in turn means working relatively near to home and
often part time. For many working class families unpaid childcare is
often the only option. The majority of pre-school children are looked
after informally, mainly by fathers and grandmothers, when the mother
is not there. When it comes to working mothers, the nature of
childcare varies greatly according to class. The proportion using
fathers and grandparents is much higher among manual workers than
among professionals and managers. While 29 percent of professionals’
and 27 percent of managers’ children are cared for by fathers, 45
percent of children of skilled manual and 50 percent of children from
semi-skilled manual families are cared for by them. Grandparents are
the carers for 18 percent of children of professionals and 25 percent
of children of managers and employers. This rises rapidly among
intermediate and junior non-manual to 44 percent, the same proportion
as the children of skilled manual workers. [28]
The family and the unskilled labour within it are still the scene
of much childcare. The proportion of childcare paid for by the
working class directly or provided free by their services in the home
shows how successful the capitalist class has been in forcing working
people to carry the costs of increased childcare involved in such a
big expansion of the workforce. The burden this puts on individual
families and the direct contribution it makes to continuing women’s
oppression are very great.
 
Poles apart
The class divisions within childcare reflect the wider class
divisions within the female workforce. Many women now see their life
as defined by their relationship to the labour market, but they don’t
all come to the labour market in the same way. It is commonly assumed
that there is a polarisation in work between those in full time
careers and those in casualised, low paid and part time work. This is
one division but a more important one has taken place in women’s
work. A minority of women have risen up the ladder of success over
the past two decades and now comprise the growing number of higher
professionals, middle and higher managers, and business executives.
They command salaries beyond the dreams of most working class women
and men, and they find themselves in an increasing and often direct
conflict with those they employ or supervise – often women. On the
other hand, the mass of working women have found the pressure of work
intensified as they enter the labour market in ever greater numbers.
This pressure occurs in the supermarkets and call centres, but also
in the more traditional ‘female professions’ such as nursing or
teaching. Those in routine full time work are closer to those in part
time and low paid work than they are to those in higher managerial or
professional jobs. This is true in terms of wages and conditions as
well as the fact that many women will move between the two in the
course of their working lives.
This pattern was already under way nearly two decades ago. A
perceptive commentary at the time talked of the double-edged nature
of women’s employment in 1988: ‘Women’s employment has been
protected and expanded not because women are progressively overcoming
their relative disadvantage in the labour market, but because of the
continued existence of these disadvantages which causes them to be an
attractive source of labour supply to employers for particular types
of jobs.’ Women were beginning to secure their position in the
labour market ‘by becoming more stable and continuous participants
in the labour force and by actively increasing their levels of
qualifications pre and post entry to the labour market’. But that
would benefit only a minority, ‘with the employment conditions for
the majority deteriorating while an increasing minority acquire more
of the characteristics ... traditionally reserved for male labour’. [29]
A minority of women have gained substantial rewards in terms of
income, status and the ability to pay for others to perform personal
services such as childcare and cleaning. This minority have seen real
advances as traditionally male areas have been opened up to women.
Today a woman heads the London Stock Exchange and a third of all
managers and administrators are women. [30] In 1997, 52 percent of
new solicitors were women, 32 percent of managers and administrators,
34 percent of health professionals and 27 percent of buyers, brokers
and sales reps. [31] This has been marked by a dramatic increase over
two decades. Whereas in 1974 only 2 percent of directors and managers
were women, by 2000 women made up 22 percent of this category. [32]
However, these women have tended to accept the traditional ideology
that they cannot take into account any of the aspects of being a
woman that might put them at a disadvantage. A survey of executive
women throughout Europe demonstrated that childcare benefits were
their lowest priorities because ‘they simply want to earn good
money and make their own decisions about how to solve their childcare
issues’. [33] Whatever their disadvantages in relation to men of
their class, the relationship of these women to most working class
women is managerial and often adversarial. The women in designer
suits who drive expensive cars have become a part of working life –
and most working class women are discovering that they get no special
favours from women managers.
Then there are the other women in suits – this time the cheaper
mass-produced ones from Next or BHS – or in uniforms. These are the
mass of office workers, the uniformed bank and building society
clerks, the nurses, the workers in Sainsbury’s or Tesco. Add to
them the teachers, childcare and welfare workers, the very young and
female workforce in the call centres, and you have much of the female
working class today. There are over 400,000 workers in call centres,
large numbers of them women. The fastest-growing occupations
throughout the 1990s tended to contain disproportionately high
numbers of women: sales assistants and receptionists, education and
health service workers, care assistants, welfare workers and nursery
nurses. The fastest-growing single occupation was hairdressing.
These women in the majority are low paid, they are often engaged
in routine and repetitive work, and they are subject to many of the
traditional controls over work which were once confined to manual
workers. Computerisation means that managers know exactly what a
worker is doing at any one time. The introduction of machinery into
office work has transformed the nature of work, with photocopiers
playing the role of printers and word processors monitoring work, and
nearly all work being tied to a machine. In shops the checkouts
measure speed of throughput and act as stocktakers, placing new
orders as they mark what is being sold. Even work which was once
considered part of the professions – such as nursing, lecturing or
teaching – is now subject to much greater managerial control, with
many of the disciplines of the traditional factory job.
There is no fundamental difference in job description and lack of
control between these workers and those who work part time. As we
have seen, increasing numbers of women work full time when they are
able to do so, but there are real barriers towards them doing so all
the time. Low pay, childcare and other caring responsibilities mean
that for at least part of their working lives many women will work
part time. The sociologist Catherine Hakim has argued that most women
are not interested in careers and prefer to centre their lives round
childcare and home responsibilities. Only a minority of women, she
says, want to work full time in high-powered jobs. [34] This argument
only serves to justify the status quo, with its existing gap
between high paid women and those part-timers who are presumably
happy in their low-wage, low-status jobs. But the connection between
part time working and family responsibilities is overwhelming. While
care in the home remains privatised, millions of women will continue
to work part time regardless of their aspirations, because they have
no alternative. The historic Women and Employment survey of 1980 –
the biggest survey of women and work – showed that women working
part time were more likely to be in ‘women only’ jobs. Over half
of women part time workers finished work by 4 p.m. to pick up
the kids from school. [35] Of those couples with children, women who
worked part time were more likely to work evenings than those working
full time. Nearly one in 20 women part-timers with children also
worked nights, suggesting that mothers take part time work when
fathers or other members of the family can care for the children.
[36] Satisfaction with part time jobs is clearly relative: a 1990s
study showed that women part timers were overqualified for their
jobs. Over half of women part-timers said that given their
qualifications and experience they could expect a better job. They
were less likely than full-timers to say their current job was the
one they liked best. [37] There have been increases in recent years
in the number of part-timers who would prefer a full time job. [38]
Much has been made of the satisfaction which part time women feel in
their jobs, and undoubtedly many do. But as Martin and Roberts,
authors of the survey, commented, ‘In some ways it is not
surprising that such a high proportion of part time workers were
happy with their hours of work; unless they can find a job with
suitable hours they are unlikely to be able to work at all’. [39]
Women’s wages – despite over 30 years of equal pay legislation
– still lag behind men’s. In 1998 women earned on average Â£6.67
per hour, 75 percent of men’s hourly average of Â£8.94. [40] The
distribution of female earnings tells how far away from equal pay
women in Britain still are, despite real improvements. For a
significant minority of women it is possible to earn as much as or
even more than men. A fifth of women now earn more than their working
partners, compared with one in 14 in the 1970s. [41] This testifies
to the growth of a section of women able to earn as much as or more
than at least some men. But it is not the main picture. Even by the
mid-1990s, 20 percent of women earned less than or equal to the
bottom 10 percent of men. Another more than 20 percent earned equal
to the second lowest 10 percent of men. Only 3 percent of women
earned equal to the top 10 percent of earners. Around three quarters
of women fell into the bottom half of male pay distribution. [42]
Work has not held the key to liberation for women; rather it has
meant exploitation on a similar basis to men, with the added burden
of work in the home. While a minority have benefited from the
conditions of the past two decades, the large majority of women are
concentrated in some of the poorest jobs and in the worst conditions.
The level of inequality is growing wider, and this includes
inequality among women themselves.
 
The great leap forward
The impact on personal lives of the change in women’s work
patterns has been dramatic. Only half a century ago marriage was
regarded as the only path to respectability for a woman. A child born
outside marriage was viewed as a terrible and shameful burden in many
families. Monogamy in relationships was promoted in women’s
magazines, by church, state and government. Geoffrey Gorer, author of
a study in the early 1950s, regarded English sexual attitudes as
remarkable. He wrote, ‘I very much doubt whether the study of any
other urban population would produce comparable figures of chastity
and fidelity’. [43] Yet in 1997 there were 310,000 marriages, one
of the lowest figures in the 20th century, of which only 181,000 were
first marriages – a decline of more than half since 1970. [44] The
proportion of women aged 18 to 49 cohabiting has more than doubled in
the past two decades from 11 percent to 29 percent. [45] Divorce
rates in Britain are twice as high as in any other EU country. [46]
Teenage pregnancies are the highest in Europe – twice as high as
Germany, three times as high as France and six times those of the
Netherlands. [47]
What happened to bring about this change? There were two major
advances in women’s sexual behaviour during the 20th century. One
was during the Second World War, where industrial and military
conscription gave women sexual opportunities not previously available
to them, and the dangers of war lent a greater urgency to
relationships. But while this change had dramatic effects on divorce
rates and numbers of children born outside marriage, the dominant
post-war morality stressed domesticity and home-centredness. That
this ideology was in increasing contrast with reality became fully
apparent in the 1960s, which marked the real leap forward in terms of
attitudes to sexuality and relationships. But this time the change
was permanent and only deepened over time.
The movements and attitudes of the 1960s – at the heart of which
is the sexual revolution – were a rebellion of young against old,
in a society where the old had dominated the young for generations.
Now all the attitudes were subverted – the work ethic, the
patriotism, the deference and of course the sexual conservatism. The
young were in a position where they did not have to just submit to
the wishes of the old:
[In the early 1960s] there were a million more unmarried
people in the age range 15 to 24 than ten years previously – a 20
percent increase. And they wielded a new economic power. Average real
wages increased by 25 percent between 1938 and 1958, but those of
adolescents by twice this. And though they disposed of only some 5
percent of total consumer spending, they were the biggest purchasers
of certain commodities – 42 percent of record players, 29 percent
of cosmetics and toiletries, 28 percent of cinema admissions. [48]
At the same time, they tended to be dependent on their parents
longer, through the raising of the school leaving age and the
broadening of higher education. This led to greater tensions between
parents and their children. So too did the more open attitude to sex,
denounced as ‘permissiveness’ by much of society and the subject
of continued controversy and debate. For most young people there were
still many restrictions on sex. However, sexual intercourse was
taking place at a younger age. So whereas for women born between 1931
and 1935 the median age of first intercourse was 21, for those born
between 1941 and 1945 the median had fallen to 19 years. [49] But
sexual experience for many does not appear to have changed too much.
As a survey done in the mid-1960s showed, for most people early
sexual experience was often conducted by trial and error. Sex ‘just
happened’: when penetrative sex occurred for the first time it was
unpremeditated for four fifths of girls and boys. By age 15, only one
in 50 girls and one in 20 boys had had intercourse. First intercourse
was not pleasurable for half of boys and two thirds of girls. [50]
But the fact was that many taboos in behaviour had been lifted by the
1960s. Marriage tended to be at a younger age and by 1972 one in
three of those marrying who had not previously been married were
teenagers. Figures from 1969–1970 showed that one third of teenage
brides were pregnant and 43 percent of all premaritally conceived
births were to teenagers. In addition only 54 percent of births
conceived premaritally were legitimised by marriage in the period
1964–1970. Illegitimate births were at 5.8 percent in 1961
(following 5 percent in 1951) – by 1976 the rate was 9 percent.
[51] This does not necessarily suggest a greater awareness of
sexuality or of control over women’s own bodies, but it does
suggest a much greater willingness to reject ‘old-fashioned morals’.
There were three major changes in women’s lives which began to
have an influence on their attitudes. First a small minority gained
access to higher education. There they encountered on the one hand
liberal attitudes on a whole range of issues which encouraged them to
think differently about their role as women. Did they have to see
their future as marriage and motherhood or were there alternatives at
least for educated and independent women? On the other hand, they
were subject to petty restrictions on their lifestyles and sex lives
which created great frustration and anger. Women undergraduates who
were caught with a man in their room could be expelled from the
college. In France the restrictions on men visiting women’s rooms
were one of the issues which led directly to the great student
explosion of May 1968. [52] The second issue was the greater control
by women over their own bodies which for the first time in history
made it possible to separate out procreation from sexual enjoyment.
The third major change was women’s greater financial and social independence.
The 1960s also produced the great social movements for change
which marked the first major challenge to the post-war consensus in
the West. Out of these movements came those for women’s liberation
and gay liberation and these helped to ensure that the questioning of
the old order brought with it a new sexual radicalism. The more open
moral climate of the 1970s met with a backlash. The second half of
the 1970s saw successive attempts to restrict abortion. James
Callaghan’s Labour government stressed the need for a strong family
and for a return to more conventional education. The AIDS epidemic
which began in the early 1980s was used as a means of attacking gay
sex in particular.
There was a growing clash between the attitudes expressed by
authority in society and people’s real circumstances, their jobs
and how they lived their lives. People had experienced open sexual
relationships and they were determined not to give them up. So by the
1990s bigoted measures such as Section 28 of the Local Government
Act, which banned the ‘promoting of homosexuality’ in schools,
could continue to coexist alongside the creation of much larger and
more open gay communities, at least in big cities such as London and
Manchester. Government ministers could spout the virtues of the
family while marriages fell to record lows and more people than ever
lived outside the traditional family.
Sex and sexuality had been separated from procreation, so people
quite rightly asked, why can’t we gain sexual enjoyment in the way
that we want – and what does it have to do with anyone apart from
the individuals concerned? Whereas for previous generations there
were all sorts of material constraints on sexual experimentation, by
the 1980s and 1990s there were far fewer. Young people had more time,
money and independence than their grandparents or parents.
Particularly important in this were young women. Women have expressed
an interest in sex which has shocked many people, but which is surely
the natural outcome of a young generation with the usual interest in
sex, but with the ability to do something about it. Women’s
assertiveness in this situation is a demand for the right to be
treated equally with men, sexually as well as legally or financially.
By the beginning of the 21st century there were clear enough signs
to point to certain permanent trends in love, marriage and sexuality.
It was no longer the norm for people to abstain from sex before
marriage – those who ‘saved themselves’ for marriage became a
smaller and smaller minority. [53] Marriage itself had changed
dramatically Whereas for some of the 19th century and much of the
20th premarital sex was taboo, now the norm was a form of ‘trial
marriage’ with few social sanctions on either side if they broke
the relationship – especially if children were not yet involved.
Whereas in the 1950s only 1 percent of women in Britain marrying for
the first time lived with the man for an extended period, by the
early 1980s this rose to 21 percent. [54] Of those born between 1933
and 1942 in the US, 84.5 percent of men and 93.8 percent of women
said they married without living with their partner beforehand; of
those born between 1963 and 1974 – only 30 years later – these
figures had slumped to 33 percent of men and 35.3 percent of women.
[55] As John Gillis has pointed out, ‘The new cohabitation has many
of the features of the old betrothal. It was an extended rite of
transition – a liminal period – which was brought to a ritual
conclusion when the couple decided it was time to incorporate
themselves into the adult world of mothers and fathers’. [56]
Talk about sex and sexuality also tends to be more open, and
sexual practices are more widespread and varied. There are marked
differences between the generations. Only 3 percent of women who
started having sex in the 1950s had ten or more lifetime partners,
while 10 percent of women starting intercourse in the 1970s claimed
this figure. [57] While half a sample of 45 to 59 year olds in the
early 1990s cited ‘being in love’ as a reason for first
intercourse, this reason declined through the age groups, to only
37.5 percent of women aged 16 to 24. [58] Attitudes to oral sex point
to the changes which have taken place. A survey in the early 1990s
revealed that while 76.7 percent of 18 to 24 year olds had
experienced oral sex, this rose to 87.8 percent of 25 to 34 year olds
but fell to 61.8 percent of 45 to 59 year olds. In the age group 16
to 24, of those who had ever experienced vaginal intercourse, 85
percent had also experienced oral sex. In the US oral sex appears to
be increasing among virgins, with 25 percent of virgin boys and 15
percent of virgin girls having given or received oro-genital
stimulation. [59] It seems the vast majority of oral sexual acts are
reciprocal, rather than the blowjobs usually talked about in
Hollywood films. [60]
Those who want women’s equality can only welcome these
developments, but the manifestations of sexuality which are so
prevalent today cannot be said to add up to sexual liberation. Unlike
the women’s magazines of the 1950s, where sexual problems were
referred to cryptically on the problem page, those of today trumpet
advice on keeping your man happy, how to improve your sex life and so
on. The assumption is that most people are having an active sex life
most of the time, although this is very far from the case. [61] We
are sold particular images of sex and sexuality which conform to
certain stereotypes about men and women but which reinforce attitudes
which are unequal or reinforce oppressive relationships: images of
violence, of dominance and submission, of rape. The image of sex is
far from one of equality and openness. Sex in all of its
manifestations is seen as a commodity to be bought and sold on the
market. Pornographic films, videos, magazines, lapdancing clubs,
phone sex, lad magazines with semi-pornographic contents, male
strippers, entertainment for stag and hen nights, ‘cybersex’, sex
contact listings in magazines, expensive women’s underwear, sex
toys and upmarket ice cream are only some of the goods which have
made millions for mostly big business in the past 20 years. Their
profits have been made out of the greater sexual openness: ‘In 1996
Americans spent more than $8 billion on hard core videos, peep shows,
live sex acts, adult cable programming, sexual vices, computer porn
and sex magazines – an amount much larger than Hollywood’s
domestic box office receipts and larger than all the revenues
generated by rock and country music recordings.’ [62]
Globalisation helps create and characterises the sex trade. Sex
tourism is a major part of the economy in a number of countries. In
Thailand ‘international tourist arrivals jumped from 2 million in
1981 to 4 million in 1988 to over 7 million in 1996. Two thirds of
tourists were unaccompanied men ... In 1997 the annual illegal income
generated by sex workers in Thailand was roughly $10 billion.’ [63]
Estimates of the number of prostitutes in Thailand vary from more
than 80,000, which is the government figure, to 200,000 or even 1 or
2 million. [64] In the Dominican Republic, popular with European male
‘sex tourists’, of 50 women working as prostitutes who were
interviewed in a survey, all but two were single mothers pushed into
the work through poverty. [65]
The destruction of the old industries and family structures
worldwide has a major impact on these developments. Global inequality
means that Western men can buy prostitutes very cheaply and that the
women have to sell their bodies in order to survive. Governments
ignore their plight most of the time. Those who constantly encourage
the development of the free market, and who moralise at those who do
not accept these developments, conveniently ignore this consequence
of the market.
Freedom of sexuality should be a fundamental right, that people
can enjoy sexual relations regardless of economic or religious
constraint. Yet the increase in sexual freedom over recent decades,
which should be of benefit to the vast majority of men and women, has
brought buying and selling, the rule of the commodity, into what
should be the most personal and intimate relationships. The women and
men directly involved in the production and display of these
commodities are often degraded by this process, but so are the rest
of us, since sexuality is turned into a series of objects and
commercial relationships rather than being a natural expression of
human relations.
 
Housewives’ choice
Changing sex roles have led to talk of male crisis. Hollywood
films such as Falling Down or Disclosure paint the picture of a world
where the old masculine values no longer apply and where women take
cruel advantage over men at work. Men lose jobs to women, are
sexually harassed by women, feel discriminated against by women. This
makes them neurotic and ill (supposedly once the preserve of women).
In the US ‘movies featuring muscular men such as Russell Crowe and
Brad Pitt [are] giving males an inferiority complex’. As record
numbers of male subscribers to gyms were noted, US psychotherapist
Roberto Olivardia commented, ‘Men tie their self esteem to their
physical appearance, it’s a huge problem’. [66] Men now are much
closer to women in their attitudes to physical appearance: they are
more likely to follow fashion, to buy personal toiletries and to
worry about their figure and looks. They are, however, more likely to
become seriously ill than women, on average die younger than women
and have a higher rate of suicide. In the ten years running up to the
early 1990s, male suicides in Britain increased by 80 percent,
notably among young men. [67] Nothing seems to be going right for
men: increasingly they seem threatened by ‘career women’,
frightened by their own failings as men and with a terrible sense of
loss for the past golden age when men and women both knew their place.
Now men supposedly feel that they are superfluous to women and the
family and no longer have a breadwinner role. The question could not
even have arisen 30 or 40 years ago. Its starting point is the very
great changes to the family and women’s ability or desire to head a
household. Whereas only 7 percent of households with dependent
children were headed by lone mothers in 1971, by the late 1990s this
had risen to 22 percent. Lone fathers headed another 2 percent of
families. [68] These figures demonstrate a dramatic increase in the
number of women caring for children without the support of a man.
However, they also show that three quarters of children are still
brought up in two-parent families. In addition, the sense that men
have little or no role within the home hardly matches with their
increased participation in childcare and housework. Most fathers who
do not live with their children are not the ‘deadbeat dads’ of
tabloid mythology. The majority are in contact with them: 70 percent
of non-resident fathers have some contact with their children and 50
percent see their children every week. [69] So most children are
living with or in regular contact with their fathers – hardly the
basis for a mass crisis.
One feature of the change in men’s behaviour has been the
increase in male work around the home. This is a strongly contested
issue: different surveys show different results, and surveys of who
does housework are notoriously subjective. But there is general
agreement that as women have ceased to be full time housewives, they
have lessened the amount of work that they do in the home. As women
work full time, so the gap between the amount of housework that they
do and that of their male partners narrows. The number of hours
devoted by men to household chores stood at 17 minutes per day in
1961; by 1985 it stood at 40 minutes a day. [70] During the same
period the time spent by British women on routine housework fell by
55 minutes a day or 6.5 hours per week. In the initial part of this
period the amount of housework done by men also fell, suggesting that
the domestic appliances made affordable by the long boom were having
some impact on curtailing hours spent in domestic labour. But that
changed from the 1970s, when the domestic work of all men went up
from 15 minutes to 40 minutes a day and that of full time employed
from 13 minutes a day to 35 minutes. This ‘probably therefore
reflects ideological changes as well as the practical pressures
associated with married women’s move into paid employment’. [71]
While the total number of hours spent on housework has fallen for all
women it has not done so proportionately, with full time workers
gaining least and with those without employment benefiting most. [72]
On the other hand, working parents of both sexes spend more time
devoted to childcare – especially to under-five childcare. Employed
men spent an average 44 minutes a day mainly on childcare in 1985
compared with 11 minutes in 1961 – far less than the 107 minutes
spent on the same childcare by women in 1985, but a substantial
increase nonetheless. [73] Many men tell researchers that they would
like to play more of a role in their children’s lives than their
own fathers did during their childhood. [74] However, the sexual
division of labour is still one which sees women doing the bulk of
domestic labour, despite the very great changes over the past few
decades. A study in the mid-1990s for a Time Use survey showed that
mothers spent much more time doing cooking and housework than men
(2.59 hours per day as opposed to 0.41 hours) and more time caring
for children and adults (1.56 hours against 0.54). Men on the other
hand did more paid work (5.31 hours per day compared with 2.06 hours
for women) and spent an hour a day on travel, compared with half an
hour for women. Women did, however, spend more time sleeping and
socialising. [75] Recent statistics from the US give two examples of
how family life is changing. Parents of both sexes are spending an
average of ten or 12 hours less per week with their children than
they did in 1960, and McDonald’s is the source of 10 percent of
family meals. [76] This suggests a family where everyone is under
pressure of time and where the classic model of the family has been
at the very least severely weakened in many respects.
The amount of work outside the home by either or both partners has
a decisive effect on the amount of domestic work carried out by
parents. The responses of young mothers and fathers, again in the
mid-1990s, to questions about the division of labour in the home bear
this out. Even when both partners worked full time, mothers took
responsibility for the majority of household chores, but here 27
percent of men said they shared preparing and cooking the meal, 40
percent shared shopping and 35 percent shared cleaning equally. When
the woman worked part time this fell to 15 percent, 28 percent and 16
percent. Where the wife was at home full time, only 10 percent shared
cooking the main meal and only 11 percent shared cleaning –
interestingly, the same number shared shopping as those with part
time worker wives. Mothers’ responses to the same questions showed
some differences but not massive discrepancies. In general, women
were slightly more likely to answer that they did most of these
chores and slightly less likely to believe they were shared equally.
[77] The overwhelming conclusion is that where both work full time
they are most likely to share chores, but even then they are far from
being equally shared. The traditional division of labour still
applies, and men do most DIY and repairs. Even so, where the wife
works and the man stays at home, the man’s share increases,
although not sufficiently to reverse roles. This is also the area of
greatest discrepancy between men and women, so 28 percent of men
believe they do most cooking of the main meal, while only 6 percent
of wives think their husbands do this. [78] Some commentators have
even suggested that men in full time work actually do more domestic
chores than unemployed men with working partners. [79] It appears
that that there are much more complex issues at work than simply who
works longer hours outside the home. Where the sex roles are most
obviously reversed – where the woman works and the man stays at
home – there are often signs that the man has particular difficulty
fitting into the ‘housewife’ role, while the woman both works
outside the home and has to shoulder a substantial domestic burden as
well. If this is the case, it suggests an ideological as well as a
practical reluctance by some men in the home to take on this role,
itself a product of the low esteem in which housework is held, which
in turn comes from the nature of housework as repetitive and unpaid
work inside capitalist society.
In a capitalist society the ability to sell one’s labour power
is the defining feature of each individual. Today the desire of
capital for this labour power is so great that every member of the
family is under pressure to enter the labour market. Anyone who is
unable to enter this market finds himself or herself at a
disadvantage. There are few opportunities for consumption of anything
but the basic necessities of life. Those without paid work carry some
of the lowest status in our society. Men who have been brought up to
expect paid work as their right feel it particularly acutely when it
is lost, and feel that being asked to fulfil a role which is widely
seen as socially subordinate is a denial of their role as men. It is
hardly surprising that those men who are forced from the labour
market feel disoriented and without social value. This after all was
how many housewives felt, and still do feel – but the men lack
their social conditioning to be able to cope, hence their inability
to even become ‘good housewives’. Unemployed men who are
responsible for childcare see themselves mostly as ‘failed
providers’ rather than successful childcarers. [80]
Miners at Yorkshire’s Grimethorpe colliery, which shut in 1993,
describe the feelings of men in this situation. One says, ‘My day?
I get up and do the washing, hang it on the line, get the kids to
school, do some shopping, get the tea for when she gets home ... The
government talks about training, education. What for?’ [81] Another
says, ‘We had pride in our work, we made a contribution to the
world, we had a place, a proper purpose. Gone. Now I’m a
housewife.’ [82]
One of the reasons many men’s attitudes are so contradictory is
because the signals sent to them by society are also contradictory.
Much of the dominant ideology in countries like Britain is
egalitarian in tone. Received opinion among the majority of our
rulers and the bulk of the media is that men and women are both
expected to work (indeed the stay at home mother who expects an
income from the state is now regarded with disapproval). Men and
women are expected to share housework and childcare where practically
possible and families are deemed to operate as contented units of
consumption where a degree of democratic choice is allowed to all its
members. Men who behave as authoritarian father figures are regarded
as both rare and wrongheaded. Tony Blair and David Beckham
demonstrate that caring comes naturally to fathers. No one could call
them Mary Annes – as they did men in Lancashire in the 1940s –
when they push the pram [83] (not that they do it very often since
that is the nanny’s job). But even while men are being encouraged
to show their emotions, there are much less pleasant developments
which also have an ideological effect on men’s attitudes to
themselves. Traditional male values have also reasserted themselves,
at least among a layer of men: lapdancing clubs, new lad magazines,
an insidious campaign against the notion of ‘date rape’, a
resurgence of sexist language, and continuing high levels of violence
against individual women.
The ‘New Lads’ with their old attitudes about women were a
phenomenon described thus by Simon Nye, writer of the television
series Men Behaving Badly:
The Lad was created by the meritocracy (or new
plutocracy, depending on your political allegiance) unleashed by
Margaret Thatcher in 1979. The shouty young men that crowded London’s
trading markets and exchanges, earning fortunes and scaring away
cupboardsful of sniffy Guildford stockbrokers, were the Trojan Lads,
hidden in the bellies of financial institutions and wheeled inside
the walls of the establishment. And it was okay to swear and be a bit
of a sexist because they worked bloody hard. [84]
The main expression of the ‘lads’ has been the rise of the
men’s magazines – glossy and upmarket, filled with expensive
advertising, by the late 1990s they were selling 1.5 million copies a
month between them. [85] The titles range in sophistication and
presentation but there is no doubting their selling point: the covers
always have women in various states of undress. The inside is little
different, containing vast amounts about sex, a lot of football, and
a very strong interest in conspicuous consumption. There is a general
assumption that ‘foreigners’ are inferior, being both strange and
stupid, that women really ‘want it’ according to the most
stereotyped male fantasy, and that any real man will only be
interested in beer, sport and ‘shagging’. But these are
aspirational men behaving badly. The editor of GQ Active
described his average reader as between 25 and 35 and likely to be
‘cruising down the motorway in an Audi with a mountain bike on the
roof’. [86] Advertising is aimed at twenty- and thirty-somethings
with large amounts of disposable income, focusing on cars, clothes
and army recruitment.
It is sometimes argued that the lad phenomenon and the men’s
magazines have a positive effect, that they are ‘an attempt by
straight men to come to terms with their new position in the world,
with the second wave of feminism and the undermin7ing of traditional
forms of gender identity’. [87] But any inspection of these
magazines shows little understanding of coming to terms with very
much. Features in Loaded include ‘Ten great arse moments in
movies’ or David Baddiel’s views on wanking. In FHM, which
is supposed to be more sophisticated, international analysis is at
the boys’ comic level. This is Benny Hill humour repackaged for the
1990s, and underlying it is a deeply conservative set of values. In
this they resemble the 1950s too. Women who complain about such
images, who don’t find the sexist jokes funny, or who in any other
way break from the norm, are regarded as humourless, too unattractive
to get a man, or lesbians. We love women, is the cry of the new lads,
but they don’t love women at all. The love a particular stylised
and objectified image of women because they believe this enhances
their masculinity and status:
In the case of lad mags there is not only nostalgia for
images of women in the mode of Playboy at its heyday, but also
the desire to utter all the offences known to man, freed from the
imagined tut-tutting of ‘ardent’ feminists. Men’s magazines
celebrate images which three decades ago feminists would have
denounced without hesitation; but these contemporary images are set
in a context which attempts to deny us the right to have any opinion
at all. [88]
The message of the magazines is that men can still celebrate their
domination in the face of the threat of liberation – and who can
dare to complain? Old sexist activities are dressed up as fun in
other areas as well. Sleazy old stripping is reborn as lapdancing in
expensive clubs patronised by businessmen and those on outings from
City banks. The presence of women in the audience is supposed to make
this cultural development acceptable. The 200 clubs which now exist
in Britain mark ‘the invention of a branch of the sex industry
considered not the slightest bit exploitative, nor remotely damaging
to women’. [89] The lapdancing clubs, however, do not break the
mould of the old exploitative strip joints or brothels – rather
they repackage it for credit card customers.
The alibi for much of this behaviour is the existence of women who
participate: the ladettes – hard-drinking, sexually aggressive,
confident women who are supposedly happy to go along with this
because they are playing men at their own game. The old sexism wanted
women to be passive – now they are allowed to be active as long as
they accept sexism. This wanting to be one of the boys attitude goes
much further than young women, with older women wanting to stress
their continuing sexual attractiveness and activity. The middle-aged,
middle class women who take their clothes off in Calendar Girls,
Germaine Greer’s writing on the boy as sex object and even the
advert for Marks and Spencer’s credit card where a woman eyes up
the Italian waiter all show how lacking in subversion and reinforcing
of sex roles this has become.
Part of the debate about men is about trying to shore up
traditional family values in the face of an increasing unwillingness
on the part of many people to live in the conventional nuclear
family. Melanie Phillips declares that the ‘so called “crisis of
masculinity”’ is ‘invented by those who wish to claim that the
distinctive role of fathers is redundant’. [90] Her aim is
transparent – forcing men to work would solve many of the social
problems that confront those who run our society at present:
Male breadwinning ... is neither arbitrary or
anachronistic. It is important both to cement masculine identity and
to civilise aggressive male characteristics. That’s why
unemployment has played havoc with young boys’ socialisation and
shattered their fathers’ emotional and physical health. Employment
is an instrumental, goal-driven activity which permits men to serve
their families through competition. In that way it directs male
aggression into pro-social purposes. [91]
The Phillips view of men is the modern equivalent of those who in
the 1960s decried the absence of a war or national service into which
young men could be conscripted. Today those who are excluded from
work are accused of tending to turn to violence and – even worse –
allowing the state to take responsibility for their families. Men
have to know their place, and it is to work – the only means, in
her chilling phrase, of ‘civilising’ them. If this authoritarian
picture of an orderly world where men are breadwinners and women
accept a traditional role as mothers and wives suggests that men have
a built-in tendency to violence and bad behaviour as men, it is by no
means unique. The sense that men can only be redeemed and civilised
by the family is quite widely held.
Sandy Ruxton puts forward an explanation of the link between
masculinity and criminality in the sex roles which men and women
adopt when they become adults. The contradiction between the male
child and the adult is greater than that between the female child and adult:
The dominant view of masculinity is that a man should be
tough, strong, aggressive, independent, rational, intelligent, and so
on. But the dominant image of children is that they are vulnerable,
weak, immature, passive and dependent. This creates a particular
contradiction for boys, which is heightened as adulthood gets nearer,
simply because, within the construction of childhood, being a man
cannot be achieved. [92]
If this is true, then becoming a man means rejecting all the
traits most closely associated with childhood – and which all too
often are also associated with ‘femininity’ – and adopting
behaviour and practices regarded as manly. Gangs, a degree of
criminal behaviour, fighting, and scorning certain forms of learning
which are seen as childish are all part of this process. So too is
the adulation of sporting heroes. There is a class element to this.
High-status schools tend to foster a liberalised version of the old
public school ethos: individual excellence in sport, but also a sense
of purpose in learning, given the expectation of all concerned in
these enterprises that their pupils will fulfil an important place in
society. The middle and upper classes place much store on individual
development, to a certain extent apart from the mass of people, and
an ambition to succeed in a career. Teenage boys from these sorts of
backgrounds will see themselves as preparing for such a future.
Working class boys take their adolescent development much more from
the streets and from popular culture: collective praise for
individual sporting or musical expertise is highly valued, and
practical and physical attributes attract a higher status than
academic ability. This is the sort of masculinity which is so
objected to by the commentators, yet in itself it represents a threat
not to the mass of people but to the dominant ideology which tries to
put working class kids in their place. Why should ability at
breakdancing not be valued as highly as playing golf? Or the ability
to memorise song lyrics as valuable as knowing multiplication tables?
The fashion for street clothes, the customisation of school uniforms,
the refusal to accept the narrow middle class ideology now imposed
with such a straitjacket on the schools, are a form of rebellion
which often stresses aggression as a means of asserting some sort of
control and status in life.
Even here we should hold on to some perspective. Most boys are not
extremely violent, or habitual criminals. Some of the most common
crimes may be more ‘feminine’ than ‘masculine’. Home Office
figures confirm that an eighth of all recorded offences are for
shoplifting and that more women than men are cautioned for the crime.
It is especially common among young women, and 7,528 girls between
the age of 13 and 15 are cautioned each year. This compares with
6,370 boys. [93] One survey found that 89 percent of 16 year old
working class girls had been involved in at least one physical fight.
[94] It would be hard to deduce from recent furores around some of
these questions that juvenile crime was not pandemic. Nor would one
conclude that – as is the truth – more boys pass exams than in
the past and there is less illiteracy among the young than among the
old. It is true that in many areas of education girls do better than
boys, and that their improvement rate tends to be much faster than
boys. But this is hardly surprising given the transformation of
expectations about work and education for women over the past few
decades. Back in the 1950s and 1960s, when girls tended to do worse
in education than boys, this was put down to girls’ low
expectations of a career and their internalisation of their
oppression. Today, especially when educational qualifications have
taken on such heightened importance in the labour market for workers
of both sexes, it is hardly surprising that girls attempt to equip
themselves for competition in that market alongside boys. It may be
as well that the preponderance of girls in clerical and white collar
jobs may encourage them slightly more than boys to gain
qualifications. This is very much a process of equalisation between
the sexes. In this process boys can feel that relatively they are
doing worse and feel a lack of self esteem due to this. However, the
fact remains that the position of boys in education is improving too,
but at a much slower rate. The proportion of young women in Britain
achieving two or more A-levels has doubled since the mid-1970s,
whereas the number of men doing so has risen by just under a half in
the same period. Even so, the number gaining A-levels has risen
substantially. [95] Whereas 173,000 women were full time
undergraduates in 1970/71, by 1997/98 there were 554,000. Comparable
figures for men were 241,000 and 498,000. Women have caught up and
overtaken men at this level, but among postgraduates they are still
slightly below the figures for men, although again they have started
from a lower level. [96] The big increase in women’s participation
and rise in qualifications seems to have stemmed from the 1980s,
perhaps the most decisive decade in marking the idea that women had
to take responsibility for their own self advancement, and this
advance has certainly continued into the 1990s. [97] Whether it will
continue – marking an ever widening gap between the sexes – or
whether it will stabilise with broad levels of equality but with
women at a slight advantage is too early to say. What is
indisputable, however, is the role of class in education and this
appears to have a much greater influence on performance than gender.
Pupils in comprehensive schools in the poorest urban areas achieve
half the success rate at GCSE of those in better-off urban areas.
[98] In 1991/92, 55 percent from families of professionals went into
higher education aged under 21; by 1998/99, 72 percent did. In
1991/92 only 6 percent of those from unskilled working class
backgrounds went into higher education. By the end of the decade this
had risen to 13 percent. Professionals were more than twice as likely
as the national average to see their children in higher education,
while unskilled workers were more than half as likely. [99] The sense
of worthlessness and bitterness at what the future holds must surely
be connected in the minds of working class girls and boys with this
lack of accessibility to the sort of education which at least holds
out a promise of financial and social benefits. For when we look at
those children who gain no qualifications, there is not a massive
discrepancy between boys and girls. So 8 percent of boys and 5
percent of girls gained no graded GCSEs in 1997/98, while 26 percent
of boys and 33 percent of girls gained two or more A-levels. [100]
Seeing the educational divide as a boy/girl question only obscures
the much greater division of class which the right wing commentators
are so keen to deny.
 
What sort of a society sees women as a threat?
Now men know what it’s like to be a woman, is the common
response from many of those women who find themselves regaled with
stories of male crisis. Women can’t help thinking that we’ve
always had to put up with this – why is it different when it
happens to a man? Time and again, the experience of men who have lost
work or are doing lower grade work than they have been used to is
comparable to women’s traditional malaise at being in the home.
Bill Costas, an unemployed meatpacker in the US aged 34 moans, ‘I
don’t see anybody anymore. The guys I worked with were my buddies
... We’d go out after work and have a beer and shoot the bull. Now
I don’t even know what they’re doing anymore’. [101] Some
believe men’s problem is precisely that they are in the traditional
‘female’ role.
But of course they are not in the traditional female role. Men
still go out to work in very large numbers, they still hang on to
nearly all the really powerful jobs in capitalist society, and they
still leave women holding the baby most of the time, whether these
women do it for love or for a paid wage. Men are not full time
househusbands very often – and those who claim to be are often
working at home part time in an occupation which has a high degree of
autonomy and is relatively well rewarded. This is a very long way
from the low-status work, cut off from any society wider than
immediate neighbours and children, that makes women prone to
depression, boredom and nervous illness. Those men who most closely
approximate to such a role are the long term unemployed, usually
without direct childcare responsibilities, and often older men, who
sense their worthlessness from their inability to sell their labour power.
The real transformation here is that men and women are moving
closer together in terms of their work and their domestic life, but
they are struggling to do so in conditions not of their own choosing.
They do so against a background of continuing women’s oppression
and intensified exploitation for both men and women. No wonder so
many feel in crisis. No wonder either that increasing numbers are
beginning to question a society which treats men and women in this
way. The experience of capitalist society is a potential unifier of
working class people: the very process of exploitation brings large
numbers of people together as workers. They face similar experiences
of low wages, petty rules at work, the tyranny of time-keeping, and
being constantly tied to machinery. They perceive a common enemy in
the form of the employer. But there are other factors at work: most
importantly, capitalist society also acts to divide working class
people. This is done in a thousand small and large ways, and through
a combination of ideological and material factors. Women’s material
disadvantage in terms of wages, for example, is underpinned by the
view of women as primarily mothers or sex objects which still
prevails. Racist and nationalist arguments feed on the fact that in
capitalist society there is scarcity amid plenty and that workers
have to compete for scarce resources. So competition between workers
for jobs or housing or education can act to reinforce racist ideas.
Society tries to pit men against women, blacks against whites,
Catholics against Protestants. When an oppressed group gain anything
at the expense of those they are supposed to be competing with, this
is enough to cause a crisis. Instead of seeing the real source of
problems lying in the wider social system which exploits and
oppresses, working people all too often see the problem as lying
within the immediate division of these scarce resources.
Women have not benefited at the expense of men. They still work in
the home and in paid work. Both sexes are under increased pressure,
with the lives of working men and women unrecognisable compared with
one or two generations ago. Both now have to work to provide an
adequate family income; both are pressurised to ensure that their
children gain the education and qualifications to equip them for the
labour market as it is today; both struggle to fit the tasks of
childcare and housework into their busy lives. As the family becomes
a centre of enhanced consumption, so individual men and women are
sold an image of themselves which goes well beyond the old roles of
breadwinner and homemaker. They are meant to successfully transcend
these old roles and adopt at least some of the roles seen as the
property of the other sex. Fitting into these new roles may be more
rewarding or enjoyable in some cases, but it is usually hard work. So
women work for less than equal wages while men are expected to
participate in unpaid childcare.
The discomfort which men feel at the new situation in which they
find themselves demonstrates how artificial the old situation was. In
The Condition of the Working Class in England Frederick Engels
wrote of the unease felt among men as they lost their work in
textiles and saw their wives or daughters earning more money than
they could. He described the plight of a male worker in St Helens,
Lancashire, interrupted by a friend while darning his wife’s
stockings. The worker describes how he has had no work for three
years, while his wife works from dawn till night in the factory and
so is too tired to do anything at home. [102] Engels wrote of how
insane this system was and how degrading it was to both sexes, since
it ‘unsexes the man and takes from the woman all womanliness
without being able to bestow upon the man true womanliness or the
woman true manliness’. [103] There is nothing natural about gender
roles or about the attitudes and status which are attributed to them.
Instead, he says:
... so total a reversal of the position of the sexes can
have come to pass only because the sexes have been placed in a false
position from the beginning. If the reign of the wife over the
husband, as inevitably brought about by the factory system, is
inhuman, the pristine rule of the husband over the wife must have
been inhuman too. [104]
In an unequal society, there must always be someone on top – but
there is nothing natural or fair about this. This is the basis of
Engels’ argument, developed elsewhere, that the family and gender
roles within it are artificial constructions. [105] The male crisis
is a product of a society incapable of treating its members as equal
human beings, but which instead robs them of any control of their
lives. The response to this among men in particular is twofold. Men
often cling on to a sense of identity or pride in masculine values or
traits, which they think set them apart from women (or indeed from
men who are regarded as being ‘feminine’). But at the same time
they feel a sense of unease and of powerlessness in controlling what
happens in their world. This explains much of the seemingly
contradictory behaviour of men today and also points to a possibly
frightening but potentially exhilarating future, as an understanding
of the shallowness and inequity of the old relationships leads to a
wider questioning of how the world is run.
 
The problem of feminism
What has happened to women’s liberation? By the late 1970s the
movement which had such an impact ideologically in putting the issue
of women on the political agenda was deeply divided. The activism
that marked many of its adherents declined dramatically; the women’s
movement had never been a mass movement in Britain, but now it
fragmented into different and disparate campaigns. Although the
movement’s founders tended to be socialists and trade unionists,
the second half of the 1970s saw the growth of radical feminism. The
disputatious conference in 1978 marked the last time that the
movement ever met as a movement. The subsequent decades have been
ones of retreat for most feminists as the attempts to find niches
where they could practise their feminism took them into different
directions. Many saw the Labour Party and especially local Labour
councils as a key agent of change, enthused by the chance of setting
up women’s committees and creating reforms for women as part of a
reborn local government. The attacks by Thatcher on the GLC and other
local councils put paid to such good intentions and little was
salvaged from what remained apart from a number of individual women
who went on to become MPs or councillors. Other women went into
academia, teaching women’s studies courses and related topics.
[106] In the course of the 1980s and 1990s, as feminism became more
acceptable as an ideology, so it became more limited in terms of what
it would accept. Abandonment of collective change leads to an
exclusive emphasis on individual change and with that powerlessness
in confronting the structures of oppression. Instead of defining
itself in solidarity with wider movements and with the working class
struggle it was enough simply to think in a feminist way in order to
be involved in political practice. This took its toll not just on the
activism of the movement but on its ideas, especially as the right
wing ideas of Thatcherism and then of neo-liberalism post-1989 gained
influence. Some of the ideas which had been accepted in the 1960s and
1970s now came under attack: a generation of younger feminists sang
the praises of make-up and designer clothes, or dismissed the idea of
date rape as wildly exaggerated. In The Morning After Katie
Roiphe writes, ‘If I was really standing in the middle of an
epidemic, a crisis, if 25 percent of my female friends were really
being raped, wouldn’t I know it?’ Probably not, if in real life
she is as unsympathetic to the problem as her book suggests, someone
who believes that ‘someone’s rape may be another person’s bad
night’. [107] Another US feminist, Naomi Wolf, embraces the
entrepreneurial spirit of the age with her attacks on ‘victim
feminism’ and the belief that ‘women’s businesses can be the
power cells of the 21st century’. [108] Wolf sees Princess Diana as
someone to be admired for having transformed herself from being a
victim. [109] British feminist Beatrix Campbell saw the pampered
princess as the subject for a whole book, including the ludicrous
claim that, ‘By telling her story, Diana joined the “constituency
of the rejected” – the survivors of harm and horror, from the
Holocaust, from world wars and pogroms, from Vietnam and the civil
wars of South America and South Africa, from torture and child abuse
– who have transformed the work of storytelling in our century’.
[110] Feminism appeared either disconnected from the world or
desperately looking for role models to whom women could aspire –
even if the role models turned out to be princesses.
Ideas of liberation do not stand in isolation from the wider
society. Some of them can become incorporated or accepted within
society – witness the very limited inclusion of a minority of women
and an even smaller minority of blacks into the high echelons of
power. Others adapt and bend to the dominant ideas, even where they
are not totally abandoned. This happened to a layer of feminists who
disconnected their individual progress from the wider progress of
society. While working women in most parts of the world saw their
conditions worsen, those who benefited from the changes left them
behind or even blamed them for their own failure to change and to
take advantage of the market opportunities which availed them.
Identity politics projected a view which could only be about
individual women ‘getting on’ and therefore encouraging other
women. But the narrow scope of the vision led to myopia: identity
politics could only see its proponents’ own advances or otherwise.
In a period when globalisation, imperialism and neo-liberalism have
run riot, concern about individual women or blacks ‘making it’
has, as Naomi Klein so well puts it, ‘amounted to a rearranging of
the furniture while the house burnt down’. [111] Fighting over the
shrinking resources available to women and blacks in the 1990s meant
‘fighting their battles over a single, shrinking piece of pie –
and consistently failing to ask what was happening to the rest of
it’. [112]
Today there is barely any pretence from some erstwhile feminists
that anything needs to be changed. A progression of spokeswomen for
the successful minority now tell us that feminism is backward-looking
or that women can only achieve by competing on the same terms as men.
[113] The retreat even further into postfeminism has led to an
abandonment of any attempt to make sense of women’s oppression, but
rather has become a simple reflection of one of society’s dominant
images – that women can make it if they work hard and don’t cause
any trouble. Elaine Showalter, veteran US feminist, now criticises
the ‘dead-end feminist combination of dependence on the nanny state
and lack of enterprise in politics and popular culture’ and urges
us to ‘solve the childcare problem, and also make money’. She
asks, ‘Where are the female Richard Bransons and Jamie Olivers of
the nappy and naptime brigade?’ [114] Where indeed?
The cleavage within the ideas of women’s liberation runs along
lines of class. Those who see liberation in terms of individual
advance can only do so by ignoring the millions of women and men for
whom life choices are quite different from which brand to buy, which
car to drive, or how to achieve the best ‘work-life balance’.
Throughout the world, the conditions of these people have
deteriorated while a small number have gained. Feminism has run up
against the limits of class society: the existence of a small
minority of women with access to top jobs and all the material
advantages that these bring with them is perfectly compatible with
the continued existence of class exploitation; millions of women
achieving real change in the form of equal pay or socialised
childcare is not. For the capitalist class to grant such demands
would mean cutting deep into their profits, something they are
unlikely to do without being forced to. And as the struggle revives,
globally and in Britain, as it has over the past few years, questions
of class become more relevant.
A growing number of women depend on other women to do their
domestic labour. In the US between 14 and 18 percent of households
employ an outsider to do their cleaning. Socialist feminist Barbara
Ehrenreich says, ‘Among my middle class, professional women friends
and acquaintances, including some who made important contributions to
the early feminist analysis of housework two and a half decades ago,
the employment of a cleaning person is now nearly universal’. [115]
But the question of class isn’t simply about individual attitudes,
shocking though some of these are – it is about the organisation of
the whole of society.
The women’s movement has failed because its theory was and is
incapable of addressing the very big problems now facing women and
the increasing class nature of the attacks on them. The theory of
patriarchy, which locates women’s oppression outside of capitalist
social relations and tries to separate out oppression and class,
proved inadequate to explain the real position of women. It could
only explain women’s oppression in terms of the benefits which
accrued to men and to capital as a result of that oppression.
Patriarchy could not therefore begin to explain the changes in
women’s lives which have been the themes of this article. Women
went out to work because capital needed labour reserves during its
long boom which could not be met by the existing male-dominated
workforce. Women’s entry into work coincided with large-scale
immigration for the same reason. The wages of men and women needed to
cover the higher costs of reproduction of the family, including the
costs of childcare. The monogamous, lifelong marriage and the
Kellogg’s cornflake advert traditional family no longer fitted this
situation. Sexual attitudes changed as a result of all these other
changes, as women saw themselves as less and less subservient.
Capitalism has served to break down many of the oppressive
structures which had dominated for hundreds if not thousands of
years, but it could not create liberation because it acts to turn
everything into a commodity and so even the caring functions of the
family are increasingly bought and sold on the market. And it
recreates oppression and its structures in order to divide the
working class. The central arena of women’s oppression remains the
family, which is both broken down by the effects of capitalism and
also maintained and reinforced by capital as the cheapest, most
convenient and most socially stable way of caring for the existing
generation of workers and reproducing the next generation. [116]
 
Liberation now?
What does liberation mean for a young woman in Thailand, facing
the choice between hard factory work and prostitution under the
control of pimps who exploit young girls for a few years until they
lose their health or looks? What does liberation mean for a working
mother in the north east of England who works in a call centre, who
rarely sees her partner because they both work shifts, and who
struggles to make ends meet on two miserable wages? What does
liberation mean for the Hispanic cleaner in Los Angeles, threatened
with deportation as an illegal immigrant and forced to neglect her
own home to clean other people’s?
It is obvious that political equality is not enough. Equality on
the same basis as men is fine if the man you are comparing yourself
to has an above-average income, can afford to pay for high quality
personal services, and has more than adequate living space and a
fulfilling high status job. If on the other hand he is low paid,
works in a monotonous and highly supervised job, works unsocial hours
and can only afford the cheapest housing, then the aspiration has to
be for something more. The call then has to be for economic and
social change, which means challenging the way capitalist society is
organised. For many feminists this is not a necessity: positive
discrimination at work, women-only shortlists for parliamentary
elections, women managers and academics at the highest level, are
sufficient to fulfil their aspirations. They do not even find these
battles particularly easy, as we have seen from the pitifully small
number of women MPs, or the regularly occurring industrial tribunals
about sexual harassment of female high-fliers in the City of London.
Institutions which defend privilege in general are unlikely to open
up even to the most respectable or compliant women. But these
feminists have little concern with these wider battles. Those who
want to change the world for working class women have to look to more
radical solutions.
The problem of childcare being privatised and remaining a burden
for women cannot be solved unless we have at hand the resources of
the whole of society to do so. That means the wealth that we create
going not into the pockets of the already rich and powerful, but into
developing a whole range of options for childcare including nurseries
on every street or estate available free to all those who want to use
them. A national childcare service based on the principles of the NHS
would be a huge step forward, but no capitalist class in the world
will let providing one eat into its profits when they can fall back
on the family to do the work unpaid. The 35–hour week for men and
women would be a huge step forward, cutting into unemployment, giving
people much more leisure time and allowing them to spend more time
with their children. This in turn would mean people needing less of
the paid services which accompany the long hours we work: the
cleaners, the grocery delivery vans, the childminders. Decent, cheap
social housing would mean less travel and commuting to work as people
were able to afford to live close to work. All of these provisions
would benefit most women and men, as well as the wider society, but
they will not be realised while those who control our world continue
to do so, because they would cut into the profits of our rulers.
Liberation will only be achieved when the working people of the
world take control of it, ending the exploitation which dominates our
lives and destroys our human potential and relations. Revolution is
about liberation and about taking control: control of the workplaces
and the work process so that we produce for need, not profit; control
of our own lives as we grapple with the possibilities of changing the
world. For women that control is central because it also means sexual
control in the genuine sense, rather than in the caricatured way of
mimicking men it means today. Sexual control means the right to have
children or not, as a woman chooses. This should seem a basic right
in the 21st century, but there are women who are forced to have
children they do not want because they are denied abortion or
contraception. There are other women who are forced not to have
children, injected with contraceptives such as Depo Provera. There
should be no financial, political or moral pressure on these
decisions. Women and men should have the right to divorce when either
partner wants it. Women should be free from domestic violence and
workplace sexual harassment. Only when we end an exploitative class
society which maintains oppression at its centre can we take control
and achieve these aims collectively.
The examples of even short-lived socialist societies in history
demonstrate that women’s demands came to the fore and that women
themselves fought to achieve them. Post-1917 Russia, despite being
poor, wartorn and beleaguered by invasion, achieved real changes for
women in what had been one of the most oppressive societies in the
world, changes only finally defeated with the rise of Stalinism.
Women’s liberation has to be part of the fight for socialism, of
the overthrow of class society, for it to achieve any of its
fundamental aims. If it is to be successful that struggle has to
involve working class men, not separate from them.
Divisions about fighting for liberation are not new. Early in the
last century there were arguments between the middle class feminists
and working class socialists about whether women’s liberation could
be achieved within capitalism. As the US socialist Elizabeth Gurley
Flynn said in 1915, following a major strike wave involving women
workers, ‘The sisterhood of women, like the brotherhood of man, is
a hollow sham to labour. Behind all its smug hypocrisy and sickly
sentimentality loom the sinister outlines of the class war’. [117]
The divisions which emerged internationally on class lines then have
emerged again now. This article has been mainly concerned with women
in Britain but features of their conditions are reproduced across the
world as globalisation, imperialism and neo-liberalism make their
attacks on working people. If in fighting back against them we make
the connection between women’s liberation, socialism and the
overthrow of class society then we will have brought the possibility
of change much closer.

Notes
1. B. Sutcliffe, 100 Ways of Seeing an Unequal World
(London 2001), p. 59.
2. www.rapecrisis.co.uk/statistics.htm.
3. S. Evans, Personal Politics (New York 1979), p. 190.
4. For the close connection between some of these strikes and the
women’s movement see The Body Politic (London 1972),
pp. 91–102, 153–174; L. German, Sex, Class and Socialism
(London 1998), pp. 163–184; S. Rowbotham, A Century of
Women (London 1997), pp. 348–352.
5. See, for example, N. Klein, No Logo (London 2001); B.
Ehrenreich and A. Russell Hochschild (eds.), Global Woman
(London 2003); C. Harman, The Workers of the World, in International Socialism 2 : 96 (Autumn 2002); G.
Horgan, How Does Globalisation Affect Women? International Socialism 2 : 91 (Summer 2001).
6. A. Coote and B. Campbell, Sweet Freedom (London 1982),
pp. 74–76.
7. Financial Times, 8 February 2001.
8. Figures from Labour Movement Trends 2001. See Financial
Times, 8 February 2001.
9. Social Trends 30 (London 2000), p. 71.
10. In 1979, 24 percent of such women returned to work, by 1988
this figure stood at 45 percent and in 1996 was at 67 percent (24
percent were full time and 42 percent part time). S. Dex (ed.),
Families and the Labour Market (London 1999), p. 33.
11. As above, p. 35.
12. These women’s earnings made up 7.9 percent of household
income in 1965 and 11.3 percent in 1983. In households where a
married woman was working, her income made up 19.5 percent or 27.4
percent of household income, depending on whether there were
dependent children or not. See Jill Walker, Women, the State and
Family in Britain: Thatcher Economics and the Experience of Women,
in J. Rubery (ed.), Women and Recession (London 1988),
p. 221.
13. D. Pilling, Engels and the Condition of the Working Class
Today, in J. Lea and G. Pilling (eds.), The Condition
of Britain (London 1996), p. 23.
14. S. Dex (ed.), as above, p. 42.
15. As above.
16. As above, p. 43.
17. Financial Times, 20 March 2002.
18. L. Ward, Childcare Gap Stops Mothers Working, The
Guardian, 26 March 2002.
19. R. Bennett, Multiplicity Of Childcare Options Fails to
Deliver, Financial Times, 20 March 2002.
20. R. Bennett, State May Pay Grandmothers to Baby-Sit,
Financial Times, 20 March 2002.
21. H. Wilkinson, The Mother Load, The Guardian, 26
March 2002.
22. R. Taylor, More Women In Paid Employment, Financial
Times, 8 February 2001.
23. H. Wilkinson, as above.
24. R. Bennett, Multiplicity Of Childcare Options, as above.
25. H. Meltzer, Day Care Services for Children (a survey
carried out on behalf of the Department of Health in 1990) (London
1994), p. 19.
26. Financial Times, 19 April 2002.
27. H. Meltzer, as above, pp. 56–57.
28. As above, p. 18.
29. J. Rubery and R. Tarling, Women’s Employment in Declining
Britain, in J. Rubery (ed.), as above, pp. 126–127.
30. Social Trends 30 (2000), p. 72.
31. Demos Report, Tomorrow’s Women, 1997, quoted in R.
Coward, Sacred Cows (London 1999), p. 49.
32. Equal Opportunities Commission figures, quoted in C. Palmer,
Some Still More Equal Than Others, The Observer, 11
February 2001 (business section).
33. J. Finch, Childcare Benefits Count for Nothing, The
Guardian, 1 March 2001.
34. Hakim’s controversial views on this question have been
decisively rebutted by various feminist academics. See C. Hakim, The
Myth of Rising Female Employment, in Work, Employment and
Society, vol. 7, no. 1 (March 1993), pp. 97–120;
C. Hakim, Five Feminist Myths about Women’s Employment,
British Journal of Sociology, vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 429–455; J. Ginn et al., Feminist Fallacies: A
Reply to Hakim on Women’s Employment, British Journal of
Sociology, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 167–173; I.
Bruegel, Whose Myths are They Anyway?, British Journal of
Sociology 47 (1), pp. 175–177; C. Hakim, The Sexual
Division of Labour and Women’s Heterogeneity, British
Journal of Sociology, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 178–188.
35. J. Martin and C. Roberts, Women and Employment: A Lifetime
Perspective (London 1984), chs. 3 and 4.
36. S. Harkness, Working 9 to 5?, in P. Gregg and J.
Wadsworth (eds.), The State of Working Britain
(Manchester 1999), p. 106.
37. J. Ginn et al., Feminist Fallacies, as above, p. 170.
38. See I. Bruegel, as above, p. 176; Y. Cooper, How Safe
Is Your Job?, The Independent, 16 May 1996, which reported
that, since 1992, 175,000 more part time workers said they would
rather work full time.
39. J. Martin and C. Roberts, as above, p. 41.
40. T. Desai et al., Gender and the Labour Market in
P. Gregg and J. Wadsworth (eds.), as above, p. 176.
41. As above, p. 168.
42. As above, p. 178.
43. G. Gorer, quoted in R. McKibbin, Classes and Cultures:
England 1918–1951 (Oxford 1998), p. 296.
44. Social Trends 30 (2000), p. 37.
45. As above, p. 40.
46. Guardian Education Supplement, 16 January 2001, p. 63.
47. Battle To Cut Teenage Pregnancy Rate, The Guardian, 22 February 2001.
48. J. Weeks, Sex, Politics and Society (London 1981), p. 252.
49. K. Wellings et al., Sexual Behaviour in Britain
(London 1994), p. 37.
50. L. Stanley, Sex Surveyed (London 1995), p. 45,
quoting survey by Michael Schofield.
51. J. Lewis, Women in Britain since 1945 (Oxford 1992), p. 44.
52. C. Harman, The Fire Last Time (London 1988), p. 86.
53. K. Wellings et al., as above, pp. 71–72, shows
of those surveyed only 6.1 percent of men and 15.9 percent of women
had their first intercourse in marriage, compared with 42.9 percent
of men and 51.4 percent of women who had it first in a steady relationship.
54. J. Gillis, For Better, for Worse (Oxford 1985), p. 307.
55. K. White, Sexual Liberation or Sexual License (Chicago
2000), p. 197.
56. J. Gillis, as above, pp. 307–308.
57. K. Wellings et al., as above, pp. 98–100.
58. As above, p. 77.
59. As above, pp. 156–157.
60. Figures according to Wellings et al., of those asked
about oro-genital sexual contact in the past year, were as follows:
Cunnilingus only: men 6.4 percent, women 5.5 percent; Fellatio only:
men 2.7 percent, women 3.3 percent; Both: men 46.5 percent, women
40.7 percent (K. Wellings et al., as above, pp. 149–151).
61. See, for example, the results of a US study quoted in G.
Greer, The Whole Woman (London 2000), p. 241.
62. US News and World Report, quoted in G. Greer, as above, p. 234.
63. K. Bales, Because She Looks Like a Child, in B.
Ehrenreich and A. Russell Hochschild (eds.), as above, p. 219.
64. As above, p. 214.
65. D. Brennan, Selling Sex for Visas, in B. Ehrenreich and
A. Russell Hochschild (eds.), as above, p. 157.
66. Quoted in Metro, 5 July 2000.
67. Quoted in R. Coward, Sacred Cows (London 1999), p. 75.
68. Social Trends 30 (2000), p. 37.
69. D. Hill, In Search of New Dad, The Guardian, 14 June 2000.
70. P. Hewitt, About Time (London 1993), p. 58.
71. As above, p. 57.
72. As above, pp. 57–58.
73. As above, p. 61.
74. D. Hill, as above.
75. S. Dex (ed.), as above, p. 37.
76. www.pbs.org/livelyhood/workingfamily/familytrends.html.
77. S. Dex (ed.), as above, pp. 38–39, from
unpublished tables by E. Ferri and K. Smith, Parenting in the
1990s (London 1996).
78. S. Dex (ed.), as above, pp. 38–39.
79. G. Dench, The Place of Men in Changing Family Cultures
(London 1996), p. 63.
80. D. Hill, as above.
81. T. Blackwell and J. Seabrook, Talking Work: An Oral History (London 1996), p. 141.
82. As above, p. 161.
83. S. Humphries and P. Gordon, A Man’s World (London
1996), p. 173.
84. S. Nye, Act Your Age!, The Observer Encyclopaedia of
Our Times, vol. 1 (London no date), p. 3.
85. R. Snoddy, Staying Active on a Diet of Sex and Sport,
Financial Times, 14 April 1997.
86. As above.
87. Letter in Socialist Review, January 1997.
88. I. Whelehan, Overloaded (London 2000), p. 65.
89. D. Aitkenhead, Prudes Rock, The Guardian, 5
March 2002.
90. M. Phillips, The Sex Change State (Social Market
Foundation, 1997), p. 15.
91. As above, p. 7.
92. S. Ruxton, Boys Won’t Be Boys in T. Lloyd and T. Wood (eds.), What Next for Men? (London 1996), p. 82.
93. L. Brooks, Ladies Who Lift, The Guardian, 5 March 2002.
94. Quoted in L. Segal, Slow Motion (London 1997), p. 263.
95. Social Trends 30 (2000), p. 58.
96. As above, p. 56.
97. As above, and A. Phillips, Down With Girls!, The
Guardian, 21 June 2000.
98. B. Hugill, Britain’s Exclusion Zone, The Observer, 13 April 1997.
99. Social Trends 30 (2000), p. 56.
100. As above, p. 59.
101. L. Rubin, Families on the Faultline (New York 1994), pp. 112–113.
102. F. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England (Moscow 1973), p. 183.
103. As above, p. 184.
104. As above.
105. F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and
the State in K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Writings
(London 1968), p. 461 onwards.
106. For a much more detailed analysis of the women’s movement see L. German, Sex, Class and Socialism (London 1998).
107. K. Roiphe, The Morning After (London 1994), pp. 52–54.
108. N. Wolf, Fire With Fire (London 1993), p. 318.
109. As above, p. 48.
110. B. Campbell, Diana, Princess of Wales: How Sexual Politics
Shook the Monarchy (London 1998), p. 203.
111. N. Klein, as above, p. 123.
112. As above, p. 122.
113. See, for example, N. Wolf, as above, and R. Coward, as above.
114. E. Showalter, Stop Whingeing, Just Do It, Financial
Times Magazine, 18 October 2003.
115. B. Ehrenreich, Maid to Order, in B. Ehrenreich and A.
Russell Hochschild (eds.), as above, p. 90.
116. For a further discussion of the role of the family under
capitalism, see L. German, Sex, Class and Socialism (London
1998), chapters 1–3.
117. Quoted in M. Tax, The Rising of the Women (Illinois
2001), p. 12.
 






Daily tales of scandals, lies and corruption
have rocked the government. With big tax increases and a public
sector pay freeze also on the horizon, political recovery is not
on the agenda, argues Lindsey German



‘Three times since 1979, the political game has seemed
to be up for the Tories in midterm. Three times, they came back to
win. Doing the same thing again should be easy, you may think, thanks
to the economic recovery that is now under way. It is starting to
look anything but.’ The Economist 15 January 1994.
Anyone considering the state of the Tory government even a month
ago would have been hard pressed to reach such a conclusion, but
hardly had the new year dawned when John Major’s government was
plunged into a daily round of crises, each more seemingly damaging
than the last.
Many of these scandals can only be described as trivial. But taken
together they represent such a serious blow to Major that his demise
is openly discussed, with ‘when’ rather than ‘if’ becoming
the key speculation. How can a government with three years of its
parliamentary term to run end up in such chaos?
The issues concerned are much greater than a series of sex
scandals. Outrage at the scandals has resulted from the obvious
hypocrisy of Tory ministers and MPs: they are doing things which they
denounce the rest of us for doing. Cheap attacks on single mothers
which won them support at the Tory Party conference last year have
now rebounded on them.
However, most of the problems facing the government do not result
from personal scandals but as a direct result of Tory policies. This
is a government which trumpeted the arrival of a ‘home-owning
democracy’ and whose flagship council, Westminster, stands accused
of gerrymandering: selling houses to potential Tory voters in order
to maintain control of the council. The homeless and those on the
waiting list were, at best, rehoused many miles away from their
families and friends.
This is a government which is penalising the vast majority of the
population – another 400,000 of the poorest in work will pay tax
from this April as a result of the budget – while it rewards its
own friends and supporters. So individual MPs have made fortunes from
buying then reselling council houses from Westminster Council. Tory
Central Office itself stands accused of buying its own headquarters
from the council and reselling at a £2 million profit.
Nowhere does its policy of rewarding big business stand out more
than in its sleazy arms deals. The cover up of arms sales to Iraq is
well known. Recent revelations of record aid awarded to Malaysia for
an unwanted dam in order to secure an arms deal with its government
show how widely the arms sales are promoted by government.
There is a horrible stench of graft and corruption everywhere.
After 14 years Tory rule increasingly looks like that of a remote
oligarchy, in office to benefit itself and its immediate associates
regardless of the consequences to anyone else.
Many MPs and councillors find it impossible to conceive of ever
being in opposition, and accept the bounty of office as natural and
justifiable. The huge increase in the number of quangos under the
Tories (there are 40,000 government appointees on quangos) has given
these people and their families lucrative pickings. Health, education
and most other areas of public life are now run by those who owe
their allegiance to the Tory government and who measure everything by
profit and loss accounts.
Previous Tory governments have been corrupt, but it is impossible
to conceive of the current level of corruption without the series of
Tory policies which actively encouraged it: privatisation, with the
discounted sale of shares, subsidies for council house sales,
competitive tendering, where local businessmen could win lucrative
contracts while cutting workers’ wages, the creation of whole new
management layers in every area of public life from the prisons to
the the hospitals. And of course arms dealing.
The Thatcher boom of the mid 1980s was at its strongest in the
defence industries, much of whose production was destined for export
to dictators around the world. These arms deals go right to the heart
of government and the Tory Party.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the scandals have much wider
political implications than the Tories might expect. They are so
severe that they have even set the Tories at each others’ throats.
A recent commentary by Philip Stephen in the Financial Times
(17 January) put it like this:
‘As [Major’s] authority wanes, he is finding it
harder and harder to reestablish discipline within the government and
the party. Concerted campaigns to bolster that authority can only be
launched so often. The mood among Tory constituency activists is
ugly. Attempts to disentangle the party conference clarion call for a
return to traditional values from the personal behaviour of
politicians have not gone down well. Many activists view the
government as incompetent, the prime minister as not up to the job.’
The discontent among Tory ranks comes overwhelmingly from the
unpopularity of government policies, which activists on the ground
feel much more strongly than remote figures in government. They know
that VAT on fuel is as unpopular as ever, that other tax rises will
hit the majority – not just workers but large sections of the
middle class – very hard, and that the scandals are being very
badly received by traditional Tory supporters.
The recent speech by Michael Portillo, chosen leadership candidate
of the Tory right, demonstrated how out of touch the Tories really
are. He attacked a mood of cynicism which was affecting the standing
of the ‘great institutions’: ‘If crown, parliament and church
are not respected, neither will be law, judges or policemen, nor
bosses, managers or foremen.’
Portillo blames this on an ‘elite’ spreading such
disaffection, by which he means the once faithful Tory press and
other commentators. But it is obvious to virtually everyone outside
Portillo’s own political circle that cynicism about the dominant
institutions in British society has been brought on by the actions of
those who run these institutions.
It is hardly surprising that a recent poll showed that ‘six
voters think that the government is doing a bad job for every one who
thinks it is doing well,’ when, for example, it is common knowledge
that the Tory ‘flagship councils’ were given extra government
grants in order to ensure that their poll tax levels were negligible
and so hand them electoral victory in 1990.
Nor is it surprising that a December opinion poll showed that
three quarters questioned wanted to give no public money to
the royal family, believing that they should fund themselves, when
the conspicuous consumption of the royals stands in such contrast to
the cuts in hospitals and schools used by ordinary people.
The connection between Tory policies and the various scandals
means that many more are likely to hit the news. Already there is
talk of investigations into other Tory councils such as Brent and
Wandsworth, and there are certainly many shady deals involving Tory
MPs which have not yet come to light. Such revelations are likely to
rock the government even harder.
This leaves out the whole question of policy. Already, the Tories
try to put as little through parliament as they can get away with.
Parliamentary recesses have been at record levels over the past year.
The Police and Magistrates’ Courts Bill was mauled by Tory
supporters in the House of Lords. They are not confident about
getting most pieces of legislation passed.
Above all, looming over government decisions is what happens with
the budget. This was hailed as a great success for Kenneth Clarke by
the ‘chattering classes’ Michael Portillo now attacks. Most
commentators agreed that it was a good budget for the Tories. Yet it
made no dent in Tory unpopularity at the polls and has clearly not
been well received by the mass of working people.
There is every sign that it will fuel political anger and unrest
outside parliament, as we are beginning to see with students and
among some groups of workers who will suffer under the three year pay
freeze imposed by Clarke’s budget.
This makes it near impossible for Major to restore his
government’s fortunes. Even the opinion polls indicate that the
depths of unpopularity now facing the Tories are greater than they
have been at any time during the 1980s. Even compared with January
1981, when Thatcher’s unpopularity was at a low, Labour had only
around half the lead it now has over the Tories, and twice as many
people were satisfied with the government (see table).
DIAGRAM: Optimism up, prime minister down



Four mid-term polls compared*




%


Jan 81


Apr 85


Apr 89


Dec 93




Conservative lead
over Labour


−10


  1


  0


−18




Satisfied with
government


   26


31


32


   13




Prime minister’s lead
over Labour leader


     9


  6


  8


−15




Source: MORI – * 20 months after election



Opinion polls in the past month give a massive lead to Labour of
up to 24 percent ahead of the Tories. And The Economist
pointed out recently that links between economic recovery and the
Tory leader’s popularity have been broken in the last year.
All this suggests that this crisis is too deep for Major – or
indeed any other Tory leader – to easily escape from. But there is
a much more fundamental reason why – and it is one which Michael
Portillo touched on when he bemoaned the lack of respect for institutions.
The crisis of government and parliamentary politics is part of a
much wider crisis. The old institutions which did so much to hold
British society together and to encourage deference to the ‘higher
orders’ are now in a state of disarray. The Church of England –
known as the ‘Tory party at prayer’ – finds itself under attack
from sections of government.
The monarchy has the look of a soap opera which has been running
too long. The judges have too often shown themselves blind to any
notion of justice for them to be widely respected.
The attacks on the Tories from their erstwhile friends in the
press are symptomatic of a society whose central, fixed and stable
ideas have crumbled – with nothing to replace them. Hence the
appeal to some Tories of ‘traditional values’, of harking back to
a seemingly golden age where everyone knew their place, and where a
respected monarchy and church were the pinnacle of an unwritten
constitution administered by Tory judges and (usually) a Tory government.
But most people do not want such a society. Whereas in 1983, for
example, 28 percent of people wanted an extension of welfare
benefits, today 48 percent do. Yet such a society is certainly not on
offer from the Tories.
Nor does Labour have any clear vision of a better society, despite
its formal commitment to more equality. Indeed the crisis of ideas
leads the shadow cabinet to further caution, as its members echo some
of the Tory right on the need for greater family values, a stronger
crackdown on crime and so on.
All this leaves an ideological vacuum. The old ideas no longer
command the allegiance of millions, yet many people do not really
know what to put in their place. So there is growing discontent,
especially focussed on government, but no obvious alternative.
In the absence of much parliamentary opposition we will have to
look elsewhere for an expression of the anger which is so prevalent
at the moment. This requires two things. The first is the building of
activity which can begin to halt the attacks, regardless of what is
said in parliament. The pensioners’ demonstrations last year meant
that the Tories were forced to double the rate of compensation for
VAT on fuel. The strike by nurses at UCH last autumn led to the
hospital’s reprieve just before Xmas.
The fights to come over taxation, the pay freeze, cuts in welfare,
student grants and against the fascists can all help to build a mood
of confidence. But any recovery in confidence will be uneven and
patchy – hence the importance of the second element: the building
of revolutionary organisation which can give a sense of direction and
coherence through linking up the struggles and applying their lessons
to different issues.
There is a strong contrast between the hatred and contempt for
‘official’ politics with its corruption at every level, and with
the ineffectiveness of even its most principled proponents, and the
growth of interest in politics at the level of struggle and activity.
The more this element can grow and become more effective, the more we
can ensure that Major’s political crisis worsens.


Dammed if you do
The Tories used the carrot of overseas aid to sell arms to
Malaysia. Top civil servant Sir Tim Lankester wrote a formal
memorandum saying that money should not be spent on the Pergau hydro
electric dam project in Malaysia. It was estimated to cost £234
million – the most expensive ever overseas aid project. It would
not be economic until well into the next century, and much more
expensive to Malaysian consumers than any other form of energy
costing them £100 million more than the alternatives.
Lankester was overruled at cabinet level – an unprecedented
move. Why? Because the government linked the dam project with the
sale of arms to the Malaysian government. It refused to do so on
paper. But Lord Younger – then defence secretary – has since said
that ‘the Malaysians said there would be no military contract
without the aid project’ and that a ‘verbal undertaking was given
by somebody – not myself – to link the aid to the defence contract’.
Could that somebody have been Margaret Thatcher herself? Maybe
that is why John Major has refused to release papers on the deal for
MPs to scrutinise the dam project, described as ‘a waste of
taxpayers’ money’ by the National Audit Office.


Porterhouse blues
An unprecedented level of corruption has been uncovered in the
richest local government borough in Britain. Westminster Council has
adopted a policy which allowed it to heavily subsidise sales of
council houses while forcing the homeless and others desperate for
houses out of the borough.
The aim was perhaps the most cynical conceivable: that new
home-buyers would be potential Tory voters while those renting
council property were more likely to vote Labour. So the policy was
concentrated in marginal wards, where the Tories feared they would
lose seats.
Empty flats in these areas were boarded up and sold at huge
discounts to those considered to be ‘upwardly mobile’. Great
pressure was put on those waiting for rented accommodation to buy,
and they were told if they turned down the offer they would get
nothing. Meanwhile Westminster wrote to local authorities as far away
as Wigan in Lancashire asking them to take some of Westminster’s
homeless for a pay off of £400 a year per homeless person.
The district auditor’s report even shocked Tory MPs, who have
always boasted of Westminster’s super efficiency and regarded it as
the jewel in their local government crown. The auditor called
Westminster’s behaviour disgraceful and gerrymandering. Yet even
after this, John Major refused to condemn the action until it is
proven in court. And it took Westminster Council nearly a week to
suspend the practice after the district auditor’s report.
Latest damning evidence suggests that government money earmarked
to help the homeless was in fact spent on easing the gerrymandering scheme.
Up to £20,000 was offered to tenants to vacate their council
homes to make way for the homeless – and the homes were then sold.
Total cost to local ratepayers is estimated at over £21 million,
which the Westminster councillors involved may be surcharged to pay.
These include Dame Shirley Porter, awarded her ‘honour’ by John
Major’s government in 1991, well after the gerrymander
investigation was under way. She is already notorious for selling
three cemeteries to a property developer for 15p.
It is inconceivable that this scandal was unknown either by Tories
nationally or by the Department of the Environment which awarded
Westminster the housing grants. One of those most centrally involved
in the allegations is now a Tory MP.
Westminster is now a symbol of everything rotten about Tory local
government. But there are already claims from Labour that Tory
Wandsworth and Brent, both in London, have been involved in similar
exercises. It remains to be seen whether any prosecutions will follow
in the Westminster fiasco.
 



The monarchy is going through its deepest crisis for many
years. Judith Orr and Lindsey German look at the truth
about the royal family
The heady days of the balcony kiss are a long way from headlines
proclaiming the last days of the Windsors. There is an endless
barrage of scandal and speculation about the royal family’s future.
This notorious family of hereditary millionaires, whose money
grabbing, laziness, hypocrisy and snobbery knows no bounds, is as
unpopular as it has ever been.
This ‘ideal family’ has been shown badly wanting. Prince
Charles’s upbringing at the hands of the Duke of Edinburgh sounds
more like a Dickens novel than the loving family so painstakingly
portrayed in women’s magazines.
The royal family wants to appear as a unifier, a typical family
just like the rest of us. Part of their appeal is based on this
assumption, with some people even believing that the queen votes
Labour ‘like the rest of us ordinary people do’. A Labour
politician could even declare in the 1940s that ‘in England the
king does what the people want. He will be a socialist king.’
This grotesque sense of one of the richest families in the world
being just like any other is widespread and deliberately fostered by
the monarchy’s supporters. A family, some of whose main interests
are horses, full of emotionally stunted individuals whose idea of
work is just over 100 days of official engagements a year, is
projected as able to understand or be like working people.
The image put across is not one of feckless aristocrats but of the
dutiful, hard working middle classes, head of one not very divided
nation. People now know that the whole image is based on a lie. The
fairytale royal marriages are fakes, entered into for commercial and
public relations considerations. The parents spend only an hour or
two a day with the children, and pack them off to barbarous boarding
schools at the age of seven.
None of this should come as any surprise, for hypocrisy is what
the royals do best. Where else would you find someone who is a patron
of Mencap, the Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and
Adults, at the same time having two severely mentally handicapped
cousins locked up in an institution, never receiving visitors for
fear the secret would come out? Then, to cover up the scandal, she
claimed they had both been dead for years! All this from the
country’s ‘favourite granny’ whose long life is a tribute to
idleness and Gordon’s gin.
Charles wants us to believe he is a caring man, ill at ease with
his privileged position. Nothing could be further than the truth.
The royals are rich, selfish and unintelligent. Left to themselves
they would barely be able to hold a job. The queen’s personal
wealth (which excludes the millions of pounds worth of gifts from
rulers all over the globe, stored in an air raid shelter under
Buckingham Palace) is massive. Her stocks and shares are worth at
least £340 million, her jewellery a mere £3.5 million and the
hundreds of works of art which the public never sees are valued no
less than £150–200 million.
 
There has always been widespread opposition to the waste of
millions of pounds of our money on these people. Socialist Worker
headlines such as ‘Stuff the Jubilee’ and ‘Noddy marries
Bigears’ have been among the highest sellers. Among particular
groups in society the royal family has consistently been very
unpopular. A Mass Observation survey in 1965 reported that 31 percent
of all people had more or less negative attitudes towards the
monarchy. Nearly 60 percent of all men had negative or indifferent attitudes.
Today there is incomparably more hostility to the monarchy than
there was then. Poll findings show that the overwhelming majority do
not want the royals to be financed out of public money and over a
third no longer want a monarchy at all. So why is Britain still
lumbered with this motley collection of the mad and bad at Buckingham Palace?
Some still cling to the explanation that the royals are good for
the economy because they bring in trade and tourists. A look at the
balance sheet tells a different story. The visit of the Duke of
Edinburgh to the Helsinki Trade Fair in 1970 resulted in a drop of
exports to Finland of £5.2 million by 1972. One study of royal
visits between 1971 to 1984 concluded that ‘the amount of time
devoted to state visits by the Queen was almost a precise reversal of
the order of the increase in trade to the places concerned’. The
country which until last month had never been visited by the royals,
Russia, increased its trade with Britain over the period fivefold,
while trade with the Commonwealth increased only by a factor of two.
If the royals don’t increase trade then it seems universally
accepted that tourists flock to these shores on the basis that our
palaces are still, occasionally, occupied. Yet tourism figures for
Italy and France are higher than Britain’s although they are both
republics – sunshine, good food and cheap wine being more important
features of a enjoyable holiday than the remote chance of glimpsing
Diana lunching in Mayfair.
A survey by the British Tourist Authority showed that the royal
family came ninth out of ten reasons for visiting Britain, just above
night life! Only 12 percent of those asked even mentioned the royal
family as a reason.
 
So why do they hang on? The monarchy heads a form of parliamentary
rule which has existed for centuries. Britain has never endured
fascism or dictatorship because of its unique combination of elected
House of Commons and hereditary House of Lords and monarchy.
Dispensing with this system would lead to the danger, so the argument
goes, of dictatorship from either left or right.
This is the argument of many Labour leaders, who are some of the
most deferential to monarchy. Recently shadow cabinet member Mo
Mowlem even argued that the royals should get a new high-tech palace
to equip them for the 21st century!
The Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky, writing in the 1920s,
described this feature of British politics: ‘The English
bourgeoisie has erased even the memory of the revolution of the 17th
century, and recast its entire past in the form of “gradual changes”.’
‘Gradualism’ permeates the trade union and labour movement,
leading to the dominant view that voting is the only way of changing
anything and nothing can be done to remove the royal family or lords,
whose roots seem to go back for centuries.
But the monarchy is much more modern than it looks. Most of what
we’re told now is royal ritual and tradition stretching back for
centuries goes back no further than the time of Victoria when the
monarchy often seemed in terminal decline.
Following the death of her husband, Prince Albert, Queen Victoria
became a virtual recluse. In 1864 a note was found pinned to the
fence of Buckingham Palace saying: ‘These commanding premises to be
let or sold, in consequence of the occupant’s declining business.’
In the end the Tory prime minister Disraeli dragged Victoria out
of retirement to counter what he saw as a rising tide of
republicanism and social unrest.
Her Golden jubilee became a grand state pageant on the streets of
London. Even the clergy’s outfits of ‘copes and coloured stoles’
on the day were an innovation. The occasion seemed to have the effect
the ruling class wished for. The Archbishop of Canterbury commented,
‘days afterwards, everyone feels that the socialist movement has
had a check’.
The jubilee was also seen as a celebration of Britain’s empire
and was followed by Victoria’s declaration as Empress of India and
her Diamond Jubilee. Her son Edward VII continued in this tradition,
with more and more grandiose state weddings and funerals, and the
introduction of the state opening of parliament by the monarch.
The era of imperialism at the end of 19th century did wonders for
monarchs all over Europe. Competition between the growing capitalist
powers for colonies, exports and in the field of military might,
meant that each also competed in the power and splendour of their royalty.
Most European monarchies, however, did not survive the First World
War: the German, Austrian and Russian emperors were toppled by
revolution. The same fate was not to befall the House of Windsor. But
this was not because the monarchy prevented revolution. Rather the
workers’ movement was not strong enough to make a revolution and so
the monarchy survived.
The royal family itself has sometimes had a crude understanding of
its weakness. So Edward VII was convinced that his heir George V
would be the last king of England. More recently, the abdication of
the Hitler loving Edward VIII, who became Duke of Windsor in 1936,
led to a deepening crisis for the monarchy. Then around half the
population thought it should be abolished.
The Second World War was very important to restoring the popular
image of a family at the head of a nation all pulling together. There
was of course no equality of sacrifice, with menus at Buckingham
Palace as sumptuous as ever, and the king and queen leaving for
Windsor nearly every night to avoid the worst bombing. Nonetheless,
the image projected helped to revive an institution which had seemed doomed.
The long boom and relative affluence of the 1950s and early 1960s
helped to create the accepted notion of a constitutional monarch at
the head of a united nation. Royalty’s popularity in modern times
has also been encouraged by the development of the media: the mass
circulation popular newspapers which began at the end of the last
century, the cinema newsreels, radio broadcasting and now television.
These media have always covered the royal weddings and funerals with
great reverence, reporting in the most obsequious fashion.
Every newspaper and television station has its gaggle of royal
reporters who churn out the line delivered to them by Buckingham
Palace without question, and have usually loyally kept any honest
information from the public. They went along with the charade of
Charles and Diana’s marriage for years.
The present royal family has consciously encouraged most of this
media attention. In particular since the mid 1960s, when the royal
image began to seem slightly old fashioned and tarnished, there was a
deliberate effort to make the monarchy seem relevant.
 
The British monarchy is characterised more by the changes that it
has undergone over the years than by continuity. As one commentator
in the last century said, ‘There is hardly a country that has
succeeded in so continually adapting her medieval institutions so as
to avoid their complete overthrow or their entire reconstruction.’
In modern times the royals have accepted the need to respond to
public criticism.
This has most recently been seen with the Queen’s abrupt change
of heart on the length of the civil list and the paying of taxes,
following popular outrage at the announcement that the tax payer
would be paying for the refurbishment of burnt out Windsor Castle.
However, as each new scandal erupts, it is not a foregone
conclusion that the royals can adapt their way out of this crisis.
There is a fundamental change going on. Firstly, Britain has declined
as a great power. The royal family with all its palaces and trappings
of splendour more fitted to a huge empire, can appear anachronistic.
During the 1980s the repackaging of the monarchy was part of the
general conservative mood of Thatcherism. We were told Britain was
great again, economic crisis was a thing of the past, that the free
rein of the market was the only guarantee of prosperity. The sense of
betrayal and bitterness in recent years over recession, unemployment
and cuts has hit the monarchy as hard as all the other institutions
of government and control.
When the structures that hold society together are in such crisis
it leads to an ideological ferment even among some of the monarchy’s
strongest supporters, the Tory middle class who feel so betrayed by
the royal family’s present behaviour.
In such a situation any move for change can really threaten the
monarchy, which is one of the weaker of the mediating structures.
People begin to think the unthinkable, that perhaps we would be
better off without this outdated and costly form of rule. The
unfavourable media images are not solely responsible for this, but
they do help to dispel the mystique which is supposed to surround the
family. An institution whose whole existence is based on people
looking up to them has little left for it when people start holding
it in contempt. That is why there is more talk of abolition than for
at least 60 years.
 
Some people believe that until this is achieved and there is an
elected presidency we cannot even get a modern democracy, but this is
to miss the point. We already have a modern capitalist democracy in a
fully developed, although declining, capitalist economy. The Glorious
Revolution of 1688 ensured that any king or queen in Britain would be
totally subservient to parliament. The House of Lords has, since
1911, been unable to block legislation passed by the Commons for any
length of time.
In the Middle Ages the king and lords – along with the church –
had absolute power. Today real power lies with the capitalist class
and its collective expression the capitalist state, of which the
monarchy and House of Lords are only component – and by no means
the central parts.
Part of the worry of many commentators today is that the behaviour
of the royals is upsetting the ‘gentlemen’s agreement’ whereby
the monarchy stays so long as it doesn’t exercise real power. They
fear that disaffection with the royal family will spread to
opposition to their class in general. Some of our rulers would even
favour abolition – but they fear altering things in case it upsets
the whole of the system which they represent.
The future of the monarchy is intimately connected with the fate
of the capitalist class, a fact often missed by those who simply
campaign for constitutional reforms. Charter 88 is dedicated to such
reforms, and the Labour MP Tony Benn campaigns to abolish the
monarchy and the House of Lords.
The hereditary principle is completely reactionary and elitist,
and the principle of election much more democratic than being in a
position because an ancestor was the mistress of a king or on the
right side in a battle so we should favour such abolition.
But the elective democracy on offer under capitalism presents no
real alternative. The US or France are not more democratic in any
fundamental sense than Britain or Holland. Those countries spend as
much on their presidents as we are forced to on the royal family. We
know that any elected government can be remote and out of touch.
This is one reason why simply swopping the queen for a president
has no great appeal for most people, if it means that the rest of
their lives stay the same. A political movement which fought not for
narrow constitutional change but for a real upheaval in society –
with a new form of democracy – might seem harder to get, but it
also seems much more worth fighting for.
The fight to abolish the monarchy should be part of the struggle
against the system which has preserved them so generously and to
which they in turn are so devoted.
 



Cracker
Mon, 9 p.m. ITV
The first series of Cracker, starring Robbie Coltrane as
the Manchester police psychologist, held your attention but was
slightly disturbing. Coltrane’s character Fitz is much more
intelligent and liberal than the police he works with. But all his
insights into society and its victims tend to lead to the same
conclusion as black bags over people’s heads and false confessions.
In one story an innocent man is sent to prison because of Fitz’s work.
Those already slightly uncomfortable at the series will have felt
their unease grow with the real life acquittal of Colin Stagg. He was
charged with a particularly horrific murder after police
psychologists invented a suspect profile, fitted Stagg to that
profile without any firm evidence linking him with the crime and then
used a police woman to entrap him by encouraging him to indulge in
violent sexual fantasies.
Watching the opening story in the new series only tends to
reinforce this unease. A young factory worker cracks up following his
father’s death. He has an argument with an Asian shopkeeper over
4p. We are supposed to believe that he goes home, shaves his head,
returns dressed in combat gear brandishing a bayonet, argues with the
shopkeeper that he is a ‘robbing Paki bastard’, and then stabs
him to death.
In the course of the argument he claims that he is a socialist and
trade unionist who has been on marches against racism but is fed up
with the way he is treated. When he commits his second murder – of
an academic psychologist without Fitz’s insight – he again
expresses his frustration that only a handful of people went to his
dad’s funeral because he was an ‘ordinary white working class
bloke’. Right at the end the murderer, Albie, says that he looked
to the Labour party but they were only interested in gays and blacks.
What are we to make of all this? The police assume the ‘profile’
will be unskilled working class, unemployed, connected with a group
like the BNP. Fitz thinks differently – and the audience know that
he is right because they have seen the murderer, Albie, working in
the factory and confessing to some left wing politics in the past. So
we have to look deeper.
The answer, it turns out, is that he witnessed the Hillsborough
football disaster. Now, it’s perfectly understandable how that
event could completely traumatise anyone. But why should it turn them
from being a socialist into a racial killer, any more than it would
turn Michael Portillo into an SWP member?
There seems to be a pernicious message here: we are all racists.
Indeed, Fitz says as much to the Asian shopkeeper’s daughter. Even
the most decent, law abiding, left wing person can be sent over the
edge, and then their residual racism comes out. The horror of the
modern world can make murderous bigots of us all.
And here Fitz comes in. The police are portrayed sympathetically,
as decent honest people who don’t have the intelligence or insight
to spot the real criminals. Fitz is not decent or honest. He is also
a compulsive drinker and gambler in a miserable marriage who cannot
face up to the mess in his life. But his weaknesses give him an
insight into all the other misfits. He is often sympathetic to their
plight, but in the end, when Fitz has cracked their story, they are
handed over to the police.
The programme attempts to deal with contemporary real life issues,
but only has one law and order solution to them.
Cracker has been described as a brilliant postmodern
character, portraying the exact opposite of a typical hero. But that
is hardly new in detective stories: look at the characters of
Dashiell Hammett or Raymond Chandler. The stories are well scripted
and acted, but at their core is a reactionary thesis which no radical
psychology can completely hide: the thin blue line – not perfect
but the best we have got – is the only protection of ‘civilisation’.
 



Fire from Heaven
David Underdown
Fontana £7.99
It is not often that you find a history book that reads like a
novel. But David Underdown’s study of the inhabitants of a Dorset
town in the early 17th century does. It tells the story from
contemporary documents. Characters appear large as life throughout
the book. John White the preacher and William Whiteway the diarist
are the zealous campaigners and reformers, while the notorious
Pouncey family appear again and again in court records, and the
Blachfords are ruthless businessmen.
The town of Dorchester was largely destroyed by fire in 1613. Half
of all its buildings – around 170 houses – were burnt down. The
fire was commemorated in the town for decades afterwards, and had a
major impact on the inhabitants.
The ‘fire from heaven’ of the title describes not only the
great disaster, but the sense of crusading zeal which dominated the
town in the decades which followed.
The book describes a physical and spiritual rebuilding of the
market town. ‘After the great crisis of the fire came the
recognition that what was needed was a total reformation of the
town.’ The town’s views were increasingly shaped by crusading Presbyterians.
They created a strongly puritan world which extended beyond
religion to a wide network of charity and ‘improving’ reforms. In
the years between the fire and the outbreak of civil war in 1642 they
established almshouses for the old and poor, a fuel house to keep the
poor warm in winter, an education system and a hospital.
The charitable works were aimed at creating a more orderly and
efficient society, based on religious conviction rather than simply
on wealth. They were also about regulating the poor – putting them
to work, stopping some of the old customs such as gathering firewood.
As Underdown puts it, ‘One side of the coin was reform: the
promotion of religion and education, the relief of the deserving. The
other side was discipline: the enforcement of personal, familial, and
communal order, and the punishment of the idle and the ungodly.’
This scheme resulted in perhaps the most radically religious town
in England in the 1620s and 1630s. Its Protestantism was consistently
internationalist and strongly anti-Catholic. Dorchester’s
townspeople raised large amounts of money in support of the
Protestant side in the Thirty Years War in Europe. As late as the
1650s Dorchester raised £147 – a very large sum then – in
support of the Protestant victims of the Piedmont massacre, the
‘slaughtered saints’ of Milton’s poem. The two dates most
celebrated were the anniversary of the fire, on 6 August, and the
nationally observed Gunpowder Treason Day, 5 November.
Unfortunately for its supporters, this world could not survive.
The increasing political, social and religious tensions throughout
England were mirrored even in Dorchester. The poor did not like the
‘godly reformation’, with its punishments for missing church or
drinking and swearing. And many of the better off were uncomfortable
with its crusading nature.
A number of Presbyterians left the town for New England, where the
town they founded, Dorchester, is now part of Boston. Those who
stayed found themselves at odds with national developments in
religion (the move closer to Catholicism under Archbishop Laud),
foreign policy (Charles I’s diplomacy with Catholic Spain) and
taxation, especially Ship Money.
When the civil war came, the town was strongly against the King
and for parliament. But its leading figures were much less happy with
the revolution that followed and with the rule of Cromwell.
Although the book goes up to the 1680s it is less interesting on
the civil war and the restoration, maybe because its leading
characters were fairly moderate by the standards of the 1640s. By the
1650s the town’s citizens reflect defeat, demoralisation and a loss
of ideals: less money went to charity, most collections were very
low, the poor no longer received free handouts. Religious reaction
also gathered pace.
Underdown has done a marvellous job in recreating 17th century
Dorchester, the customs, religion and cares of people of different
classes. Two centuries later the novelist Thomas Hardy based his town
of Casterbridge on Dorchester. By then, as Underdown says, the ‘fire
from heaven’ had gone, and the town was described as a ‘hoary
place of wickedness’.
 



‘Fascism corresponds to Italian conditions. The
organised strength and highly developed political education of the
German working class, as well as the relative weakness of the
non-proletarian masses in Germany in comparison with Italy, make such
a brutal crushing of democracy impossible in our country.’
This statement appeared in the journal of the German Social
Democratic Party (SPD) in 1929 – only four years before Hitler
became leader of one of the most powerful capitalist nations and set
about crushing its trade unions, political parties and democratic
institutions.
Hitler appeared as a right wing lunatic on the political fringe,
supported by only a handful of fanatics, for much of the 1920s. How
could fascism grow from these tiny beginnings to dominate the whole
of the political scene and eventually take power? After all, there
were mass Communist and Socialist Parties in Germany and the unions
were very strong.
Fascism seemed an aberration, created by extreme nationalists and
racists who were in a tiny minority in the country as a whole. So for
the Nazis to come within even a chance of seizing power they had to
obtain the backing of much wider forces inside society.
The way in which this happened – in both Germany and Italy –
is described in great detail in one of the best books on fascism,
Daniel Guerin’s Fascism and Big Business. Guerin was a
French revolutionary socialist writing in the 1930s as he witnessed
the seemingly unstoppable rise of fascism in Italy, Germany and then Spain.
He explains that fascism appealed above all to those sections of
the middle classes whose lives were being ruined by big monopoly
capitalism. The German middle classes had suffered hyperinflation in
the 1920s which left many of them destitute, their savings wiped out
and investment income rendered worthless. The collapse of a number of
banks during the slump in 1931 also hit them particularly hard.
Fascist propaganda had a strong appeal. It spoke of restoring the
former national glory of Italy and Germany, of taming big capital and
the banks and of helping small businesses and restoring the former
prosperity of the middle classes.
A movement based on the middle classes alone, however, could not
have succeeded. Key sections of big capital had to throw their weight
behind Hitler in order for him to take power. Guerin points out that
capitalism does not seek fascist rule. It would far rather carry out
capital accumulation in conditions of parliamentary democracy than
under the conditions of dictatorship. Democracy is cheap. It allows a
safety valve for workers’ grievances, preventing clashes between
the rulers and the ruled.
’When the feast is abundant, the people may safely be allowed to
pick up the crumbs’, but when economic crisis hits, things begin to
change. The capitalists need to cut wages, raise taxes and slash
welfare in order to maintain their levels of profit. Then the
democratic institutions which workers have developed can become a
hindrance to capitalist rule. ‘And so, in certain countries and
under certain conditions, the bourgeoisie throws its traditional
democracy overboard.’
The capitalist, class is not united in turning towards fascism. It
is a last resort undertaken because of the depth of the crisis.
Guerin shows that in both Italy and Germany it was the heavy
industrialists, in iron and steel and mining, plus the bankers who
funded them, who turned to fascism. The bosses of light industry were
much less enthusiastic and sometimes hostile. Heavy industry depended
much more on a level of economic nationalism or autarky, and of
course on military and related spending.
In Italy, Mussolini’s March on Rome, which marked his accession
to power in 1922, was financed by the heads of the Banking
Association. The leaders of the Federation of Industry and the
Federation of Agriculture telegraphed Rome that the only possible
solution was a Mussolini government.
German heavy industrialists were enthusiastic about the Nazis from
relatively early on. Emil Kirdorf, head of the Gelsenkirchen metal
trust, was Hitler’s ‘admirer’ from 1927. Fritz Thyssen, the
steel magnate, regarded Hitler as his friend. ‘By the summer of
1930, most of the great industrialists and bankers associated with
them were underwriting the National Socialist [Nazi] party. They gave
it the formidable material resources that permitted it to win the
electoral victory of September, 1930, and gain 107 seats in the
Reichstag [parliament].’
Those industrialists connected with light industry feared fascism
and the consequent dominance of heavy industry, but believed they
could tame the fascists, who could be a useful parliamentary
counterbalance to the left. They soon found out that the fascists had
become an independent force who could only be combatted by armed force.
This mistake was echoed by much of the left. The way the left
dealt with the fascists effectively strengthened them. The main
working class parties insisted that opposition to the fascists had to
come through parliamentary and constitutional channels. Sometimes the
left and the liberals even helped the fascists to gain a respectable
parliamentary base. The liberal Italian politician Giolitti
incorporated the fascists into a bloc of government parties,
resulting in the election of 30 fascists in 1921. He later wrote:
‘Fascism already represented a real force in our
national life, and, according to my old principle that every
political force in the nation should express itself in parliament, it
was desirable that fascism should have parliamentary representation.’
Mussolini used the election results as a springboard to build his
power and to gain a breathing space. He used the time to build
fascist gangs, terrorise his opponents and launch his successful bid
for power in 1922. Even after this, however, he was careful to
pretend that he respected parliamentary democracy until he felt
strong enough to crush it in 1924.
Hitler’s strategy was similar. He used the election campaigns in
order to build his support, claiming – like many of today’s
fascists – to be just another right wing patriot. In the meantime
he built up his gangs of stormtroopers who terrorised Jews,
Communists and trade unionists.
The Nazis were treated as a constitutional party, and Hitler only
became chancellor in January 1933 with the agreement and collusion of
right wing constitutional politicians. Even at this stage the main
left wing parties stressed the need for calm and order. Otto Wels, a
Socialist leader, said, ‘The people will have the opportunity on 5
March [the election date] to take its destiny into its own hands.’
But the fascists used their position to prevent the left gaining
in the election. The state of emergency declared after the ‘Reichstag
fire’ (when parliament was burnt down and the Communists were
blamed) at the end of February led to Nazi stormtroopers becoming
auxiliary police who tortured or killed militant workers,
anti-fascist parties could not hold meetings and Communist deputies
were arrested. The Nazis did well in the elections, and ensured an
absolute majority by outlawing the Communists and sending some
Socialist deputies to concentration camps. In the months that
followed all democratic organisations were brutally suppressed.
The Nazis had used their democratic platforms to destroy all
democracy, just as Mussolini had before them. Hitler summed up the
fatal flaw in the anti-fascist strategy:
‘Only one thing could have broken our movement – if
the adversary had understood its principle and from the first day had
smashed, with the most extreme brutality, the nucleus of our new movement.’
Instead the Nazis were given crucial time both to put on a
respectable face and to use the armed bands of stormtroopers to smash
up union offices and intimidate militants.
Could it have been any different? Guerin argues very persuasively
yes. Firstly, the workers’ movements in Italy and Germany could
have been mobilised to prevent the fascists’ growth. Divisions
among the different workers’ parties, a sense that parliamentary
opposition was enough, and of political complacency all contributed
to defeat.
Nor was it automatic that the middle classes would back fascism.
They had good reasons to hate the capitalist system and big business,
which had ruined them. But the middle classes had no coherent
strategy or class politics of their own and were therefore dragged in
the wake of one or the other of the main classes. Tragically, the
working class did not develop the successful struggles which could
have given a lead and a sense of confidence to sections of the middle classes.
The victorious fascists were careful not to seriously damage the
privileges of the capitalist class. This led to tensions among their
supporters, who had been fed anti-capitalist rhetoric. In both Italy
and Germany the fascist leaders turned on their popular base when it
became any sort of challenge to big capitalism. In Italy the fascist
militias were integrated into the regular army.
In Germany, Hitler eventually had to physically crush his
stormtroopers, with the full backing of the capitalists. Two days
after Hitler visited the arms manufacturer, Krupp, in June 1934, he
carried out the Night of the Long Knives, having many of his oldest
fascist collaborators shot. From then on the main support of the
fascist dictatorship was the regular army. This and the German
capitalist class backed Hitler right to the end of the war in 1945.
The great strength of Guerin’s book is its demonstration that
fascism was never inevitable – its rise was due to the failure of
the class struggle and the weaknesses of the workers’ parties. The
German revolutionary Clara Zetkin wrote in 1923, ‘Fascism is the
punishment inflicted on the proletariat for not having continued the
revolution begun in Russia.’ We have to relearn that lesson today.
Fascism and Big Business by Daniel Guerin is published
by Pathfinder and is available from Bookmarks, 265 Seven Sisters Rd,
London N4. Price £12.95 (plus postage)
 






With a backlash against women’s liberation,
it seems that all the gains of recent years are under attack. Why
is this happening and how can we fight for real liberation?
Lindsey German provides some answers



A book which asserts that ‘date rape’ is a figment of women’s
imagination. A novel by the author of Jurassic Park which
talks about the dangers of sexual harassment that men face. A number
of notorious court cases where women are pilloried for their
sexuality. A headmistress who is denounced by the media for being a lesbian.
It all seems a little more than coincidental. The insidious
message being put across is that women have to accept their place as
inferior. The gains women made in the 1960s and 1970s have redressed
the balance too far, and now men are reasserting their rights.
Underlying it all is the ‘postfeminist’ view: it is no good
fighting to change things. Women have to compete on the same terms as
men. If they fail to do so, their oppression is their own fault. And
if they decide they want to be independent – for example those
single mothers who prefer to bring up their children without a man –
then they cannot be surprised when men feel threatened.
It would be easy to believe that the world is full of women who
grope men at work, cry rape the morning after, and act in such an
aggressive way that they turn men into quivering wrecks, too
frightened to assert their ‘natural’ male dominance. The opposite
is true.
The facts about women’s lives are stark. Every study of rape
accepts that the crime is under-reported. One study found that
instances of rape were five times higher than the reported figures. A
study by America’s Ms magazine showed that a quarter of
women college students had experienced rape or attempted rape since
the age of 14. Sexual harassment at work is now commonly the subject
of industrial tribunals.
Women may be workers on an unprecedented scale – 10 million of
them are in the workforce in Britain today – but they come to the
labour market still carrying the burden of women’s oppression. They
earn, on average, little more than two thirds the earnings of men.
The new jobs being created are increasingly women’s jobs: low wage
and often part time.
The lack of availability and high cost of childcare means that the
majority of working class women with young children are forced to
live at home on benefits while caring for their children or working
inconvenient shifts which fit in with their partners’ work.
The dream of women’s liberation in the late 1960s and early
1970s was that women’s oppression could become a thing of the past.
The real gains won by women at the time – the Equal Pay Act, a sex
discrimination law, abortion and contraceptive rights, freer divorce
– were all seen as stepping stones to complete equality.
Recognition of issues concerning women, such as domestic violence and
rape, was demanded by those who knew that the courts, the police and
the family structure were all stacked against women. The right of
women accusers of rape to be anonymous was won after a series of
cases where women’s past sexual experiences were used by
reactionary judges to heap the blame on them.
Twenty years on at least some of these gains are under attack.
Blame the victim has become the watchword of the moral crusaders,
centred in the Tory government itself, who want to reduce the number
of single mothers, make divorce harder to obtain, and patch up the
family whatever horrible secrets lurk within the walls of the family home.
And while some women have done extremely well out of the legal and
financial equality ushered in by the 1970s, they remain very firmly
in the minority. For every career woman on a high salary, with car,
house and nanny or au pair, there are ten in low paid work
with few of the material advantages which can help lessen the burden
of women’s oppression.
Some would argue that the movements of the 1960s and 1970s were a
failure, that they only created greater opportunity for a tiny layer
of women. But it is precisely the changes in women’s lives which
have created the attempted backlash now. In the 1950s single mothers
would have been stigmatised, often forced to put their children out
for adoption, and treated as a shameful family secret.
Today single mothers are angry at attacks which try to make them
out to be scroungers or somehow immoral. They point to the hypocrisy
of their accusers who preach the sanctity of the family but follow a
quite different set of values.
The same is true at work. Women today expect and demand the right
to work, and refuse to accept that they should be kept in the home as
some bigots want. However it is also true that real liberation seems
as distant as ever. In a world where the basic provisions of the
welfare state are under attack, where having millions unemployed is
regarded as normal, where health cuts make it harder to receive free
abortion or contraception, women are finding that many of the
services they took for granted are no longer available or are under threat.
Is real women’s liberation an impossible dream? No, but it has
come up against the limits of capitalist society. Ideas of women’s
equality arose at the time of the great French Revolution, just over
200 years ago. Its slogans of liberty, equality and fraternity were
taken up by feminists such as Mary Wollstonecraft, who argued that
women too should have their freedom. But the gains of the revolution
only went so far. It achieved a system of democracy, but it didn’t
challenge the existence of private property and so could not achieve
real equality and freedom. Rich and poor alike had the vote
(eventually) but the economic power of the rich allowed them to make
the real decisions about how society was run and to wield real power.
Ideas of women’s liberation have faced the same problem. The
legal and financial independence achieved by some women under
capitalism cannot be true liberation, because women’s
oppression itself is rooted in class society.
That class society long predates capitalist society itself.
Frederick Engels, the great 19th century revolutionary, argued that
the development of private property led to the creation of a society
divided into classes – essentially of those who owned the wealth
and those who did not – and the creation of a state machine, to
protect the property of those who owned it, and a family, to ensure
that it was passed to the rightful heirs. This represented the
development of women’s oppression, the monogamous family and with
it the ‘world historic defeat of the female sex’.
Every form of class society has created its own form of family,
and has maintained the oppression of women at its centre. Capitalism
itself would, Engels believed, lead to the disappearance of the
working class family. The worker’s family, unlike that of the
ruling class, was not based on property and so had no basis for
existence. Engels based his views on the early 19th century families
who worked in the cotton textile industry. Here men, women and
children all worked for wages outside the home, and many of the basic
feeding and caring functions of the family were performed as services
outside the home.
But the family did not disappear. Instead – especially in the
second half of the 19th century – it appeared to be strengthened.
Many workers desired a family home and a wife who did not need to
work and so could care for her husband and children full time.
Although the majority of male workers probably never received the
‘family wage’ which was supposed to make this possible, it became
the ideal to which the majority aspired.
Men and women workers did so because they saw the alternative as
worse: women working up to 18 hours a day, breast feeding or
suffering miscarriages at their machines, children working from as
young as four and sustaining terrible injuries.
The needs of the capitalists were also beginning to change.
Increasingly, they needed a more stable, skilled and educated
workforce. They needed a family where the next generation of workers
(and the existing generation) could be fed, cared for, socialised and
given rudimentary health care and education at minimal cost to the
capitalist class itself.
The role of the family in the reproduction of labour power was and
is central to its existence – and to the oppression of women –
today. It is often said that the capitalist system itself acts to
break down the family. The pressures on working people mean that the
reality of the family does not match the ideal. Families are torn
apart by emigration, having to move jobs, or by the pressures of
school and work. The divorce rate has soared, teenagers can’t wait
to leave home, more and more people live outside the conventional
nuclear family.
At the same time governments and the state machine act to try to
shore up the family. There are laws to regulate domestic violence,
education of children, sexual relations, as well as marriage and
divorce. The whole apparatus of social work is designed to prop up a
family institution which constantly fails its members.
The state and its representatives have become some of the main
oppressors of women. If women’s oppression were just due to
individual men, it would be much easier to deal with. It is because
the actions of individual men are backed up, reinforced or
legitimised by the state itself that women’s oppression becomes
such a burden and why there is no easy way out of oppression without
a fight to get rid of that state.
Some feminists argue that it is not capitalism, but patriarchy,
that oppresses women. It is said that patriarchy is a separate and
parallel system to capitalism which will not be defeated by the
overthrow of capitalism. But women’s oppression has material roots
– inside the capitalist family – whereas the concept of
patriarchy (literally ‘the rule of the father’ but more often
meaning a system of male domination) has no such material roots.
Patriarchy does not explain why men dominate, except to say that
they have always done so. More importantly, it does not explain why
the very structures of capitalism oppress women. It is these, rather
than the wishes of individual men, which create women’s low pay or
the lack of decent childcare facilities.
Patriarchy theory assumes an unchanging relationship between men
and women since time immemorial, and has deeply pessimistic
implications. Yet if women’s oppression is structured into
capitalism and its family, then it will take much more than changing
men’s individual attitudes to end oppression. If we locate
oppression in class society then we can only end it by fighting to
end class society.
The fight for women’s liberation and for socialism are therefore
part of the same fight.
Will socialism be the answer to women’s oppression? Surely there
will still be male chauvinists, still be sexual harassers, even still
be a few rapists after the revolution? Won’t women still be the
carers and the servicers, even if they care for more than their own
children? And won’t some women want to live within a conventional
family as the place where they feel most secure?
In the process of making a revolution millions of women will begin
to realise their potential in a way that they never did within the
family. Millions of men will begin to see women not as good cooks or
sex objects or loving mothers, but as working class fighters.
But women’s oppression has lasted for thousands of years. it
goes deeper than any other oppression, both because of the length of
time it has existed and because it concerns the most intimate, sexual
– both loving and oppressive – relationships between people. So
all the problems of oppression will not disappear in the first days
or months of revolution.
Human beings will have to make choices and decisions about how
they achieve their own liberation. But there are some material
changes which will lay the preconditions for women’s liberation
and, eventually, the liberation of all humanity.
Firstly, the resources of society will be channelled into easing
the burden of oppression. In capitalist society very little is spent
on making women’s lives easier and pleasanter. Spending on areas
such as childcare is usually meagre and often temporary, designed to
fit the needs of capital at any one time (such as temporary nurseries
during the Second World War when women workers were needed). In a
socialist society money would not be spent on dangerous nuclear
weapons, handouts for the rich or subsidies for public schools.
Instead money would go into improving the lives of workers in
health, education and childcare. Central to that would be providing
an alternative to the family: places where food is prepared, children
cared for or washing done. Responsibility for children, the old and
the sick, and ensuring adequate care outside the family for those who
need it, would be taken by the whole community, not by individual
women and men within the family. Housing provision would be on the
basis of shared assessed need, not wealth.
The role of the press and the law would also be completely
different from today. Whereas today these institutions reflect the
oppression of women, with the stereotypical images that they
project, in a socialist society they would reflect exactly the
opposite. This would not mean the disappearance of male chauvinism,
but it would mean that sexist ideas would cease to be the respectable
currency of society.
From day one of the revolution there would not be liberation, but
there would be complete social, legal and financial equality for
women, which would not only be a massive step forward but moreover
would create the conditions for women to achieve their own liberation.
 



Frederick Engels came from a privileged family but devoted his life to struggling for the poor and oppressed. He was a man of action but spent much of his time developing theoretical ideas. He worked in a job he hated to enable Karl Marx to concentrate on his studies which produced the three volumes of Capital. These were the two dominant features of Engels’ life: his 50 year long commitment to revolutionary socialism and to working class struggle, and his equally strong personal commitment to Karl Marx, who he sustained politically, financially and with a deep friendship for 40 years until the relationship was broken by Marx’s death in 1883.
Engels had no doubts on either count. He wrote to his mother in 1871, when he was criticised for supporting the first workers’ government, the Paris Commune:
You know my views have not changed for nearly 30 years, and it cannot have come as a surprise to you that, when events compelled me, I should not only maintain them but also do my duty in other ways. You would have reason to be ashamed of me if I did not do so. If Marx was not here, if he did not exist at all, it would make no difference to that. [1]
Commenting on his political and intellectual relationship with Marx, he wrote elsewhere that he was doing what he ‘was meant for, to play second fiddle.’ [2] Yet Engels was much more than a ‘second fiddle’. He was an independent revolutionary thinker, who was already in the process of writing one of his finest books by the time he began his close friendship with Marx in 1844. He combined an original mind with an enthusiasm for revolution and struggle which never left him.
 
Early life
Frederick was born in Barmen (now Wuppertal) in the Ruhr region of Germany on 28 November 1820. He was the eldest in the family of a mill owner. The young Engels’ politics, atheism and activity were a constant source of worry to, and disagreement with, his father. His home life was comfortable and middle class, but he grew up in what was effectively becoming a factory district, since the adjoining town of Elberfeld was experiencing its own industrial revolution, with the creation of a growing working class. So, as his biographer Gustav Mayer has put it, Engels knew from childhood the real nature of the factory system. [3]
The defeat of Napoleon in 1815 led to the dominance of Prussian and Austrian reaction in central Europe during Engels’ youth. By the time he was politically conscious, that had begun to change. The revolution of July 1830 in France, which established a constitutional monarchy, gave hope to liberals in Germany. There were the beginnings of movements against the old tyranny. Germany at the time comprised a number of sometimes tiny states with varying levels of economic and political development dominated by Prussia which was by far the most important. Many of the movements, particularly in the south German states, were directed at Prussian autocracy.
Engels was a supporter of these movements and ideas. He was also an enthusiastic proponent of liberal German nationalism from a young age. He was sent to work in the port of Bremen and did his military national service for a year in Berlin where he mixed with others of similar views. He wrote on literature and political issues under the name of Friedrich Oswald, and discovered a proficiency in languages.
He was attracted first to the Young Germany movement, whose literature and ideas expressed the youthful hopes of a new generation who were trying to find the liberty they had read about in the French Revolution of 1789 and its much paler shadow, the revolution of 1830. The importance of philosophy in German intellectual life meant that these ideas often expressed themselves in philosophical terms. The Germans talked about what others did, as Marx put it, comparing the Germans unfavourably with the English and French who had made their bourgeois revolutions in the 17th and 18th centuries respectively. He saw the predominance of philosophical thought in Germany as a sign of the country’s economic backwardness.
Engels and Marx were themselves products of this intellectual environment and therefore first developed an interest in philosophy. They were attracted to the ideas of the philosopher Hegel, the impact of whose teachings was revolutionary, since they stressed that the universe is in a constant process of development and change. This led many of his followers to believe that the struggle against existing institutions, for example the Prussian state and the monarchy, was an inevitable part of social development. Engels joined the Young Hegelians, and later became influenced by the ideas of communism, to which he was already attracted by the early 1840s.
So the young Frederick Engels had already developed left wing ideas when he was despatched to England at the end of 1842 to work in the family firm of Ermen and Engels, manufacturers of sewing thread in Manchester. His experience in England helped to create in Engels an understanding that the working class had the potential to put his communist ideas into practice. He arrived in England only weeks after the Chartist general strike of 1842 which, despite its eventual failure, had demonstrated the potential power of the workers. The strike’s centre was in Manchester and the surrounding areas of Lancashire and Cheshire, the areas of textile production. England was by far the most advanced industrial economy in the world, having been the scene of the Industrial Revolution. It was already leading the world in the production of cotton, coal and iron. Its working class was also the most advanced in the world, organised through the Chartist movement.
Engels was horrified at the poverty and misery that he saw in Manchester. The city had grown up around the cotton industry and was a mass of filthy slums. Infant mortality, epidemic diseases and overcrowding were all facts of life. Up to a quarter of the city’s population were immigrant Irish, driven there by even worse conditions in their own country. Poverty had existed in the old towns and rural areas – as it had done in Germany – but the growth of the big cities exacerbated and accentuated these conditions. The attitude of the capitalist class was brutal. Engels describes how:
I once went into Manchester with such a bourgeois, and spoke to him of the bad, unwholesome method of building, the frightful condition of the working people’s quarters, and asserted that I had never seen so ill-built a city. The man listened quietly to the end, and said at the corner where we parted: ‘And yet there is a great deal of money made here: good morning, sir’ [4]
The effect of Manchester on the young man was electrifying. He came into contact with the Chartists and, in 1843, visited the Leeds office of the Chartist newspaper, the Northern Star. One of their leaders, George Julian Harney, much later recorded this impression of Engels at that meeting: ‘a slender young man with a look of almost immaturity, who spoke remarkably pure English, and said he was keenly interested in the Chartist movement’. Harney went on to say that Engels was as modest and retiring 50 years later as he was when a young man of 22 years old. [5]
Engels travelled round, spoke to workers and studied official statistics to produce his remarkable first book, The Condition of the Working Class in England. It documents not only how people lived, but also explains how this state of affairs could be – and needed to be – changed. Even today the book is cited by those quite hostile to Engels’ politics for its accurate and sympathetic descriptions of working class life. However, the book is much more than reportage of the terrible conditions in which workers lived. Woven into it is the political analysis of capitalism which Marx and Engels later developed but which even at this stage was central to the book’s analysis. Engels starts by looking at how the Industrial Revolution transformed the old ways of working to such an extent that it created a whole class of wage labourers, the proletariat. The introduction of machinery into the production of textiles, coal and iron turned the British economy into the most dynamic in the world, creating a mass of communications networks – iron bridges, railways, canals – which in turn led to more industrial development.
The new working class soon accounted for the mass of the population, as capitalist methods of manufacturing destroyed many of the old artisan or middle classes, turning the bulk of them or their children into workers. The needs of manufacturing industry led to the building of factories and mills and, moreover, ‘population becomes centralised just as capital does.’ [6] Industrial towns then developed into the great cities that Engels observed when he first visited England. He describes in great detail the condition of life in these cities, using a variety of contemporary press reports, official investigations and even diagrams of the back-to-back houses which formed the early Manchester slums. Nothing escapes Engels’ eye, not even the workers’ diet:
The better paid workers, especially those in whose families every member is able to earn something, have good food as long as this state of things lasts; meat daily and bacon and cheese for supper. Where wages are less, meat is used only two or three times a week, and the proportion of bread and potatoes increases. Descending gradually, we find the animal food reduced to a small piece of bacon cut up with the potatoes; lower still, even this disappears, and there remain only bread, cheese, porridge and potatoes, until on the lowest round of the ladder, among the Irish, potatoes form the sole food … But all this pre-supposes that the workman has work When he has none. he is wholly at the mercy of accident, and eats what is given him, what he can beg or steal. And, if he gets nothing, he simply starves. [7]
At the heart of the misery Engels describes is the very nature of the capitalist system. The competition between capitalists leads them to pay their workers as little as possible, while trying to squeeze more and more work from them: ‘If a manufacturer can force the nine hands to work an extra hour daily for the same wages by threatening to discharge them at a time when the demand for hands is not very great, he discharges the tenth and saves so much wages. [8] This leads in turn to competition between workers for jobs, and to the creation of a pool of unemployed who can be pulled into the workforce when business is booming, and laid off again when it is slack. The existence of this reserve of unskilled and unemployed workers – especially among the immigrant Irish in the cities of the 1840s – holds down the level of wages and conditions for all workers.
The effects of this system are brutal. Engels describes the ill health and low life expectancy of workers compared with the bourgeoisie, the increasing tendency to suicide, the very widespread drunkenness and ‘sexual licence’ – ’the bourgeoisie has left the working class only these two pleasures’ [9] – and the very obvious class divisions, so that ‘the working class has gradually become a race wholly apart from the English bourgeoisie … the workers speak other dialects, have other thoughts and ideals, other customs and moral principles, a different religion and other politics than those of the bourgeoisie’. [10]
Perhaps the most devastating aspect of this new society for Engels was that, far from resulting in increased prosperity for the workers, the development of capitalism had the inevitable result of producing great wealth for some and increased misery for many. Machinery which should have made lives easier in fact replaced jobs and drove down wages. To pay for their investment the capitalists introduced night working. Workers thrown out of work by the spread of machinery were reduced to selling oranges or shoelaces on the streets, or simply to begging for food. The factory owning class was castigated by Engels: ‘I have never seen a class so deeply demoralised, so incurably debased by selfishness, so corroded within, so incapable of progress, as the English bourgeoisie … It knows no bliss save that of rapid gain, no pain save that of losing gold.’ [11] The mass of beggars created by the system had at all costs to be hidden from view, and the bourgeoisie devised one of the most hated institutions ever just a few years before Engels visited Britain – the workhouse, into which poor, sick and destitute members of the working class were forced.
Yet the working class fought back in Britain in the 1830s and 1840s, through the great Chartist movement and in a whole number of skirmishes with the employers where they attempted to defend their living and working conditions. This movement helped Engels understand that as well as capitalism creating competition between workers it also led them to combine to organise against the employers. The attempts to form single unified unions and to withdraw their labour, which was the only weapon they possessed, was warmly applauded by Engels: As schools of war, the unions are unexcelled.’ [12] He concluded the book enthusiastically:
The war of the poor against the rich now carried on in detail and indirectly will become direct and universal. It is too late for a peaceful solution … soon a slight impulse will suffice to set the avalanche in motion. Then, indeed, will the war-cry resound through the land: War to the palaces, peace to the cottages!’ – but then it will be too late for the rich to beware. [13]
Engels dedicated the book to ‘the working classes of Great Britain’ and it marked the start of his lifelong commitment to the working class as the agent of revolutionary change. [14] Writing towards the end of his life, Engels explained the importance of this in the development of his thought:
While I was in Manchester, it was tangibly brought home to me that the economic facts, which have so far played no role or only a contemptible one in the writing of history, are, at least in the modern world, a decisive historical force; that they form the basis of the origination of the present-day class antagonisms; that these class antagonisms, in the countries where they have become fully developed, thanks to large-scale industry, hence especially in England, are in their turn the basis of the formation of political parties and of party struggles, and thus of all political history. [15]
On his way from Manchester in the summer of 1844, Engels stopped off in Paris, where he met Marx, and they embarked on their lifelong collaboration. The two had met briefly two years previously, but now they found they had a great deal in common politically, and that each could bring something to the relationship. Engels’ biographer Gustav Mayer has summarised it like this:
Marx … first showed him that politics and history are explicable only in terms of social relations – the principle which became the lever of their whole conception of history … Marx gave Engels both the final proof of his assumption that communism was the continuation and completion of German philosophical thought, and a convincing solution of the apparently irreconcilable conflict between mind and mass … Engels … taught him the technique he needed for the study of economic facts. Engels helped him to know the living realities: and Engels was the right man to do this, since he had personal acquaintance with industry, commerce, and capital, and had been in personal contact with the modern proletariat. [16]
If anything this underestimates Engels’ abilities and influence on Marx at the time. He had a much surer grasp of economics than Marx but also had a background in philosophy and communist politics which was comparable to that of Marx. In addition he had direct experience of the first mass workers’ movement. As Franz Mehring wrote about the two men’s early influences on one another:
The twenty-one months Engels then spent in England had the same significance for him as the year spent in Paris had for Marx. Both of them had gone through the German philosophic school and whilst abroad they came to the same conclusions, but while Marx arrived at an understanding of the struggles and the demands of the age on the basis of the French Revolution, Engels did so on the basis of English industry. [17]
Mehring also commented that, despite Engels’ modest denials, with regard to economics ‘the fact remains that in the beginning it was Engels who gave and Marx who received on that field on which in the last resort the decisive struggle must be fought out.’ [18]
Engels went briefly back home to Barmen after this meeting. The town was buzzing with communist ideas – ’in Barmen the police inspector is a communist’, wrote Engels to Marx – and in early 1845 a communist meeting attracted 200, such was the level of discontent among even the factory owners and the middle classes. [19] But Engels never settled in Barmen. He railed against the place, against his bourgeois father and at having to work in the family firm:
Barmen is too beastly, the waste of time is too beastly and most beastly of all is the fact of being, not only a bourgeois, but actually a manufacturer, a bourgeois who actively takes sides against the proletariat. A few days in my old man’s factory have sufficed to bring me face to face with this beastliness, which I had rather overlooked. [20]
His father was in turn horrified at his son’s communism and by his illegal political activities in this small town in which Engels senior was such a respected citizen. Close interest from the police led Frederick to beat a retreat to Brussels, where Marx was already living. He moved in next door and ‘never again did they work in such close contact as in those years before the revolution, when they were working out their final position both in philosophy and in practical politics’. [21]
 
The foundations of historical materialism
Marx and Engels’ first written collaboration in 1844 was The Holy Family, or as they originally called it, A Critique of Critical Criticism (the final title was regarded as more punchy but worried Engels who thought it would offend his religious father). In 1846 they wrote The German Ideology, subtitled Critique of modern German philosophy according to its representatives Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer and Stirner. Its aim was to attack the ideas which dominated German philosophical and political thinking. These the two regarded as mystical and idealist, because they started from ideas in the abstract rather than a materialist analysis. The weight of Marx and Engels’ argument was that an understanding of the world had to start, not from the ideas which existed in people’s heads in any particular historical period, but from the real, material conditions in which these ideas arose. Their starting point was therefore an understanding of the historical development of class society and how people’s ideas altered in this process of social change:
We do not set out from what men say, imagine, conceive, nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men, and on the basis of their real life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life-process … Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and all their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development; but men, developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with this their real existence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life. [22]
Nothing about the world could be understood without starting from an understanding of historical development. The German Ideology details some of this history and explains how the very development of society comes into conflict with the ideas, beliefs and structures of existing society. This clash between the two is represented in the struggles between the various classes which represent particular economic interests. It was impossible to develop a theory of socialism which ignored this development or ignored the material reality:
It is only possible to achieve real liberation in the real world and by employing real means … slavery cannot he abolished without the steam engine and the mule and spinning-jenny, serfdom cannot be abolished without improved agriculture … in general, people cannot be liberated as long as they are unable to obtain food and drink, housing and clothing in adequate quality and quantity. ‘Liberation’ is a historical and not a mental act. [23]
However, although the stress in The German Ideology is heavily weighted against the idealist philosophers, and their political counterparts the ‘True Socialists’, Marx and Engels did not make the mistake of believing that progress in history was inevitable or that socialists could ignore what human beings actually did to bring about change: ‘circumstances make men just as much as men make circumstances’. [24] In any class society, they argue, the class which owns the wealth – the ruling class – also has a monopoly on the ideas of that society:
The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas: i.e., the class, which is the ruling material force of society, is at the same time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production. [25]
In addition, ‘for each new class which puts itself in the place of the one ruling before it, is compelled, merely in order to carry through its aim, to represent its interest as the common interest of all the members of society … it has to give its ideas the form of universality, and represent them as the only rational, universally valid ones.’ [26]
So the ruling class controls both the means of producing wealth and the production of ideas which justified that control of wealth. The working class, on the other hand, was without property. Workers were also alienated from the products of their labour because they have no control over the productive process and because ‘each man has a particular, exclusive sphere of activity, which is forced upon him and from which he cannot escape.’ [27] The working class can only escape by making the revolution, by collectively seizing the means of production from which it is separated under capitalism. The description of this process is worth repeating for its clarity:
A class is called forth, which has to bear all the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages, which, ousted from society, is forced into the most decided antagonism to all other classes; a class which forms the majority of all members of society, and from which emanates the consciousness and necessity of a fundamental revolution … In all revolutions up till now the mode of activity always remained unscathed and it was only a question of a different distribution of this activity, a new distribution of labour to other persons, whilst the communist revolution is directed against the preceding mode of activity, does away with labour, and abolishes the rule of all classes with the classes themselves, because it is carried through by the class which … is in itself the expression of the dissolution of all classes, nationalities, etc., within present society … Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, the alteration of men on a mass scale is necessary, an alteration which can only take place in a practical movement, a revolution; this revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew. [28]
The proletariat is a revolutionary class, but it needs to make a revolution before it can control the wealth it produces. It is only in the process of making a revolution that it can fully come to revolutionary or ‘communist consciousness’. Discussion of communist ideas led Marx and Engels to talk about organisation based on these ideas. Around this time they turned to trying to build such an organisation. They had formed the Communist Correspondence Committee in 1846, to keep in touch with those of like minded views. But Engels moved to Paris in August of that year (Marx was exiled from France) to organise among German artisans in the League of the Just, and to establish some contact with the French workers’ movement.
He found it heavy going at first. The artisans’ tradition of craft working, small family businesses and the like made them much less amenable to communist politics than the Manchester cotton workers. Trying to build among workers meant a sharp argument with other socialist tendencies inside the movement, including the ‘True Socialists’, followers of Karl Grün. Marx and Engels attacked the ‘True Socialists’ in their writings at the time, and saw them as a rival to communist ideas inside the emerging working class movement. The ‘True Socialists’ talked in very radical terms but Marx and Engels saw them as in fact the product of the retarded nature of Germany’s economic and social development. The dominance of the petty bourgeoisie, of small businessmen, artisans and craftsmen, in German society meant that a socialism which played down the fundamental antagonism between the two major classes inside capitalism, and ‘proclaims instead the universal love of mankind’ could have a real appeal. [29]
A letter from Engels to the Communist Correspondence Committee describes a fraught meeting in Paris in October 1846 where Engels defined the aims of the communists off the cuff in response to the ‘True Socialists’ criticisms:
(1) to ensure that the interests of the proletariat prevail, as opposed to those of the bourgeoisie; (2) to do so by abolishing private property and replacing same with community of goods; (3) to recognise no means of attaining these aims other than democratic revolution by force. [30]
The form which the earliest communist organisation took was the Communist League. Marx and Engels joined the League of the Just, along with groups of exiled Germans and other nationalities of workers and artisans. Although Engels’ direct experience led him to despair of the Paris League, Marx and Engels put their faith in the London branch. In late 1846 the leadership of the League moved from Paris to London. This group, led by Schapper, Moll and Bauer, was in the process of looking for new ideas and ‘they turned to Marx, perhaps because the Marxian stress on economics and class warfare meant more to them, exposed as they were to the Chartist movement in the advanced industrial England’. [31]
At the League’s London congress on June 1847 it changed its name to the Communist League and its slogan to ‘Proletarians of all lands unite’ from the previous, more ‘True Socialist’, ‘All men are brothers’. At the London congress Marx and Engels were instructed to draft a platform – which became their most famous joint work and which remains one of the clearest statements of their politics – The Communist Manifesto. The first draft, known as Principles of Communism, was written by Engels. Marx worked on Principles to produce the final draft which was printed in German in early 1848.
Principles of Communism is a beautiful example of Engels’ writing style: a very short, simple pamphlet written in question and answer form. He describes how capitalist society creates two major classes which stand in contradiction to one another:
Two new classes have come into being which are gradually swallowing up all others, namely:
(I) The class of big capitalists, who in all civilised countries are already in almost exclusive possession of all the means of subsistence and of the raw materials and instruments (machines, factories) necessary for the production of the means of subsistence. This is the bourgeois class or the bourgeoisie.
(II) The class of the wholly propertyless, who are obliged to sell their labour to the bourgeoisie in order to get in exchange the means of subsistence necessary for their support. This class is called the class of proletarians, or the proletariat. [32]
The old ways of living were destroyed by the development of capitalism:
Free competition is necessary for the establishment of large-scale industry because it is the only state of society in which large-scale industry can make its way. Having destroyed the social power of the nobility and the guildmasters, the bourgeoisie also destroyed their political power. [33]
Capitalism is a dynamic system, based on the accumulation of capital through commodity production. Competition between different capitalists leads to the constant search for greater profits and greater accumulation of capital. This means new investment in machinery, new ways of making workers work harder, new factories and industries.
But this revolutionary system is prone to crisis. The unplanned nature of capitalism and its drive to accumulate leads to overproduction, which in turn leads to factory closures and unemployment. Suddenly there is, as The Communist Manifesto puts it, ‘too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce … the conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them.’ [34] In the midst of such previously unheard of wealth there is misery and waste. The capitalist looks for ways out: destruction of some capital – so that the crisis leads to the collapse of individual capitalists to the benefit of their rivals – or the search for new markets and new investment. This search leads to greater investment, but there is less relative return on the investment. Both ‘solutions’ expand the system but eventually lead to further crises.
These means of escaping the crisis also deepen class antagonisms. Workers are forced to work harder and for longer hours. More workers are pulled into production, more of the old handicrafts and ways of working are destroyed. It is this new class which can make the communist revolution through the abolition of private property by socialised production. The revolution will,
Have to take the running of industry and of all branches of production out of the hands of mutually competing individuals and instead institute a system in which all these branches of production are operated by society as a whole, that is, for the common account, according to a common plan and with the participation of all members of society. It will, in other words, abolish competition and replace it with association. [35]
Principles of Communism and then The Communist Manifesto were written in the expectation of imminent revolution. There were signs of worsening economic conditions and political discontent. The analysis of capitalism developed by Marx and Engels led them to assume that revolution would take place. As the capitalist mode of production developed and spread from England to Belgium, France, Germany and elsewhere in Europe, so it increasingly clashed with the old feudal regimes which still dominated Europe. The rise of capitalism brought with it the rise of the industrial bourgeoisie, whose interests were quite opposed to the old autocratic regimes. The production of capital and the development of a class of free wage labourers presupposed all sorts of legal freedoms, a limited suffrage to elect a democratic parliament, freedom of religion, and an end to the restraints on trade and business which characterised the old regimes.
In England in the 17th century and France in the 18th century the clash between these two classes brought about the great revolutionary movements which transformed property and social relations in those countries forever. Marx and Engels were convinced the same would happen elsewhere. In their native Germany, where the division of the country into 39 often very small states hampered the development of any sort of bourgeois democracy, they saw bourgeois revolution with national unification as essential for the development of capitalism and for progress in general. The Communist Manifesto began with the still famous phrase, ‘A spectre is haunting Europe – the spectre of communism’. [36] Their prediction of revolution was accurate.
 
Revolution in Europe
The creation of the Communist League in 1847 took place against a background of growing social unrest. Economic depression had worsened living conditions. Famine and hunger were stalking Europe, most notoriously in Ireland where millions emigrated or starved, but also in continental Europe where bread riots occurred in many countries. ‘The climax of the Hungry Forties in Europe came when the depression of 1847 brought business failures, unemployment and frequent reduction in wages. Every third family in Cologne received public relief.’ [37] Among the middle classes there were growing liberal and nationalist protests in Germany, Austria and Italy – countries all under various forms of feudal rule.
Engels had returned to Paris in December 1847, after attending the second League congress in London in November and then staying with Marx in Brussels. He attempted to establish contact with the French socialist Louis Blanc, with some success. But by January 1848 he wrote to Marx in some despair, ‘Things are going wretchedly with the League here’. [38] He was more optimistic about the state of the democratic movement and the impetus for bourgeois revolution in countries such as Germany and Austria, but at the end of January he was expelled from France just as revolution was about to break out. The government prohibited a big reform banquet in Paris, due to take place on 22 February. A number of such banquets had been held in the previous months as part of the growing mood for reform. Within two days there were barricades on the streets and the king abdicated. France was left with a provisional government which in turn proclaimed a republic. For the first time the government contained workers’ representatives; Louis Blanc and the representative of the Parisian workers, called simply Albert. The government initially guaranteed a ‘right to work’ for all, with the creation of ‘national workshops’ for the jobless, to be paid for by increased taxation.
The movement spread throughout Europe in the following weeks: to Sicily, Vienna, Berlin, Milan. The Prussian regime was forced to allow political activity, and to endorse national unification. Engels wrote in March 1848 that, with the exception of Cologne, where some communists were arrested, ‘otherwise the news from Germany is splendid. In Nassau a revolution completed, in Munich students, painters and workers in full revolt, in Kassel revolution on the doorstep, in Berlin unbounded fear and indecision, in the whole of western Germany freedom of the press and National Guard proclaimed’. [39] Two weeks later he wrote to Marx, ‘In Germany things are going very well indeed, riots everywhere and the Prussians aren’t giving way’. [40]
Marx and Engels returned to their native Germany in April – to Cologne, a city which was under Prussian rule but which had the liberal press laws inherited from French occupation under Napoleon. They launched their new daily paper as the ‘organ of democracy’. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared from June.
The historian Eric Hobsbawm has written of 1848, ‘Within a matter of weeks no government was left standing in an area of Europe which is today occupied by all or part of ten states, not counting lesser repercussions in a number of others.’ Yet ‘within six months of its outbreak its universal defeat was safely predictable, within 18 months of its outbreak all but one of the regimes it overthrew had been restored, and the exception (the French Republic) was putting as much distance as it could between itself and the insurrection to which it owed its existence’. [41]
The 1848 revolutions were bourgeois, not workers’ revolutions – which meant that in countries such as Germany the liberal capitalists and the middle classes such as doctors and lawyers, determined the course of the revolution, even though it was supported by the poorer classes of peasants, artisans and the emerging working class. That explains the nature of the revolution’s early days when all classes united against the old order. Marx described February 1848 in France, symbolised by the poet Lamartine, as ‘the beautiful revolution, the revolution of universal sympathy’. [42] Only seemingly small numbers of reactionaries were opposed to the revolutions.
But there was a crucial difference between 1848 and the earlier revolutions. When the English and French revolutions had taken place the working class was barely in existence. By 1848 it was a major and growing force in England, France and, increasingly, Germany. Marx and Engels had long been contemptuous of the German bourgeoisie, whom they viewed as too timid and ‘philistine’ to make a revolution. They regarded the Germans as wanting the fruits of revolution without being prepared to risk their property or lives. As the revolution took its course in the various states which made up Germany not only was this assessment proved accurate, but it also became increasingly clear that the German bourgeoisie was more frightened of the emerging working class than it was of the old order.
Engels wrote in early 1848 that the rule of the bourgeoisie would be short lived; they would taste the fruits of rule by making their revolution, but the proletariat was waiting in the wings:
Your reward shall be a brief time of rule. You shall dictate laws, you shall bask in the sun of your own majesty, you shall banquet in the royal halls and woo the king’s daughter – but remember! The hangman’s foot is on the threshold! [43]
But what if the bourgeoisie shrank from this historic task because it would rather go into alliance with the old feudal order it so hated than side with the workers? This was, of course, exactly what happened in Germany. It took another 20 years before the project of national unification and untrammelled capitalist development was fully under way, and then it was under the leadership of Bismarck, one of the most frenzied reactionaries in 1848. The reason for the German bourgeoisie’s timidity lay, above all, in their fear of what happened in France. There the hopes of the February revolution, which proclaimed the republic, increasingly gave way to fears that the class rule of the bourgeoisie was under threat from the workers. In particular the middle classes were infuriated by the increased taxes levied to pay for the national workshops.
The newly elected National Assembly moved against the workshops in June, enlisting the unmarried men into the army and moving various other people out of Paris, the hotbed of revolution. The day the Assembly met to consider closing the workshops, barricades were again thrown up, as they had been in February. But this time the fighting was between those who had made the February revolution. Although some 60,000 people fought behind the barricades, they were crushed after four days by the forces of General Cavaignac. This was how the ruling class dealt with the ‘spectre of communism’ and the liberal middle classes were well prepared to go along with such treatment rather than risk their property. Marx and Engels recognised the June days as the first big clash between the bourgeoisie and proletariat:
Fraternité, the brotherhood of opposing classes, one of which exploits the other, this ‘fraternité’ was proclaimed in February and written in capital letters on the brow of Paris, on every prison and every barracks. But its true, genuine, prosaic expression is civil war in its most terrible form, the war between labour and capital. This fraternity flamed in front of all the windows of Paris on the evening of 25 June. The Paris of the bourgeoisie was illuminated, while the Paris of the proletariat burned, bled and moaned in its death agony. [44]
Events in Paris influenced the revolution elsewhere in Europe and nowhere more so than in Germany. Here the revolutionary fervour was high. Despite concessions from the Prussian king, Frederick William IV, in March 1848 – a Berlin parliament, an end to censorship and a unified Germany – barricades were thrown up in Berlin too. Shots had been fired at crowds celebrating their gains outside the royal palace. The crowds fought with the soldiers. The king called off the troops and was forced to pay his respects to the dead as they were carried past his balcony. By April the liberal leaders, Camphausen and Hansemann, were in key positions in the Prussian parliament and the transition towards a bourgeois democracy in Germany seemed inevitable.
The national Frankfurt parliament was established in May. It was moderate and stood for a constitutional monarchy, rather than the republic for which Marx and Engels hoped. They saw this form of national unification as a compromise with the old monarchy and aristocracy, rather than a break with them.
The liberal leaders in Germany gained the benefits of the February revolution in France, because Germany’s rulers were frightened into making concessions without much resistance. But the liberals were also confirmed in their timidity by the June events which taught them that too many concessions to the masses would lead to ‘anarchy’. They wanted stability and order in the new Germany. To this end they introduced various programmes of job creation and public works to buy off discontent.
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared in this context at the beginning of June. Marx and Engels saw their place as being on the extreme left wing of the democracy movement, rather than cutting the communists off from the movement completely. They saw the major division as being between old reaction and the new democratic forces. So the first issue of their paper described the feudal reactionaries’ victory over the revolution in Naples and Sicily and warned of the dangers of the military attacking the revolution in Germany. [45] Engels also attacked the Frankfurt parliament for its lack of drive and decisiveness. [46] The Prussian assembly came under even greater attack, especially when further street fighting loomed in the middle of June.
When the French June Days took place the German movement was split in its response. Marx and Engels and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung were fully behind the working class fighters, while the ‘moderate’ democrats opposed them and attacked the communists. The democrat and republican Bonner Zeitung’s attack had a now familiar ring when it stated ‘we want freedom, but we also want order, without which no freedom can exist. Was the Neue Rheinische Zeitung truly defending democracy when it praised a wild insurrection which endangered the republic, the first fundamental basis for a democracy?’ [47]
The fear of the June Days marked the turning point after which there was increased repression of the democratic and workers’ organisations. The Camphausen ministry in Berlin was replaced by that of Hansemann which stressed constitutional monarchy and increased law and order. Yet the revolutionary mood remained, heightened in the summer by the Frankfurt parliament’s capitulation over the Danish annexation of the northern Schleswig-Holstein province. By September the situation had reached boiling point. The class forces were polarising: the military, monarchy and aristocracy towards further repression and a showdown with the Prussian assembly, the democrats by demonstrating against the Hansemann ministry and against the attacks by reactionaries on the Democratic Society. The assembly’s attempts to control the army were blocked by Hansemann, who in turn faced demonstrations and protests.
In Cologne the communist influence was growing and in early September a Committee of Public Safety was formed to defend the revolution. Members of the committee, which was openly elected at a mass meeting, included Marx, Engels and their fellow communists Schapper, Moll and Wolff. A meeting held in the town of Worringen just up the river from Cologne attracted thousands and many of the barges travelling to it carried red flags. Engels spoke, among others. The Demands of the Communist Party were distributed at the meeting. This was the high point of communist organisation in the revolution. Less than a fortnight later the Prussians declared a state of siege in Cologne and several of the most prominent speakers and organisers were arrested. Engels had left home by the time the police called. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was banned. Engels escaped via Barmen to Belgium and then into France. Meanwhile a wanted poster was put out for him.
Engels spent the closing months of the year walking through eastern France to Switzerland, where he stayed for a couple of months until things had died down in Germany. While there he wrote a large number of articles for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (only briefly prevented from publication) on Swiss politics and what was happening to the revolution elsewhere in Europe, especially in the Austrian empire, where the Hungarians led by Louis Kossuth were fighting for independence. Engels’ views on the various national struggles have long proved controversial, since he distinguished between certain national groups who he believed had a future as independent nations within Europe – especially the Germans, the Italians, the Poles and the Hungarians – and those, in particular the small groups of Slavic peoples, whose national movements Engels regarded as sometimes little more than a cover for reactionary Russian despotism. So Engels wrote in 1849 that ‘the revolution of 1848 compelled all the European peoples to declare for it or against it. In one month all the peoples which were ripe for revolution had made their revolution, all the unripe peoples had formed an alliance against the revolution.’ [48] He saw the development of the revolution, especially in the Austrian empire, as clearly divided into ‘two huge armed camps: on one side, the side of revolution, were the Germans, Poles and Magyars; on the other side, the side of counter-revolution, were the others, ie all the Slavs with the exception of the Poles, plus the Romanians and the Saxons of Transylvania’. [49]
He saw the counter-revolutionary nature of the South Slavs in particular as connected with their lack of economic and social development, which not only led them to ally with the Russian Tsar, but also meant that their future as nations in an emerging capitalist Europe was in doubt. He compared them to groups such as the Scottish Highlanders who supported the reactionary Stuarts from 1640 to 1745, or the Bretons in France who supported the old Bourbon monarchy during the French Revolution. Mehring describes the political background which justified these views:
In the Slav question also the interests of the revolution were paramount in determining the attitude of Marx and Engels. The Austrian Slavs – with the exception of the Poles – had sided with the reaction in the struggle of the Vienna government against the revolutionary Germans and against Hungary. They had taken revolutionary Vienna by storm and handed it over to the merciless vengeance of the ‘Royal and Imperial’ authorities.’
Mehring continues, ‘Their struggle for national independence made them the willing tools of Tsarism, and not all the well-meaning self-deceptions of the democratic Pan-Slavs could alter this fact’. [50]
Engels’ view of the future of the Slav nationalities has come under attack for seeming to favour particular national groups while attacking others, and for being wrong about whether all the Slav peoples had a future as nation states. [51] But he always approached the question from the point of view of European politics: that national independence in Germany, Italy, Poland and Hungary would represent progress over the patchwork of nations held together by reactionary autocratic empires which dominated central and eastern Europe. His judgement on particular peoples was based on how far they supported such advances, and also whether they supported the arch reactionary empire, that of Russia. In both instances the record of most of the South Slavs was appalling. As one not particularly sympathetic biographer has put it:
Engels’ judgements on whole peoples reflected the real struggles and hard choices of the time, when democratic rights were difficult to achieve and easy to lose. In those circumstances he felt obliged to identify potential enemies to the cause of constitutionalism – though he may not have been correct in his allegations – because actual enemies were causing numerous deaths amongst the democrats whom he was supporting. [52]
It was this which motivated his views on the national question.
Engels was active in the workers’ movement in Switzerland and was appointed a delegate to a workers’ congress while there, but he wanted to get back to Germany and managed to do so by the end of January 1849, when he heard that there would be no charges against him. The revolutionary wave which had erupted a year before was by no means over, but its impact was fading. Vienna was once again in the hands of the feudal reactionaries, but the Hungarians were still fighting under Louis Kossuth. Engels still hoped for a new French revolution, and Germany itself was still seemingly bound for unification. He wanted the Frankfurt parliament to declare for unification against Prussia and so open up a revolutionary civil war.
Tension in the Rhineland mounted in early May 1849, as the hopes of the people clashed with the military might of Prussia, encamped in occupation of the region. The government’s mobilisation of the militia to thwart democratic revolt brought matters to a head and barricades were thrown up in Engels’ home town of Elberfeld, where a Committee of Public Safety was appointed. Engels threw himself into the struggle with his usual gusto, despite attempts by the local bourgeoisie to drive this dangerous red from their town.
But the uprising was defeated, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung suppressed and the end of the German Revolution was in sight. While Marx went to Paris, Engels stayed in the Palatinate, last bastion of revolution. When the Prussians invaded, Engels joined in the ensuing war, fighting in the army as assistant to the ‘True Socialist’ Willich, and was the veteran of four battles before he once again retreated to Switzerland. This time, however, his exile was anything but temporary.
 
Exile
Marx made his way to London in the summer of 1849. Engels joined him that autumn, travelling via Genoa by sea to avoid problems in France. They were both young men and could not have dreamt that their exile would last for the rest of their lives. For one thing, they expected the failed revolution to rise again very rapidly, as was clear from a letter Marx wrote to Engels that summer. [53] They spent much time analysing the revolution and what had gone wrong, and further developed the analysis which they held for the rest of their lives: the bourgeoisie wanted revolution, but was too cowardly to really fight for it once the working class was an active force on the political scene. The democrats and various supporters of the bourgeoisie were therefore half hearted revolutionaries who would pull back from the final confrontation in favour of compromise with the old order.
In their writings therefore Marx and Engels put a lot of emphasis on workers needing to follow a bourgeois revolution with their own workers’ revolution and increasingly talked about the need for a ‘permanent revolution’ until workers’ power was achieved. Their address to the Communist League written in 1850 said:
[the workers] themselves must contribute most to their final victory, by informing themselves of their own class interests, by taking up their independent political position as soon as possible, by not allowing themselves to be misled by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeoisie into doubting for one minute the necessity of an independently organised party of the proletariat. Their battle-cry must be: The Permanent Revolution. [54]
The Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky was to extend the analysis half a century later to explain how it was that Russian workers in backward semi-feudal Russia had to jump over the heads of the extremely weak and vacillating bourgeoisie in order to make the revolutions. [55]
Hopes of immediate revival of revolution soon faded, however, and the exiled revolutionaries had to seriously assess what they should do. Attempts to publish a German paper from London were short lived, and the two quickly became disillusioned with émigré politics. They broke with the habits and petty squabbles of the other European exiles, and the Communist League split. They also had strategic differences with other socialists, especially the Blanquists who believed that if only the revolutionary vanguard acted alone it could somehow make the revolution, despite unfavourable objective conditions. Marx and Engels came to see that capitalism had stabilised itself politically following the revolutionary wave, and was poised for great economic expansion into corners of the globe which had previously been untouched.
In 1850 Engels made a decision which meant great personal sacrifice to him; he agreed to work once again in the family firm of Ermen and Engels in Manchester. He did so to ensure that he received a decent income from his father, who wanted a member of the family keeping an eye on the Ermen side of the partnership while he himself stayed in Germany. Engels’ income went in large part to sustain Marx and his family – a task which Engels took upon himself from 1850 until Marx’s death over 40 years later. He did so out of personal and political regard for Marx, whose family were suffering terrible poverty.
Marx’s wife, Jenny, endured many pregnancies but only three children survived into adulthood – Jenny Caroline, Jenny Laura and Jenny Eleanor. Marx wrote to Engels in 1850 on the death of his baby son Heinrich Guido that his wife was in a state of exhaustion and that the baby had died as a ‘victim of bourgeois misère’. [56] The family had to endure much travelling, police persecution and above all poverty. They lived in miserable lodgings in London’s Soho and were constantly beset with problems of ill health and unpaid bills.
Engels saved the Marx family from this destitution and allowed Marx to develop his theoretical studies which culminated in Capital, the first volume of which appeared in 1867. Engels’ help eventually enabled the family to move to a house in north London, ensured that Christmas was always celebrated, paid for holidays and made sure the girls got an education. He was also totally uncomplaining about it. He detested work at Ermen and Engels, and thought initially he would be there for just a short time. Eleanor Marx described the day, nearly 20 years later, when he was able to finally leave, having secured enough money to keep himself and the Marx family in some comfort:
I was with Engels when he reached the end of this forced labour and I saw what he must bave gone through all those years. I shall never forget the triumph with which he exclaimed ‘for the last time’ as he put on his boots in the morning to go to his office. A few hours later we were standing at the gate waiting for him. We saw him coming over the little field opposite the house where we lived. He was swinging his stick in the air and singing, his face beaming. Then we set the table for a celebration and drank champagne and were happy. [57]
That Engels agreed to work in Manchester was a sign of his dedication to the Marx family, but his situation was also eased by his personal relations with the Burns sisters, Mary and Lizzie. Engels is assumed to have met Mary when he first visited Manchester in the early 1840s, and she certainly accompanied him to continental Europe in 1845. Mary was Irish and working class. She and Engels never married but he lived much of the time at the house he provided for her and Lizzie in Ardwick (although he maintained separate lodgings). Engels was distraught at her death at the age of 41 in 1863. As he wrote to Marx, ‘I felt as though with her I was burying the last vestige of my youth’. [58]
Mary Burns’s death was the occasion of almost the only sharp interchange between the two friends. Marx received a letter from Engels telling him of the death and Engels, not unnaturally, expected his old friend to extend great sympathy. Instead, Marx’s reply mostly dwelt on the problems of finance and health which were yet again besetting his family. Engels did not reply for a week and then wrote a fairly reproachful letter, to which Marx then wrote a deeply apologetic reply. Engels finally came round, although obviously still hurt:
I tell you, your letter stuck in my head for a whole week, I couldn’t forget it. Never mind, your last letter made it quits: and I am glad that when I lost Mary I did not also lose my oldest and best friend. [59]
So the threatened rift between the two was mended. Why did Marx respond in this way? We can only conjecture, but it would seem to be a combination of obsession with his own problems (he and Jenny had decided to get the two older daughters posts as governesses and move into a lodging house with their youngest daughter – although Engels eventually came to their rescue on this, as on so much else) plus, possibly, a lack of understanding of Engels’ feelings for Mary. Their relationship was unconventional. Mary and Engels never married and lived apart, at least formally. The great class differences between them were much harder to overcome in the 19th century than they would be today. Culturally they must have seemed very far apart – Mary was probably illiterate, for example, and did not share the same friends as Engels.
When Engels eventually started a relationship with Mary’s sister Lydia, known as Lizzie, Marx and Jenny appear to have been careful not to make the same mistake again. They became friendly with Lizzie (she and Jenny Marx would holiday together in later years) and Eleanor visited Manchester to stay at the Engels-Burns household. She also accompanied them on a trip to Ireland.
Much is made of Engels’ unconventional relationships with the Burns sisters (he only married Lizzie on her deathbed in 1878). It is often implied that their relationship must have been unequal and so fits closely the image of the well off bourgeois man with his working class mistresses who are kept out of the way of respectable society. Terrell Carver’s remark that, ‘in love Engels does not seem to have gone searching for his intellectual equal’ is fairly typical. [60] It is impossible at this distance to know whether the Burns sisters were his ‘intellectual equal’. But we do know that they were political, sympathetic to communism and to the cause of Irish nationalism. Eleanor Marx learnt about Irish oppression from Lizzie Burns who also showed her the haunts of the Fenian Manchester Martyrs. [61] When Engels met the young Mary Burns in 1840s Manchester she was almost certainly involved in the Chartist politics of the time, as were so many Irish textile workers. There is no sign that the relationships were ever regarded by any of the participants as one sided or oppressive. There is, however, some evidence that Engels gained a great deal from living with these women, and that their personalities were at one with his own. Engels wrote to the German socialist August Bebel’s wife in 1878 after Lizzie’s death, ‘She was of genuine Irish proletarian stock and her passionate, innate feeling for her class was of far greater value to me and stood me in better stead at moments of crisis than all the refinement and culture of your educated and aesthetic young ladies. [62] The 14 year old Eleanor Marx wrote home in 1869 with a description of the Burns household:
On Saturday it was so warm that we, that is Auntie [Lizzie] and myself and Sarah, lay down on the floor the whole day drinking beer, claret, etc. … In the evening when Uncle [Engels] came home he found Auntie, me and Ellen [Lizzie’s niece], who was telling us Irish tales, all lying our full length on the floor, with no stays, no hoots, and one petticoat and a cotton dress on, and that was all. [63]
His role as a respectable businessman was one reason why Engels had to keep his private life separate from his work, and so it was only when he left Ermen and Engels and moved to London that he could live openly with Lizzie.
The period which opened up before Marx and Engels in the 1850s was quite difficult for political agitation. Reaction was triumphant in much of Europe. In France, Louis Napoleon established a dictatorship which lasted until the Franco-Prussian War nearly 20 years later. In Germany an alliance of the Prussian monarchy with the statesman Bismarck, representative of the reactionary noble Junker caste, ushered in the move towards a centralised and industrialised capitalist state, with eventual unification under Prussian dominance. Britain and its empire were going through an unprecedented period of domestic and overseas expansion, and its once militant working class was entering a long period of social peace and relative prosperity. Left wing politics, as so often in times of reaction and working class defeat, were dominated by inward looking, sectarian squabbling.
The 1848 revolutionaries, the men of action, now found themselves in a very different situation. Marx worked on his studies for Capital, and both men spent much of their time commenting, in their correspondence and in various pieces of journalism and other writings, on events about which they could do little. They wrote on the Crimean War, the American Civil War and the economic depression of 1857. Marx was hired to write regular articles for the New York Daily Tribune on a variety of topics. Often they were written by Engels, especially where they concerned military matters or questions of international diplomacy. Engels himself found it impossible to get full time journalistic work because of his political views, as his attempt to become military correspondent of the Daily News demonstrated. [64]
Although the class struggle remained at a low ebb in Britain, there were two events in the early 1860s which Marx and Engels considered to be important: the emancipation of the serfs in Russia in 1861 and the Civil War in America, which began in the same year and was eventually to complete the bourgeois revolution started against English colonialism in 1776. Marx wrote in 1860, ‘In my opinion, the biggest things that are happening in the world today are on the one hand the movement of the slaves in America, started by the death of John Brown, and on the other the movement of the slaves in Russia’. [65]
The American Civil War was a struggle between the Southern Confederacy of slave owning states and the Northern states under Lincoln, who wanted to stop the extension of slavery to any new states. The British ruling class tended to support the Southern Confederacy, from whom it bought the cotton so central to the British economy. The British ruling class also saw the emerging United States as a major threat to its world dominance. British workers, on the other hand, overwhelmingly opposed slavery and demonstrated in favour of victory for the North. Marx and Engels were enthusiastic supporters of the Northern Union side. The Union represented the more industrialised, democratic and progressive society. But Marx and Engels were very impatient at the failure of the Northern armies to score rapid and decisive victories against the supposedly inferior South. Engels wrote to Marx in November 1862, ‘I must say I cannot work up any enthusiasm for a nation which on such a colossal issue allows itself to be continually beaten by a fourth of its own population, and which after eighteen months of war has achieved nothing more than the discovery that all its generals are asses and all its officials rascals and traitors’. [66]
He and Marx had already debated whether the North was likely to win. The superior tactics of the South, under General Lee, led Engels at times to despair of the North’s victory. On purely military grounds he had good reason, since the North conducted the first two years of war in a shambolic and half hearted way. Most importantly, its leaders and military men refused to mobilise the radical sentiments of the mass of Northerners and its natural supporters in the Southern states – the slaves themselves. Marx wrote in August 1862 that ‘the North will finally make war seriously, adopt revolutionary methods and throw over the domination of the border slave statesmen. A single Negro regiment would have a remarkable effect on Southern nerves’. [67]
This is in fact what happened. Crucial to the North’s fortunes were, firstly, Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation to free the slaves and, secondly, the bringing into play of the superior industrial strength of Northern industrial capitalism over the slave system of the South. Engels recognised the mark the Civil War would make on future development in what was to become the United States. He wrote to his old friend Joseph Weydemeyer, now living in St Louis, that:
[the war’s] outcome will doubtless determine the future course of America as a whole for hundreds of years. As soon as slavery – that greatest of obstacles to the political and social development of the United States – has been smashed, the country will experience a boom that will very soon assure it an altogether different place in the history of the world, and the army and navy created during the war will then soon find employment. [68]
 
The First International
Solidarity among British workers with the Northern side in the American Civil War, the massive sympathy for Garibaldi’s attempt at Italian unification in 1861, and support for the democratic struggle in Poland, all contributed to a sense of internationalism among the British working class and also formed the backdrop for Marx and Engels’ decision to involve themselves directly in working class organisation for the first time since the collapse of the 1848 revolutions. The International Working Men’s Association, known as the First International, was set up in 1864 and held its first Congress in 1865. Marx was absolutely central to its political development and to the fact that it held together as an organisation over the ensuing years.
The International was an amalgam of very different politics, drawn from its two main national components, the English and French. Its main English support stemmed from the London Trades Council, a body which was beginning to feel its industrial strength after years when the working class had remained quiescent. But it represented only a minority of the working class, the skilled trade unionists, and its leaders – men like the shoemaker George Odger, the cabinet maker Robert Applegarth and the carpenter William Cremer – held politics a fairly long way from Marx’s. One of their main aims in establishing the International was to stop foreign scab labour from undermining trade unions in Britain, although they were also keen on developing solidarity with movements for democracy in other countries. The French were followers of Proudhon, and therefore adhered to some form of artisan socialism which criticised capitalism from the point of view of returning to small scale production. Consequently they were hostile to the state and were also opposed to strikes and revolution.
Marx drew up the inaugural address and rules for the General Council of the International which was based in London, where he tried to steer a course between his own politics and those of the various components of the International, in order to ensure that the organisation got off the ground and made some advances in organising across national boundaries. Marx wrote enthusiastically to Engels on 1 May 1865:
The great success of the International Association is this: the Reform League [based on agitation for the suffrage] is our work … We have baffled all attempts of the middle class to mislead the working class … If we succeed in re-electrifying the political movement of the English working class, our Association … will have done more for the working class of Europe than has been possible in any other way. [69]
Again in 1866 he wrote, ‘The workers’ demonstrations in London, which are marvellous compared with anything we have seen in England since 1849, are purely the work of the International’. [70]
Marx’s other great achievement in the mid-1860s was the publication of the first volume of Capital in 1867. Marx was well aware of the debt he owed Engels both in terms of financial support and of the constant collaboration which had enabled him to test his ideas and theories with his oldest friend:
So this volume is finished. It was thanks to you alone that this became possible. Without your self-sacrifice for me I could never possibly have done the enormous work for the three volumes. I embrace you, full of thanks! [71]
Engels, being in Manchester, was clearly not involved in the day to day work of the International but he followed the politics and the international situation closely. When war broke out between Austria and Prussia in 1866, Engels wrote a series of articles on the conflict and, unusually, quite wrongly predicted the defeat of Prussia. However, he also saw that the Prussian victory would lead inevitably to German unification on Prussia’s terms and the falling out between Bismarck and his erstwhile ally, Louis Napoleon.
Engels also maintained a strong interest in the situation in Ireland, which reached crisis point in the late 1860s. The Fenian movement of Irish nationalists organised a series of armed protests against the British state and so brought home the struggle against Irish colonial oppression to the British ruling class. The huge Irish immigrant population in cities like Manchester and London supported their struggle. The reprisals against the Fenians by the British ruling class were vicious and there was an outcry when the ‘Manchester Martyrs’ were hanged in 1867. There was, however, just as in more recent times, a backlash against the Irish nationalists among English workers, especially when a bombing in Clerkenwell killed ordinary people.
Engels wanted to write a history of Ireland and visited the country with Lizzie and Eleanor Marx in 1869, after he had left Ermen and Engels. He wanted to explain the economic reasons why Ireland was kept in subordination, but why also this subordination had not – despite the best efforts of the English rulers – wiped out Irish identity, culture and nationalism. He wrote to Marx on his return, ‘Irish history shows one how disastrous it is for a nation to have subjected another nation … things would have taken another turn in England too, if it had not been necessary to rule in Ireland by military means and to create a new aristocracy there.’ [72]
However, the book did not materialise. Some sections were found in Engels’ papers after his death, but it seems that much of it was never completed. Perhaps the reason for this was the turn in political events and, to a lesser extent, in Engels’ personal circumstances. He and Lizzie moved to London in the autumn of 1870, to a house in Regent’s Park Road, since he now had the financial independence to work full time at politics.
The political situation in Europe was then in flux. When war broke out between the two major continental European powers, France and Germany, in the autumn of 1870, Engels backed Germany at first, seeing its expansion as the means of defeating the French emperor on the one hand, and of curtailing the power of reactionary Russia on the other. It was only after Napoleon III’s defeat at the battle of Sedan that he saw the main threat to European workers as German expansionism. The annexation of Alsace-Lorraine (the provinces on France’s eastern borders) by Germany, Marx and Engels predicted, would only lead to further war between France and Germany.
Events in France were of central political importance in 1870 and 1871. They also brought out the political differences in the International, which could be smoothed over in periods of relative social calm but could not hold together when there were fundamental questions at stake. Such was the situation which Marx and Engels now faced.
The overthrow of Napoleon III led to political turmoil in France between September 1870, when the French army was defeated, through to the end of May 1871, when the Paris Commune was finally defeated and the reactionaries took control. A republic was proclaimed in September 1870, but very soon there were differences over what sort of republic it was to be. Should it continue to govern in the interests of large scale capital, as the Second Empire had done, or should there be a government which represented the workers and small shopkeepers? The collapse of the Second Empire led to various localised attempts at insurrection. They failed but in Paris the possibility of revolutionary government was on the agenda.
Paris was under siege from October by occupying Prussian troops. This led to a radicalisation within the city, which was greatly strengthened in the new year when the existing government made peace with the Prussians in return for the siege being lifted. The French government refused to return to Paris, staying in Versailles until the militant population was disarmed. This led to the revolution on 18 March which established the Paris Commune.
The Commune was the first ever attempt at working class revolutionary government and was therefore of critical importance to Marx and Engels. They saw it as a model for a workers’ state: representatives were elected and accountable, the whole working population was involved in politics and decision making, and perhaps most importantly there were attempts to set up a form of state power or armed rule in opposition to the army and police of the old capitalist state. The Commune was real democracy in action.
Its life span was short. Just two months after its inception the Commune was once again besieged, this time by the Versailles government’s army. The Commune was put down after over a week of the bloodiest fighting imaginable: thousands were killed by counter-revolutionaries and many more were exiled or deported.
During the Commune’s closing days Marx set about writing one of his best known works, The Civil War in France, which was commissioned by the General Council of the International. It was delivered verbally to the General Council meeting on 30 May and then printed as a pamphlet.
Here Marx spelt out his ideas on the capitalist state and how the crushing of the Commune represented the most basic class instincts not just of the French bourgeoisie, but of its counterparts elsewhere: ‘Class rule is no longer able to disguise itself in a national uniform; the national governments are one as against the proletariat!’ [73] The Commune was a new form of democracy, ‘a working, not a parliamentary, body, executive and legislative at the same time’. [74] Education was open to all and free from religious or state interference. Public functionaries were paid workmen’s wages. Judges and magistrates were accountable and elected. The army and conscription were abolished, replaced by a National Guard made up of all citizens. Elections were by universal male suffrage.
The crucial lesson of the Commune for Marx was that ‘the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes’. [75] Instead revolutionaries had to be prepared to smash the old capitalist state, which was there to protect the capitalist class and its property, and to establish in its place a workers’ state, based on the most complete form of democracy and on new forms of power: a workers’ militia which could protect the gains of the revolution and ensure that the capitalists did not regain power. This, Engels said, was what he and Marx meant by ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’. [76]
The need for a completely new form of state was vindicated by the terrible events with which the Commune met its end. The attempt to storm heaven by the Communards was destroyed in the most bloody way by the men – and women – of property. It became the habit of fashionable women to go and watch the execution of many thousands of Communards in the days following its defeat.
There were demonstrations of solidarity with the Commune among workers in many different countries. The workers’ movement internationally saw the Commune’s defeat as a blow to them all. Conversely, the rulers of all the capitalist powers took heart from the smashing of this first workers’ government, and themselves launched a witch hunt against the International. In 1872 membership of the International became a punishable offence in France. Similarly repressive measures were considered elsewhere, and Bismarck proposed a European alliance against the International. [77]
The backlash led to the fracturing of the International. The English trade union leaders Odger and Lucraft left the organisation which they had helped to found because they objected to The Civil War in France. In fact, they were out of sympathy with the whole experience of the Commune, which was far too revolutionary for their cautious reformist politics. On the other hand, Marx and Engels now found a full scale battle on their hands with the Russian anarchist Bakunin, who they suspected of having joined the International in order to wreck its organisation.
Marx and Engels therefore spent the remainder of 1871 and much of 1872 on two tasks: organising relief work and political solidarity with the refugees from the Commune, many of whom fled to London, and fighting against the influence of Bakunin and his followers in the International.
To this end they held a closed conference in September 1871, which Marx and his supporters were able to dominate because so few of their opponents turned up. They argued strongly for a centralised organisation against the decentralising tendencies of Bakunin. In the months that followed the debates continued, with Engels – responsible for corresponding with Italy and Spain – spending a great deal of time trying to win more influence for his and Marx’s ideas in areas where Bakunin and his supporters were relatively strong.
Things came to a head at the Hague conference in 1872, which Engels was largely responsible for organising and where he still pushed for strengthening the General Council so that it could, if necessary, discipline or control the various sections, and so that it could provide some impetus to the formation of independent working class parties throughout Europe which were firmly committed to revolutionary upheaval.
Opposition to Marx and Engels again came from two sources: the English trade union leaders did not want a tight revolutionary disciplined organisation because this cut across their pragmatic and timid politics, and they did not want to be tied to a political line. The anarchists on the other hand also wanted decentralisation because it gave them more influence, and also because it fitted better with their denial of the state and its importance. At the Hague conference the English trade union leaders preferred to back the anarchists.
But despite the trade union leaders’ attitude Engels realised that the majority of delegates would vote with him and Marx. He argued that Bakunin was in fact organising a centralised secret conspiracy, quite against the interests and spirit of the International. Engels then pushed the question of Bakunin’s secret organisation into a subcommittee, managed to win the expulsion of Bakunin and his ally Guillaume, and then proposed the removal of the General Council to New York. From America it was unable to influence events in Europe and was much less prey to internal intrigue.
The last days of the First International, like any infighting on the left, are not its best testament. Engels and Marx did what they thought necessary because they saw no way of salvaging the International. The course of the class struggle had been on the rise in the latter half of the 1860s. The bloody reaction which followed the defeat of the Commune left the revolutionaries much as they had been after 1848. Left wing circles were dominated by internal squabbles and had less and less contact with reality. Marx and Engels were under attack from all sides. All that they could see to do was to allow the First International to die a natural death and wait for a new rise in class struggle which would enable international socialist organisation to be rebuilt. This time it would take nearly 20 years and Engels would be undertaking the task without Marx, and with a new generation of socialists.
 
The end of an era
Engels now lived in London, and so was able to collaborate much more closely with Marx, as his increased intervention in the International between 1870 and 1872 demonstrated. He continued his military writing and interests, and was given the nickname of ‘the General’ by the Marx family because of his skill and enthusiasm in military matters.
He also began a number of other works. He started work on his book The Dialectics of Nature in 1873, although he continued to write notes for it over a number of years and it was never completed. It represented an attempt to apply his philosophical ideas to the study of science. [78] But perhaps his most important writing in these years was a polemic against the ideas of one man who was becoming increasingly influential inside the German socialist movement and whom Engels and Marx regarded as a dangerous miseducator of even some of the most experienced socialists.
The background to the argument was the Franco-Prussian War and the collapse of the Commune. This was a watershed in European politics. Germany replaced France as the pivotal continental European power. This had its impact on the workers’ movements in various countries. They tended to develop stable nationally based parties, often oriented to the parliamentary structures which had also emerged at this time. This was true above all in Germany, where two socialist groups – those influenced by Marx and those influenced by the ideas of Lassalle – merged in the 1870s to form what became the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the most powerful socialist party in the world. The party participated from its inception in the new parliament created as a result of German unification.
Marx and Engels were extremely critical of the German socialists. The party’s unity programme, moved at the Gotha conference in 1875, was subject to a critique by Marx because it accepted a number of non-Marxist concepts, such as the idea that all other classes apart from the working class were ‘one reactionary mass’. In the Critique of the Gotha Programme Marx argued that socialists should not dismiss all other classes as incapable of struggling against the system. [79] At various points in their lives Marx and Engels were prepared to ally with even bourgeois parties against reactionary feudalism, and very often with various petty bourgeois organisations and tendencies.
The ‘one reactionary mass’ formulation came from the supporters of the socialist Lassalle, who despite his rhetoric against all other classes, had in practice favoured alliance with the Bismarckian monarchy against the bourgeois opposition.
Hal Draper has described how, for Marx and Engels, the petty bourgeoisie had to be viewed as capable of both reactionary and progressive political action. They considered that the programme of the German party would lead to sectarianism. Both the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry (the urban and rural sectors of the class) are ‘classes that are on the decline and reactionary in relation to the proletariat as soon as they aspire to maintain themselves artificially’, wrote Engels:
But they are not reactionary under all social conditions; not all sectors of the class are equally reactionary under the same conditions; different sectors and groups might vary widely on different issues; and last but not least, the difference must always be borne in mind between parties and groups based on this class and the possibilities of recruiting the rank and file of the class or of parts of it, in a fight against their own parties. In other words, we enter the realm of intelligent political leadership of a broad revolutionary movement that is striving to reach out, without compromising its own politics, as against the wooden drill of a self-pickling sect. [80]
The tendency to reformism, to accommodation with the German state, was apparent to Marx and Engels from the Gotha programme. However it is also clear that the theoretical level of the German party was low. In the early 1870s it attracted all sorts of people and the party did not always have a clear understanding of how to win them to revolutionary politics. Marx’s best known biographer, from the next generation of German socialists, Franz Mehring, has written of the party in the mid-1870s:
It was the rapid growth of its practical successes which made the new party indifferent to theory, and even that is saying too much. They were not indifferent to theory as such, but rather to what, in their vigorous advance, they regarded as theoretical hair-splitting. Unappreciated inventors and misunderstood reformers, anti-vaccinationists, nature healers and similar cranks flocked to the standards of the new party because they hoped to find in the active ranks of the working class the recognition which had been denied them in the bourgeois world. Whoever showed good-will and offered some remedy for the sick body politic was sure of a welcome, particularly those who came from academic circles and whose presence promised to seal the alliance between the proletariat and science. A university professor who befriended or seemed to befriend socialism in one or the other of its manifold interpretations, had no need to fear any very strict criticism of his intellectual stock in trade. [81]
Engels’s Anti-Dühring, a critique of the ideas of Dr Eugen Dühring, has to be seen against this background. He and Marx were extremely perturbed at the influence Dühring had on even the intellectuals of the party such as the young Eduard Bernstein. Anti-Dühring started as a series of articles in the German party’s publication Vorwärts in 1877. The articles came under attack from within the party itself. The tone of Engels’ articles and their content were regarded by some as ‘objectionable’ and they were relegated to the paper’s scientific supplement. [82]
However, Engels persevered, and this polemic became central to turning the ideas of Marx into reality for a new generation of socialists who held Marx and Engels in great esteem but who knew little of their theoretical ideas. Although it was soon banned in Germany, a section of the book was published as a popular pamphlet, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, which was translated into various European languages and sold widely. It was and remains one of the best and most easily understood introductions to Marxist ideas.
Engels describes how the great Utopian socialists, Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen, derived their ideas from the rationalist thinking of the Enlightenment, which culminated in the great French Revolution. They expressed the disappointment felt at the political and social institutions which came out of the revolution. According to Engels, ‘Society presented nothing but wrongs; to remove these was the task of reason.’ [83] He describes how this sort of socialism dominated the earliest socialist thinkers:
To all these socialism is the expression of absolute truth, reason and justice, and has only to be discovered to conquer all the world by virtue of its own power. And as absolute truth is independent of time, space, and of the historical development of man, it is a mere accident when and where it is discovered. [84]
Yet socialist thought had to move beyond moral outrage with capitalism and exhortations for change to an understanding of how that change could be brought about. Socialism became a science, according to Engels, with the development of the materialist conception of history and with the understanding that the basis of capitalist accumulation is the exploitation of workers:
The socialism of earlier days certainly criticised the existing capitalistic mode of production and its consequences. But it could not explain them, and, therefore, could not get the mastery of them. It could only simply reject them as bad.
With the ideas of Marx, ‘socialism was no longer an accidental discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary outcome of the struggle between two historically developed classes – the proletariat and the bourgeoisie’. [85] A system which should have been able to make life easier for all of humanity instead made it far more wretched for many, while a minority benefited:
Machinery, the most powerful instrument for shortening labour time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourer’s time and that of his family at the disposal of the capitalist … the overwork of some becomes the preliminary condition for the idleness of others … Accumulation of wealth at one pole is … accumulation of misery at the other pole. [86]
Moreover, the constant development of newer and more powerful machinery, which is central to the accumulation of capital, produces great wealth but leads eventually to crisis: ‘markets are glutted, products accumulate … hard cash disappears, credit vanishes, factories are closed, and the mass of workers are in want of the means of subsistence, because they have produced too much of the means of subsistence.’ [87]
The only way out of this crisis is the socialisation of the means of production, a solution which, says Engels, even the capitalist system half recognises, with its increased attempts to regulate the free market by monopoly, nationalisation and state intervention. But genuine socialism can only come about when the working class seizes control of the means of production. [88]
The success of Socialism, Utopian and Scientific helped to establish Marx and Engels’ reputation among a new generation of socialists internationally. However, the political problems which Marx and Engels encountered in their dealings with the German party did not disappear. In 1879 the Anti-Socialist Law was passed by Bismarck in response to the growing strength of the party. In fact, the law did not harm the party’s growth, but its leaders responded to restrictions on their activity in the most compromising and mealy mouthed way. Its parliamentary group followed a policy of adaptation, and its leader, Wilhelm Liebknecht, declared in the Reichstag (parliament) that the SPD would obey the law. Marx said of the parliamentary group of socialists that ‘they are already so far affected by parliamentary idiotism that they think they are above criticism’. [89]
Engels in particular was angry with the leadership of the German party at the time. He felt attacked unjustifiably over Anti-Dühring and also believed that residual ‘Lassalleanism’ kept showing through in the party’s politics. He considered that the advice that he and Marx had given was not readily accepted by the German party and that this often led it to opportunist and even reformist tendencies, as over the Anti-Socialist Law. Although a visit to London by August Bebel in 1880 helped allay his fears, the German party remained a source of worry to Engels for the rest of his life.
Lizzie Burns had died in 1878, and had become Engels’ wife on her deathbed. Three years later Marx’s wife, Jenny, also died, to be followed just over a year later by her eldest daughter, Jenny. Marx had long been in bad health, as his correspondence frequently testified, but these deaths had a terrible effect on him. His health deteriorated further, despite convalescent trips to Algeria and the Isle of Wight. He developed a tumour on the lung and died on 14 March 1883, just two months after his eldest daughter and a few days before his grandson, the four year old Harry Longuet, who is buried in Marx’s grave.
Engels was there at the time of death and wrote the next day to their old friend in America, Frederick Adolph Sorge, ‘Mankind is shorter by a head, and that the greatest head of our time’. [90] He spoke at Marx’s graveside where he stated that ‘just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic nature, so Marx discovered the law of development of human history’. He went on to reaffirm their revolutionary commitment:
For Marx was above all else a revolutionist. His real mission in life was to contribute, in one way or another; to the overthrow of capitalist society and of the state institutions which it had brought into being … Fighting was his element … And, consequently, Marx was the best hated and most calumniated man of his time. [91]
 
After Marx
The void in Engels’ life following the death of Marx must have been great, but he was not the sort of person to allow it to prevent him from carrying on the work to which the two men had always devoted their energies. Therefore Engels’ final years – he was to live another 12 years after Marx – were as full and demanding as any in his younger life. His life in those years was devoted to arguing for, explaining and clarifying Marx’s ideas; working on the remaining volumes of Capital which would probably never have seen the light of day if it were not for Engels; looking after the Marx daughters, Laura and Eleanor; and advising those trying to build organisations in various countries, especially in Germany and Britain.
Engels’ theoretical production never diminished. Indeed in 1884 he published one of his best known books, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, which drew on anthropological writings to trace the course of women’s oppression throughout class society. This was a pathbreaking book in more ways than one. Not only did it tie the development of family forms and structures to the rise of private property held by a particular class in society, it also demonstrated a completely egalitarian attitude towards women. Throughout his life Engels saw women’s oppression as an unnatural product of property relations which would disappear once those property relations disappeared. He therefore developed a view which set him well in advance of even liberal commentators in Victorian England, who all too often saw women as weak beings who had to be protected, rather than as equals. [92]
Much of volume II of Capital had been completed before Marx’s death, and Engels was able to write an introduction to it by 1885. He was only able to publish the final volume nearly ten years later, just before he died in 1895, and much of that had to be written from scratch. His task was made harder since much of the data on which it was based was ten or 15 years old.
The desire to finish Capital may be one reason that Engels stayed in England, rather than return to his native Germany or to German speaking Switzerland. He often stressed that he felt able to continue his theoretical studies better in London than in Germany or Switzerland. He was also much less directly involved in the workers’ movement in Britain than he would have been in Germany. Indeed, Engels was fairly isolated from the working class movement – in contrast to his youth when he was involved with the Chartists, the Communist League and later with the International. In part this reflected what had happened to the working class movement over the intervening two decades – although the passivity and lack of struggle among English workers began to change in the last years of Engels’ life.
He also had a number of strong personal commitments in England: to Helene Demuth, the lifelong friend and servant of the Marx family, and like them a committed socialist – she spent the last years of her life as housekeeper to Engels in Regent’s Park Road; to ‘Pumps’ (Mary Ellen) Burns, niece of Mary and Lizzie, who with her husband and family was also ensconced there much of the time; and to the Marx daughters. Laura lived with her husband the French socialist Paul Lafargue in Paris, but Eleanor lived in London, in a relationship with the socialist Edward Aveling from 1883.
Engels treated them with the utmost affection and generosity, tact and sympathy, and smoothed many problems, such as Laura’s unhappiness that Eleanor, not she, was one of her father’s executors. Right up until his death, he provided them with money and left them both enough in his will to provide for them for the rest of their lives. Engels took all this as a matter of course, just as he had supported Marx throughout his life. He also defended them from attack – an impulse which he generously extended to Edward Aveling, who had a bad personal reputation but whom Engels always regarded as one of the most able socialists in Britain.
 
Rebirth of the English socialist movement
When Engels had first come to England in the early 1840s, his enthusiasm for the English working class movement knew no bounds. The Chartist movement was the most advanced in Europe. But the defeat of Chartism after 1848 and the ensuing dominance inside the working class movement of a layer of skilled trade union leaders led him to change his views. The experience of the First International reinforced these later views that the English working class movement – or at least its leaders – were narrow, parochial and all too willing to do deals with the bourgeois Liberal Party, rather than form their own independent workers’ party. So Engels could write to Eduard Bernstein in 1879:
The workers are divided politically into Conservatives and Liberal Radicals, into supporters of the Disraeli Cabinet and supporters of the Gladstone Cabinet. One can therefore speak of a labour movement only in so far as strikes take place here, which, whether they are won or not, do not get the movement one step further. [93]
He wrote in even more scathing vein to the German socialist Karl Kautsky:
You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as they think about politics in general: the same as the bourgeois think. There is no workers’ party here, you see, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals … [94]
Things began to change around the time of Marx’s death. Engels himself had started to write articles in the London Trades Council paper the Labour Standard in 1881, in which he called for the establishment of a workers’ political party rather than just trade union organisation – a call which led to his departure from the paper. [95] Soon afterwards came the establishment of tenuous socialist organisation in Britain. The Democratic Federation, led by H.M. Hyndman, was a coming together of various radical organisations. It developed in a socialist – as opposed to Liberal – direction. In 1884 it renamed itself the Social Democratic Federation, with a socialist programme and widespread support, especially among young trade unionists who were to become famous later in the decade for their role in leading strikes.
But the SDF soon split. Its departing members cited Hyndman’s opportunism coupled with his authoritarian behaviour – and set up the Socialist League in the beginning of 1885. The signatories to its founding statement included some of the best known names of English socialism such as Eleanor Marx, Edward Aveling, William Morris, Belfort Bax and John Lincoln Mahon. Their quarrel with Hyndman was understandable: he had irritated Marx with his frequent visits during the last years of his life, and irritated Engels as somebody who although he had read Capital did not grasp the essentials of Marxism. Neither had he broken fully from his own bourgeois background and ideas, in particular suffering from a degree of national chauvinism which coloured his socialism, and so was indeed capable of the opportunism of which he was accused. The SDF concentrated on abstract propaganda, did not see the relevance of strikes and was incapable of grasping many of the opportunities which came its way. Engels regarded it as a sect: ‘It has not understood how to take the lead of the working class movement generally, and to direct it towards socialism. It has turned Marxism into an orthodoxy’. [96] But the SDF did attempt to popularise Marx’s ideas, in however distorted a way, to a new generation of socialists. Hyndman’s book England for All was an attempt to put forward Marx’s ideas (although without crediting them).
The Socialist League, despite high hopes, did not really fare any better. Its reaction to opportunism was to stress abstract propaganda for socialism still further and just wait for the revolution. It was distrustful of ‘palliatives’ which could in any way improve the condition of workers under capitalism. The League was therefore unable to combine its vision of socialism with a support for the day to day struggles which could enable it to win workers to its broader vision, unable to combine its theory with any practice. Those who did engage in activity found themselves doing so as individuals, not as part of a supportive organisation. So Eleanor Marx and Aveling were heavily involved in free speech and assembly activity in the East End of London from the mid-1880s, but increasingly felt estranged from the League and eventually left it. The League became more influenced by anarchism than Marxism.
A third group of socialists came into being in the mid-1880s: the Fabians. Unlike the other groups the Fabians exclusively attracted the educated middle classes, not workers. At first some of its members were sympathetic to left wing ideas, but the increasing class conflict in evidence in the second half of the 1880s, especially the unemployed riots in 1886 and the fighting in Trafalgar Square in 1887, led their leaders to move consciously away from any flirtation with revolutionary change and towards the theory of gradualism which eventually influenced the Labour Party.
Engels kept fairly aloof from these movements, although he was far from aloof from the activities which took place in these years. He did not play an active role himself, but worked closely with Eleanor and Aveling, and can be assumed to have agreed with the thrust of their politics in the various disputes which took place. He was sceptical about the fortunes of the early British socialists, as his comments in 1886 demonstrate:
Here the lack of any competition, on the one hand, and the government’s stupidity, on the other; have enabled the gentlemen of the Social Democratic Federation to occupy a position which they did not dare to dream of three months ago … The labour movement is beginning here and no mistake, and if the SDF is the first to reap the harvest that is the result of the cowardice of the radicals and the stupidity of the Socialist League, which is squabbling with the anarchists and cannot get rid of them, and hence has no time to concern itself with the living movement that is taking place outside under its very nose. Incidentally, how long Hyndman and Co will persist in their present comparatively rational mode of action is uncertain. Anyhow I expect that they will soon commit colossal blunders again; they’re in too much of a hurry’. [97]
Engels still had much more contact with socialists from abroad than from England, and his regular Sunday dinners were a gathering place for German socialists in London. [98] But he became increasingly enthusiastic about the class struggle in Britain as the decade came to an end. The movement of the New Unions began in 1888 and spread like wildfire for the next three years. It was a movement from below, led by the supposedly unorganisable: the women, the unskilled, the Irish. All had been excluded from the existing unions by the skilled craftsmen who dominated them. These union leaders were timid and conservative. In 1886 Tom Mann, a socialist engineer who went on to lead the dockers’ strike which was so central to the New Unionism, wrote this of the old unions:
None of the important societies have any policy other than that of endeavouring to keep wages from falling. The true unionist policy of aggression seems entirely lost sight of, in fact the average unionist of today is a man with a fossilised intellect, either hopelessly apathetic, or supporting a policy that plays directly into the hands of the capitalist exploiter … I take my share of the work of the trade union to which I belong; but I candidly confess that unless it shows more vigour at the present time, I shall be compelled to take the view – against my will – that to continue to spend time over the ordinary squabble-investigating, do-nothing policy will be an unjustifiable waste of one’s energies. I am sure there are thousands of others in my state of mind. [99]
The misery caused by economic depression, the increasing attacks by the police on demonstrators and campaigners for civil liberties in 1886 and 1887, the lack of any political or economic voice for the bulk of the working class suddenly exploded. The match girls’ strike at the Bryant and May factory in east London, following an exposé of their terrible conditions by the radical Annie Besant in the Link newspaper, was a terrible shock to respectable opinion, and was widely supported throughout the working class. The match girls won their demands.
The women’s strike was followed by that of the gas workers, led by Will Thorne (whom Eleanor Marx taught to read and write) and then by the London dockers’ strike for their ‘tanner’ increase, led by the socialists John Burns and Tom Mann. Other strikes followed in all the sweated, unskilled trades – shops, transport, food industries. They also affected the unionised sections of the working class, who themselves became more militant.
The New Unionism was notable for a number of features: it started in the East End of London, the poorest and most politically backward slum in Britain; the strikes were frequently led by socialists who had agitated in the East End and elsewhere in small numbers in the years before struggle broke out; and the level of political generalisation was high. Engels made all these points in a letter sent to his old friend Sorge at the end of 1889:
The people are … drawing far greater masses into the struggle, shaking up society far more profoundly, and putting forward much more far reaching demands: the eight hour day, a general federation of all organisations and complete solidarity. Through Tussy [Eleanor Marx], the Gas Workers’ and General Labourers’ Union has got women’s branches for the first time. Moreover, the people regard their immediate demands as only provisional, although they themselves do not yet know toward what final goal they are working. But this vague notion has a strong enough hold on them to make them elect as leaders only downright Socialists. [100]
The success of the agitation was shown in the mass May Day demonstration organised around the theme of the Eight Hour Day in 1890. Despite sectarian opposition from some of the old union leaders around the London Trades Council, hundreds of thousands went to Hyde Park – organised through a committee including the Avelings. Engels was on one of the speakers’ platforms and was full of enthusiasm for the event, which he saw as symbolising the reawakening of the working class. [101]
There were moves afoot for a political voice for labour, motivated especially by the Scottish socialist Keir Hardie. The Liberal Party had always been supposed to represent working people in parliament but when the great disputes of the New Unionism blew up, they were often in opposition to Liberal employers or their supporters: such were the owners of Bryant and May, the shipowners and the bosses of Manningham Mill who broke their workers’ strike in 1891. As the strike movement subsided and the employers’ offensive grew in the early 1890s, so the appeal of the Independent Labour Party grew. It was an appeal which Engels initially welcomed, because it was based on working people, it was oriented away from the sectarian squabbles of the old left and it seemed to have the chance to develop into a mass socialist party. However, it never really involved all the different socialist groupings, was racked with divisions and did fairly badly electorally in its early years. Most importantly, it was completely unclear theoretically and politically, rejecting Marxism and putting its emphasis on educating workers towards socialism rather than on struggle. By the mid-1890s the ILP became much closer to the gradualist Fabians:
Thus, when the great upsurge of the late ’eighties and early ’nineties began to die away, the old ideas of bourgeois Liberal reformism reasserted themselves in a form more suitable to the level which the movement, both political and industrial, had now reached. [102]
 
The final years
Engels was 70 years old in 1890. Eleanor Marx, writing on his 70th birthday for a Viennese socialist paper, said:
He carries his six foot odd so lightly … and although Engels looks young he is even younger than he looks. He is really the youngest man I know. As far as I can remember he has not grown any older in the last 20 hard years. [103]
At the birthday celebration guests were ‘all regaled with claret and champagne until half past three in the morning, when twelve dozen oysters were consumed’. [104] Among the guests were the German socialists Liebknecht, Bebel and Singer. The international links between the socialists were growing by now, given a boost by the founding of the Second International, the first congress of which took place in Paris in 1889, on the hundredth anniversary of the storming of the Bastille.
Engels was instrumental in ensuring that the Congress took place. Before its very inception there was such division amongst the left that two international conferences were planned in Paris for the same time. His attempts to ensure that the Congress was an open public conference and that it was a means of launching a campaign for an eight hour day internationally were all important, and he worked very closely with Eleanor Marx, who was central to its organisation, although he did not attend himself.
The growth of socialist organisations, often under the influence of at least some form of Marxism, meant that Engels’ advice was much in demand. He became close friends with Victor Adler, a leader of the Austrian Social Democratic Party, who visited him in London, and also corresponded with socialists in countries as far apart as Russia and Portugal. The leaders of the emerging movement looked to him as the embodiment of a revolutionary tradition stretching back before 1848 – and as one of the last survivors of his generation.
A sign of this recognition came at the Zurich International Socialist conference in 1893. Yet again this was one of two conferences – the other called by the English trade unions in London, which Engels saw as a political challenge to the more advanced continental socialists. Engels managed to get the English conference cancelled by urging the German, Austrian and French trade unions to pass resolutions demanding one conference. Engels used the occasion to revisit Germany after many years and turned up only near the end of the Congress. He was feted by the international delegates and made the closing speech to the Congress. Engels’ lifelong modesty was evident here as elsewhere:
The unexpectedly magnificent welcome you have given me and which I could not but receive with deep emotion, I accept not in my personal capacity but as the collaborator of the great man whose portrait you have here. It is just 50 years ago that Marx and I came into the movement, when we wrote the first socialist articles for the Deutsch-Französiche Jahrbücher. From the small sects of the time, socialism has since developed into a powerful party making the officials of the whole world tremble. Marx has died, but were he still alive there would be no one in Europe and America who could look back upon his life’s work with such justifiable pride. [105]
But Engels found that despite the growth of these parties there was a danger within them – that their very success could hide theoretical and political problems. His concern was always that they should develop into proper mass workers’ parties, as opposed to the sects with no real roots in the class struggle which had so often dominated the left. He was therefore always extremely critical of anarchist tendencies, and took the side of the German party when it was faced with an anarchist splinter in the 1890s. But the stress that he put, quite rightly, on the need to work through the unions and parliament, the need to build up a mass base, could easily lead the German party to an opportunist accommodation with the system.
The arguments that broke out after Engels’ death in favour of ‘revisionism’ – led by the theoretician Eduard Bernstein – had their seed in the years before. The idea that the system would simply expand without contradiction and would therefore yield up the fruits of socialism almost as a matter of course were there, in Engels’ view, in the revised programme put to the German party’s 1891 conference. Engels had always been very bitter about the suppression by Liebknecht of Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Programme. He was even more furious when that programme came to be revised after the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law that no acknowledgement of past mistakes, or of Marx’s critique, was made by the party’s leaders.
He therefore took it upon himself to publish the Critique so that young comrades in Germany and elsewhere could see what Marxism was really supposed to mean in practice. In the process he attacked the tendencies towards opportunism in parts of the socialist press. His fears were well grounded since opportunism later became a dominant tendency inside the party. Even while Engels was still alive, his writing was subject to censorship by the party, when party leaders deleted references that he had written to the violent overthrow of society. [106]
In Engels’ final years he found no respite from the demands for theoretical clarification which had dominated his life. ‘In the last five years of his life Engels had some 135 works of greater or lesser importance to his credit’. He read seven daily papers (three German, two English, one Austrian and one Italian) and 19 weeklies in a variety of languages. [107] His most important work in these years was volume III of Capital which he wrote largely from scratch.
But he was also concerned to keep up with current debates and politics and to try to understand a very rapidly changing world. Sometimes he succeeded admirably. Engels was always very clear, for example, about the role that nationalisation played in the modern capitalist economy. He saw that state control of railways, the postal system and other means of communication was vital to the efficient accumulation of capital by the ruling class. He was scathing about those who equated such state control with some form of socialism. [108]
He also had a very good picture of the course and level of class struggle in a whole number of countries. But he was sometimes less accurate on changed conditions in other matters, particularly where he had taken a certain position in his youth. For example, he still thought that a defensive war by Germany against the Russian Empire might be necessary. In the 1840s Germany was an emerging nation which was fighting for unification and national identity. Russia was regarded as the most reactionary bastion of feudalism in Europe, which did its utmost to foster national divisions and to prevent revolution.
But the balance of forces changed after the Franco-Prussian War, when Germany became the fastest growing industrial and imperial power, gradually rivalling even Britain. Whereas German socialists would earlier have supported war against Russia, by the 1890s this meant siding with their own imperialist ruling class. Yet Engels still clung to the idea that in certain circumstances there could be a justified defensive war, for which German socialists would have to vote war credits. His ‘argument was to be parroted with disastrous effect in 1914 by the same party leaders who censored Engels’ other writings when the German socialists supported their ruling class in the imperialist First World War and, indeed, voted them war credits. [109]
However, the fact that Engels said or wrote things that could later be turned against revolutionary socialists can in no way diminish his record as a revolutionary. His activity spanned a huge period from the Chartists through to the birth of the modern trade unions. He lived through some of the biggest changes in the development of capitalism, nowhere more so than in Germany. He left his imprint on the socialist movement in both Europe and America. Despite his desire to always take a back seat, he was a man of huge talents. He never became a mere commentator, or a fossilised armchair socialist but was always inspired and enthused by the activities of workers and the oppressed. His writings on a range of subjects demonstrate his tremendous knowledge and interest in science, the military and, perhaps most importantly, history. Engels’ historical writings show a real grasp of the subject and a style which makes them widely accessible.
He made his last public speech at the Zurich conference. He continued his activity and writing but became ill at the beginning of 1895, with cancer of the throat. He died on 5 August. Engels was cremated at a funeral attended by the leaders of the German, Austrian and French parties, by the Russian revolutionary Vera Zasulich and the English gas workers’ leader Will Thorne. His ashes were scattered in the sea six miles out from Eastbourne by Eleanor Marx. The attendance at his funeral shows how Engels was able to carry the spirit of the founders of revolutionary socialism and of the 1848 revolutions to the next generation of socialists.

Notes
1. G. Mayer, Frederick Engels (London 1936), p. 208.
2. Ibid., pp. 56–57.
3. Ibid., p. 15.
4. Quoted in F. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England (Moscow 1973), p. 313.
5. Quoted in G. Mayer, op. cit., p. 49.
6. F. Engels, op. cit., p. 60.
7. Ibid., pp. 111–112.
8. Ibid., p. 120.
9. Ibid., p. 167.
10. Ibid., p. 162.
11. Ibid., p. 312.
12. Ibid., p. 261.
13. Ibid., pp. 333–334.
14. Ibid., p. 11.
15. F. Engels, On the History of the Communist League in K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works (London 1968), p. 436.
16. G. Mayer, op. cit., pp. 59–60.
17. F. Mehring, Karl Marx (Sussex 1981), p. 93.
18. Ibid., p. 95.
19. K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence 1844–1851 (London 1982), p. 4.
20. Ibid., p. 20.
21. G. Mayer, op. cit., p. 69.
22. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology (London 1965), pp. 37–38.
23. Ibid., pp. 55–56.
24. Ibid., p. 50.
25. Ibid., p. 60.
26. Ibid., pp. 61–62.
27. Ibid., p. 44.
28. Ibid., pp. 85–86.
29. Ibid., p. 503.
30. K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence, op. cit., p. 82.
31. O.J. Hammen, The Red 48ers (New York 1969), p. 160.
32. F. Engels, Principles of Communism (Peking 1977), p. 3.
33. Ibid., p. 8.
34. K. Marx and F. Engels, Communist Manifesto (Tirana 1981), p. 34.
35. F. Engels, Principles, op. cit., p. 11.
36. K. Marx and F. Engels, Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 25.
37. O.J. Hammen, op. cit., p. 187.
38. K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence. op. cit., p. 54.
39. Ibid., pp. 159–160.
40. Ibid., p. 165.
41. E. Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution (London 1977), p. 22.
42. K. Marx in Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 29 June 1848, reprinted in D. Fernbach (ed.), The Revolutions of 1848 (Harmondsworth 1973), p. 131.
43. Article in Deutsch-Brüsseler Zeitung, 23 January 1848, quoted in G. Mayer, op. cit., p. 88.
44. Article in Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 29 June 1848, reproduced in D. Fernbach, op. cit..
45. Quoted in O.J. Hammen, op. cit., p. 234.
46. Ibid., p. 236.
47. Ibid., p. 250.
48. F. Engels in Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 16 February 1849, reprinted in D. Fernbach, op. cit., p. 239.
49. F. Engels in Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 13 January 1849, reprinted in D. Fernbach, op. cit., pp. 216–217.
50. F. Mehring, op. cit., p. 164.
51. The most detailed criticism from a Marxist point of view comes from R. Rosdolsky in Engels and the Non-historic Peoples: the National Question in the Revolution of 1848, (Glasgow 1986).
52. T. Carver, Frederick Engels: His Life and Thought (Basingstoke 1989), p. 201.
53. K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence, op. cit., p. 211.
54. K. Marx and F. Engels, Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League (March 1850), printed in D. Fernbach, op. cit., p. 330.
55. L. Trotsky, Permanent Revolution (New York 1962).
56. K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence, op. cit., p. 241.
57. Y. Kapp, Eleanor Marx, Vol. 1, p. 112.
58. Quoted in T. Carver, op. cit., p. 155.
59. See G. Mayer, op. cit., pp. 171–174 and T Carver, op. cit., pp. 153–155, for different interpretations of the correspondence.
60. T Carver, op. cit., p. 159.
61. Y. Kapp, op. cit., p. 113.
62. Quoted in ibid., p. 114.
63. T. Carver, op. cit., and The Daughters of Karl Marx (London 1984).
64. K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 39 (Moscow 1983), pp. 434–435.
65. Letter from Marx to Engels in Selected Correspondence (Moscow 1982), p. 114.
66. Ibid., pp. 126–127.
67. Ibid., p. 125.
68. Ibid., p. 140.
69. Ibid., p. 163.
70. Ibid., p. 168.
71. Ibid., p. 180.
72. Ibid., p. 209.
73. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Civil War in France in Selected Works, op. cit., p. 306.
74. Ibid., p. 287.
75. Ibid., p. 285.
76. F. Engels, Introduction, ibid., p. 259.
77. D. Fernbach introduction to K. Marx, The First International and After (London 1974), p. 43.
78. See the article by John Rees in this volume.
79. In K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, op. cit..
80. H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. II (London 1978), pp. 308–309.
81. F. Mehring, Karl Marx (Sussex 1981), p. 5l1.
82. Ibid., p. 512.
83. F. Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific in Selected Works, op. cit., p. 398.
84. Ibid., p. 404.
85. Ibid., p. 410.
86. Ibid., pp. 418–419.
87. Ibid., p. 419.
88. Ibid., p. 422.
89. Letter from K. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge in Hoboken, 19 September 1879, in Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 309.
90. Ibid., p. 340.
91. Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx in Selected Works, op. cit., pp. 429–430.
92. F. Engels, The Origin of the Family Private Property and the State in Selected Works, op. cit., pp. 449–583. For a fuller view of this and other works by Engels on human origins see the chapter by Chris Harman in this volume.
93. Letter from F. Engels to Eduard Bernstein in Zurich, 17 June 1879, in Selected Works, op. cit., p. 301.
94. Letter from F. Engels to Karl Kautsky in Vienna, 12 September 1882, in Selected Works, op. cit., p. 678.
95. A.L. Morton and G. Tate, The British Labour Movement (London 1979), pp. 162–163.
96. H. Draper, op. cit., p. 120.
97. Letter from Engels to J. Adolph Sorge in Hoboken in Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 375.
98. Y. Kapp, Eleanor Marx, Vol. II (New York 1976), pp. 212–213.
99. Quoted in E. Hobsbawm, Labour’s Turning Point (Brighton 1974), p. 72.
100. Engels to Sorge in London, 7 December 1889, in Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 385.
101. Y. Kapp, Vol. II, op. cit., pp. 377–380.
102. A.L. Morton and G. Tate, op. cit., p. 204.
103. Y. Kapp, Vol, II, op. cit., p. 423.
104. Ibid., p. 425.
105. Ibid., p. 549.
106. Engels’ Introduction to Marx’s The Class Struggles in France was abridged for publication in Die Neue Zeit. For details see chapter by John Rees in this volume. For the introduction see K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 27 (London 1990), pp. 506–524.
107. Y. Kapp, op. cit., p. 446.
108. See F. Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific in Selected Works, op. cit., pp. 421–422.
109. C. Harman, Hidden Treasure, in Socialist Review 149 (London, January 1992), pp. 30–31. For a discussion on the argument about socialists and war see G. Mayer, op. cit., pp. 285–295.
 



Perhaps the most persistent and widespread theory around the Women’s Movement today is that of patriarchy. It takes many different forms but the ideas behind it – that male domination or sexism is something which exists not just as a product of capitalism but as something quite separate from the capitalist mode of production and which will endure beyond capitalism – are accepted so widely that a wholesale rejection of the theory is greeted with complete and genuine amazement.
Such theories contain little understanding of how women’s oppression and the nature of the family have changed historically. Nor is there much notion of how widely differing that oppression is from class to class. Instead we are presented with the “eternal truth” that “patriarchy” in one form or another is the cause of women’s oppression.
This is justified by pointing to the existence of women’s oppression in societies other than those of western capitalism – in the class societies that pre-dated capitalism and in the so-called socialist societies of Russia, China, Cuba, Eastern Europe and so on.
The patriarchy theory backs up the notion widely accepted within the women’s movement that there has to be a separation of struggles, socialism and the workers’ movement fight capitalism, the women’s movement fights a separate struggle against patriarchy. The logic of the separation of the struggles now is the separate social development of each sex in the future. This is a logic which many people who espouse the patriarchy theory would not accept. But if patriarchy is indeed something by which all men oppress all women, how can it ever be overcome by women and men acting together?
I want to argue something completely different. I want to reject the concept of patriarchy as at best a muddled term simply mean women’s oppression (in which case it cannot explain this oppression), and at worst a completely idealist notion which has no basis in material reality. I want to show that it is not men who “benefit” from the oppression of women but capital. I want to look at the way in which the family has changed, and how as it has changed women’s conception of themselves has also changed. Hopefully that will demonstrate that women’s continued oppression is not the result of male conspiracy (or an alliance between male workers and the capitalist class), but of the continuation of class society in every part of the world. It follows that I shall argue the “socialist” countries have no more in common with socialism than they have with women’s liberation.
Finally I want to consider the question which is always thrown at socialists. Engels and the early Marxists considered that the proletarian family (unlike the bourgeois family) would disappear since it was not based on property. It clearly has not. Since I do not believe that this is because of patriarchy, I want to look at precisely what does keep the family going.
 
Various forms of the theory
The joy of the patriarchy theory is that it can be all things to all people. It thrives on the “vague feelings” so beloved by sections of the women’s movement, rather than on a materialist analysis. Consequently, even searching for a definition of the term can be difficult, since there are so many to choose from.
Patriarchy can for instance refer to a specific society where the father (the “patriarch”) ruled not only the women in the family but also the younger men. Such a society depended on peasant or artisan production based at least partly in the home. The patriarch’s power derived from his possession of the wealth produced and his ownership of land. But in most cases such an historically specific society is not what is meant by the term. Even the vaguest of patriarchy theorists can see that we do not live in such a peasant society today, and their concern is to deal with present day women’s oppression.
The prevalent versions of the theory take two forms.
First there are those who see patriarchy purely in ideological terms. Juliet Mitchell for instance, sees a strict demarcation: “We are dealing with two autonomous areas, the economic mode of capitalism and the ideological mode of patriarchy.” [1] Sally Alexander and Barbara Taylor put similar arguments in In Defence of Patriarchy. [2]
Such a separation of the economic and ideological has to be queried. There is always a connection between the economic basis of a society and the ideas which arise within that society. The two cannot be seen as autonomous spheres. As Marx long ago pointed out, if you see history as just the result of the dominance of ideas or of a succession of ideas, then you cannot explain anything about the development of society. For why do some ideas dominate? And why do dominating ideas change?
If we reject the religious notion of women’s position as being ordained by a (male chauvinist) god, then we have to look for the material conditions that have led human beings to act in certain ways in relationship to the world and therefore to each other. The origins of women’s oppression have to be sought in these, just as the origins of any other social phenomenon. Then we can understand the way in which the ideas that justify that oppression have arisen and engage in a meaningful fightback.
What Marx wrote in 1845 applies as much to women’s oppression as to anything else in our society:
“We do not set out from what men say, imagine, conceive nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men, and on the basis of their real life process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life process. Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development: but men, developing their material production and their material intercourse alter, along with their real existence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life.” [3]
By contrast, to see patriarchy as an “ideological mode” is to see ideas as sustaining themselves. The struggle for the liberation of women then ceases to be linked to the struggle against material exploitation which can tie in with the mundane concerns of millions of working women and men. Instead it becomes what Alexander and Taylor call for – a cultural struggle to change people’s ideas in isolation from changing society. It is easy to see from this how ideas about the autonomy of the women’s movement develop. If ideas are autonomous from economic exploitation, why not fight against women’s oppression autonomously too?
Some women have recognised a contradiction here, and so have tried to develop, more recently, materialist theories of patriarchy. They argue that men (all men) benefit from women’s oppression, and that they are able to do so because of the fundamental biological differences between the sexes. Here lies the basis for patriarchy. As Roberta Hamilton puts it:
“The feminist analysis has addressed itself to patriarchal ideology, that patriarchal mode which defines the system of male domination and female subjugation in any society. But [the ideology] ... is predicated on biological differences between the sexes, giving it a historical basis of its own.” [4]
Christine Delphy puts forward such a materialist argument from the point of view of radical feminism in The Main Enemy. [5] A similar attempt, but using Marxist categories has been made by Heidi Hartmann. [6] It is this I want to look at at some length. If these sorts of arguments can be shown to be faulty, then the whole attempt to combine “patriarchy theory” and Marxism falls to pieces.
 
Are men the exploiters of women?
Hartmann defines patriarchy as “a set of social relations between men, which have a material base, and which, though hierarchical, establish or create interdependence or solidarity among men that enable them to dominate women.” She further argues that “the material base upon which patriarchy rests lies most fundamentally in men’s control over women’s labour power … [it] does not rest solely on childbearing in the family, but on all the social structures which enable men to control women’s labour”. “Control is maintained by denying women access to necessary economically productive resources and by restricting women’s sexuality.” [7]
In denying women access to these economically productive resources, men form an alliance with capital. Evidence for this is cited in the development of capitalism, and the working class response to its problems in the form of demands for protective legislation and the family wage. The argument goes that both were fought for by male workers in order to benefit them by putting women into the home where they could both service men and be controlled sexually by them. But is this view of events true?
The development of capitalism in Britain had the effect of destroying domestic production and of forcing women and children, as well as men, into the factory system. This had a devastating effect on the reproduction of the working class. Infant mortality reached horrific levels, due (as Marx showed in Capital) to mothers working long hours away from home. Children were left with slightly older children, or minders who often neglected them or kept them quiet with gin or laudanum. When they grew old enough to work machinery they too were pulled into factory production. As Marx put it:
“the mighty substitute for labour and for workers, the machine, was immediately transformed into a means for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling under the direct sway of capital every member of the worker’s family, without distinction of age or sex.” [8]
The conditions described here by Marx, and by Engels in The Condition of the Working Class in England [9], show how horrific the early factory system was. The impact of the new system pulled the old pre-capitalist family apart, as each member of the family became wage labourers. Capitalist exploitation did, however, despite its brutality lay the basis for the men and women of the propertyless class, the proletariat, to be equal. Both had to rely on wage labour, and men had lost their property. That was why Engels made such a distinction between the bourgeois and the proletarian families. The tendency seemed to be for the working class family to cease to exist. In that, Engels was right.
But what he didn’t appreciate was the impact that the factory system had on the very process of reproduction. In Manchester, probably the most advanced centre of factory production, there were 26,125 deaths per 100,000 infants under one year of age [10]; treble the mortality rate in some non-industrial areas. The most far-sighted members of the ruling class could see that the system’s future supply of labour power was being destroyed.
It was out of these conditions that the demand for protective legislation and the family wage came. They fitted in with the changing needs of capitalism but were also in part due to the real concerns of working class men and women for better standards of living, safer pregnancies, healthier children and cleaner homes.
Theorists of patriarchy like Hartmann argued that men allied with capital to exclude women from certain jobs. There were it is true attempts at this. Skilled craft workers used their unions to exclude women from some trades. But it was not only women they excluded. The children of unskilled workers and of immigrant workers could stand as little chance as women of getting apprenticeships in such trades and the exclusion then was of anyone who had not “served their time”. It is stretching the notion of “patriarchy” to absurd limits to make it mean as Hartmann does, “white male supremacism” – and it would be beyond absurdity to make it fit the historical facts by being “white skilled male supremacism” which discriminates not only against all women and all immigrants, but against most “native” workers as well.
What is more, some of the most important areas from which women were excluded were ones where the unions were weak or non-existent and in no position to exclude anyone. The legislative exclusion of women from certain industries was carried on by bourgeois parliaments But was that really the alternative posed? Firstly the working class (male) was hardly the brilliantly organised monolithic class that Hartmann pretends. The majority of workers were not even members of unions. For a long period after the decline of Chartism they hardly fought at all for demands of a generalised nature. They accepted the ideas and framework of capitalism including the dominant ideology about women. One can hardly expect them to have fought for greater socialisation of childcare when they were fighting for little else.
Secondly, there was the problem for working class women of the danger and frequency of childbirth. Today in virtually every advanced capitalist country women are refusing to have many (if any) children. Our access to contraception, however inadequate, is something completely undreamed of until our generation. To those women there was no alternative to a lifetime of frequent and often unwanted pregnancies other than abstention. To working class people of both sexes childbirth was a fact of life, and in such circumstances they usually both wanted the woman to be protected. This explains in a much more satisfactory way than any theory of male conspiracies why it was women who left the factory at marriage and why the family wage was a wage for men.
It is still a fact that these moves dealt a blow to women’s chances of overcoming their subordinate social position. Capitalism had presented the potential for equality, but that equality could not come to fruition within the system. In the interests of the reproduction of labour power, women were isolated and atomised in the home. Their work was seen as serving their husbands and their families. They were denied financial independence. This “ideal” was never the reality for all working class women; many always engaged in wage labour. But the ruling ideas propagated the notion of the family as sacred, projecting the stereotype of the bourgeois family on to the working class as a means of ensuring reproduction. And the stereotype was what working class women and men accepted as the “norm” even if it did not match their own personal reality.
Even today, as the development of capitalism has drawn the majority of women into the labour market, this view of women has not disappeared although it has been severely eroded. Attitudes to women, and of women to themselves, have advanced enormously under the combined impact of control over contraception and entry into the workforce. The way changed material conditions have changed attitudes is itself an argument against seeing oppression as the result of some mystical male ideological hold that never changes.
Hartmann argues that men benefit from women’s labour in the home. She asks: “Who benefits from women’s labour? Surely because the conditions in those industries was seen as harmful to the creation of the next generation of workers (either directly, where pregnant women were working with processes that could harm foetuses or indirectly, where they were working hours that prevented them playing their part in the socialisation of their children). The motive force for exclusion did not lie with “patriarchal men”, but with capital’s view of its own long term needs.
The theory that the family wage – a wage paid to the man sufficient to keep not just himself but his family as well – was a patriarchal/capitalist plot to force women out of work does not stand up.
It was, however, in the interests of capital, once the development of the forces of production permitted the creation of enough value both to cover the costs of reproduction of the whole family and to provide an adequate surplus. Married working class women could then devote themselves to housework and childcare, ensuring that the male workers were more refreshed and more productive, and the next generation of workers were healthier and better socialised. Even so the family wage never covered the whole of the working class, and there continued to be a growing number of married women in paid labour (even if there was a relative dimunition in their numbers compared to men). And the older children had to go to work for the family.
But the family wage did not materially benefit men. It did not cover more than the minimum costs of reproduction: the amount needed to keep the whole family. It certainly did not raise the level of consumption of the male worker, since it was generally considerably less than the joint family income that would have been received had his wife and children also been working. It is true that the male worker received the wage packet with the family wage in it. But all sorts of legal and ideological pressures were applied to encourage it being spent on keeping the whole family and not on his own pleasures.
To see men’s higher wages – the family wage – as beneficial to men is to misunderstand the totality of the wages system. It is to see the form, bot not the content. It is to be confused by the way things appear under capitalism, with the wage earner seeming to be a sovereign consumer possessed of a certain income to be spent freely and not to recognise that income has to be spent on the reproduction of the ability to toil for capital. Under the family wage system, the married woman suffers insofar as she is excluded from direct capitalist production and thus, like the unemployed, is denied even the appearance of being a sovereign consumer. That is the important part of what we mean when we say housewives are oppressed while workers are exploited. But it does not signify that male workers benefit from women’s oppression.
Of course there was an alternative to the demand for the family wage. That would have been to fight for adequate childcare facilities, maternity leave and equal pay. For Hartmann,
“instead of fighting for equal wages for men and women, male workers sought the ‘family wage’, wanting to retain their wives’ services at home. In the absence of patriarchy a unified class might have confronted capitalism, but patriarchal social relations divided the working class, allowing one part (men) to be bought off at the expense of the other (women.)” [11]
But was that really the alternative posed? Firstly the working class (male) was hardly the brilliantly organised monolithic class that Hartmann pretends. The majority of workers were not even members of unikons. For a long period after the decline of Chartism they hardly fought at all for demands of a generalised nature. They accepted the ideas and framework of capitalism including the dominant ideology about women. One can hardly expect them to have fought for greater socialisation of childcare when they were fighting for little else.
Secondly, there was the problem for working women of the danger and frequency of childbirth. Today in virtually every advanced capitalist country women are refusing to have many (if any) children. Our access to contraception, however inadequate, is something completely undreamed of until our generation. To those women there was no alternative to a lifetime of frequent and often unwanted pregnancies other than abstention. To working class people of both sexes childbirth was a fact of life, and in such circumstances they usually both wanted the woman to be protected. This explains in a much more satisfactory way than any theory of male conspiracies why it was women who left the factory at marriage and why the family wage was a wage for men.
It is still a fact that these moves dealt a blow to women’s chances of overcoming their subordinate social position. Capitalism had presented the potential for equality, but that equality could not come to fruition within the system. In the interests of the reproduction of labour power, women were isolated and atomised in the home. Their work was seen as serving their husbands and their families. They were denied financial independence. This “ideal” was never the reality for all working class women; many also engaged in wage labour. But the ruling ideas propagated the notion of family as sacred, projecting the stereotype of the bourgeois family on to the working class as a means of ensuring reproduction. And the stereotype was what working class women and men accepted as the “norm2 even if it did not match their own personal reality.
Even today, as the development of capitalism has drawn the majority of women into the labour market, this view of women has not disappeared although it has been severely eroded. Attitudes to women, and of wome to themselves, have advanced enormously under the combined impact of control over contraception and entry into the workforce. The way changed material conditions have changed attitudes is itself an argument against seeing oppression as the result of some mystical male ideological hold that never changes.
Hartman argues that men benefit from women’s labour at home. She asks:
“Who benefits from women’s labour? Surely capitalists, but also surely men, who as husbands and fathers receive personalised services at home. The content and extent of these services may vary by class or ethnic or racial group, but the fact of their receipt does not. Men have a higher standard of living than women in terms of luxury consumption, leisure time and personalised services”. [12]
Now of course it is true that women bear the brunt of childcare and housework in the home. But does it follow from that that men “benefit” from women’s labour? The division of labour is after all a division of labour where men do different work, both in the factory and in the home. But to say that welding is better or worse than housework is to look at both in completely subjective and unmeasurable terms. The same is true of leisure. Men have more rigidly defined leisure which tends to be social (the pub, football) just as they tend to have more rigidly defined working hours. But it cannot be simply said to be more – it is different.
Housework, by definition, is work that is not subject to the tempo imposed by capitalist exploitation in the factory or the office. It does not involve intensive effort for a certain number of hours, followed by a period of recuperation in order to allow application of another fixed spell of intensive effort. Therefore there is no way the amount of labour that goes into it can be measured against the amount of labour that goes into factory work. All that can be said with certainty is that both factory work and housework are debilitating – one leading to occupational diseases (which is why symptoms such as chronic bronchitis are much higher among male workers than among housewives), horrific accidents, acute fatigue and often, an early death; the other to demoralisation, atomisation, insecurity, and a variety of ailments that are normally ignored by doctors. The great disadvantage that housewives suffer is not that they are somehow exploited by men, but that they are atomised and cut off from participation in the collective action that can give the confidence to fight back against the system.
In fact, the problem of “benefits” only really arises where there is a departure from the old stereotype division of labour between the “male worker” and the female “housewife”. As married women are increasingly drawn into the employed labour force, many women find themselves doing fulltime paid labour yet still expected to run the home. They are left with much less time to recoup their labour power than their husbands as they have to combine work and house work. Yet even in these instances it is doubtful if the husbands benefit in more than a marginal way. The most tiring and debilitating aspects of housework are those connected with child care. The great “parasite” on women’s domestic labour is the child. Yet it is not the husband who benefits from the child’s existence, but capital which thereby is guaranteed a future source of surplus value Just because the woman suffers a double burden of both directly producing surplus value in the factory or office and of reproducing future sources of surplus value in the home, it does not follow that the male worker’s single burden is less.
I would argue therefore that not only do men not benefit from women’s work in the family (rather the capitalist system as a whole benefits), but also that it is not true that men and capital are conspiring to stop women having access to economic production.
We live in a period where more women work in most advanced countries than in any other period in history. The jobs they do differ from men, in that sense the sexual division of labour is as alive as ever. And their pay is far from equal. This is because women still (usually) have their working lives interrupted by childbirth (although much less so than a couple of generations ago) and are still expected to play the major part in caring for the children as well as work.
But the structure of women’s jobs has more to do with the period of capitalist development in which they entered the labour force (the expansion of the service sector in particular) than with any male conspiracy. This is particularly clearly shown if you compare the jobs women have with those of immigrants of both sexes. Both are concentrated (with a few exceptions such as foundry workers) in cleaning, transport, catering, light manufacture, food processing, because both entered the workforce at similar times. The job segregation of women has nothing to do with their role in the home. It is sometimes argued that women’s jobs reflect motherhood and housework. But canning peas can in no way be seen as an extension of the sort of things women do in the home. Nor can the jobs of bank tellers, typists, filing clerks, telephonists, cashiers. (In offices, only the privileged elite secretaries play the role of surrogate wife to the (male) managers – the mass of clerical workers certainly do not.)
Neither has the present recession had the effect of driving women wholesale out of the workforce. Hartmann claims that
“It is symptomatic of male dominance that our unemployment was never considered a crisis. In … the 1930s, the vast unemployment was partially dealt with by excluding women from all kinds of jobs – one wage job per family, and that job was the man’s.” [13]
This is simply wrong. A study of US labour in the period 1930–40 shows that more women entered wage labour in that decade than in any other in American history. [14] This was despite the rhetoric of some men including trade union bureaucrats like Samuel Gompers, and was a reflection of the impact of the crisis. Similarly in Germany in the great slump, although all the parties (except the Communists) were for married women giving up their jobs, the female proportion of the total workforce rose between 1928 and 1932 from 35.3% to 37.3% – and this was due to increased working by married women. [15] As men were thrown out of the traditional industries, women were forced onto the labour market at whatever price.
A similar tendency can be seen today. Of course this doesn’t mean that capital has become pro-women and anti-men. But what it does mean is that capital will use the ideology of women’s place being in the home to enforce low wages, poor union organisation and inferior conditions. The question the theorists of patriarchy have to answer is this – if capital and men are indeed in alliance why are women not being thrown out of work and replaced by unemployed miners, steelworkers and dockers?
 
Is the family unchanging?
The common contention to all theories of patriarchy is that male domination has remained the same, regardless of other changes in society. Thus patriarchy endures and the struggle against it is something apart from the struggle against capitalism. In the biological theories, the problem is reduced to that of the differences of men from women. Logically the solution is the eradication or removal of these creatures. These arguments are fairly easy to dismiss and have little influence in Britain at any rate.
More influential are the sorts of arguments put across by people like Hartmann, who see capitalism and patriarchy as two different forces that ally against women. She tells us that “Marxists… underestimated the strength of pre-existing patriarchal social forces with which fledgling capital had to contend and the need for capital to adjust to these forces”. [16] But this assumes that the old pre¬capitalist family passed intact into capitalism, without changing. And as such it is part of her more general argument that within class society there are two forms of production – labour and the family. One involves a mode of production, the other a mode of reproduction. She justifies this claim with a quote from Engels’ first preface to The Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State [17]:
“The determining factor in history is … the production and reproduction of immediate life … on the one side, the production of the means of existence, of food clothing and shelter and the tools necessary for that production on the other side the production of human beings themselves, the propagation of the species. The social organisation under which people of a particular historical epoch live is determined by both kinds of production.”
She sees the two “modes” as equally important (criticising Marxists for referring to economic production as the mode) and she argues that “there appears to be no necessary connection between changes in the one aspect of production and changes in the other.” [18] In other words each “mode” of production can change independently of the other. Capitalism can be abolished while patriarchy remains intact.
Marxists have always argued something quite different from this. Engels, in his preface to Origins of the Family, goes on to say that as class society develops it is less and less the case that the two modes co-exist and that what arises is “a society in which family relations are entirely subordinated to property relations.” [19] As capitalism develops as a world system, a totality, it envelops and changes all pre-capitalist structures, including the family.
The nature of the family is transformed. It could hardly be otherwise. It could not have survived the transition from feudalism to capitalism without changing fundamentally. For this transition was not something peaceful but a revolutionary upheaval in people’s lives. It meant the destruction of the old ways of life, of the old forms of domestic production, of the situation where women were dependent on the man in the family for their livelihood, and its replacement by generalised wage labour. Of course the family endures through history in the sense that the reproduction of life continues. The biological process remains the same. But the social relations of production change completely. Each new form of family is recreated by the ruling class to serve its own needs. And the new family created by capitalism cannot exist independently of the capitalist mode of production.
To suggest otherwise is to deny that material conditions can change ideas or structures of society. Sheila Rowbotham makes the same mistake when she argues that the capitalist family contains elements of feudal forms of production and so is a “mode within a mode”. [20] Yet vestiges of pre-capitalist society that endure within capitalism do not remain at all the same as previously. The monarchy is a remnant of feudal society but has been so totally transformed by capitalism that it bears really little relation to its previous role. So with the family. It may look the same (although even that is dubious) but its role and functions, its foundations have been transformed by capital. Reproduction through the family is not a separate mode, but part of the superstructure of capitalism. Abolition of the capitalist system – a revolutionary overthrow of society – means that the capitalist system of reproduction, the family, cannot survive intact.
Hartmann claims that “a society could undergo transition from capitalism to socialism for example, and remain patriarchal”. [21] But it couldn’t. For with the abolition of class society, the socialisation of childcare and housework would mean that the material base of the capitalist family would be destroyed. That isn’t to say that there will be no problems the day after the revolution. The problems facing the Russian working class when they did try to do these things were immense. Revolution and civil war had a massive impact on the lives of men and women. Ultimately the revolution was lost through the failure of the working class in the advanced capitalist countries to follow the Russian lead. That in its turn led to severe setbacks to the position of women. But in the early years they saw the glimmers of opportunity of equal work, socialised housework and a much freer sexuality which was made possible by the revolutionary overthrow of the old society.
The fact that women’s oppression manifestly exists in the so-called socialist countries is not evidence of patriarchy. On the contrary it is evidence of the non-existence of socialism. No wonder that a society based on accumulation is not willing to allow any spending on the socialisation of childcare. Instead the burden on women is as great as in the West. True, nurseries are often said to be widely available, but the most widespread form of childcare in Russia is the grandmother, or child-minder, which of course requires no capital investment on the part of the capitalist class – a familiar story? It is theoretical acceptance of these countries being somehow better than Western capitalism that leads to acceptance of theories of patriarchy: if women are manifestly unequal there, this must be the fault of men, rather than of the economic system.
The family, the system of reproduction, is not a historical given but changes with the development of the forces of production. Not only that. Within capitalism the family has not remained constant either. [22]
The pre-capitalist family was destroyed by the rise of capitalist relations of production which created a class of propertyless free wage labourers. This in turn created at least the potential of the equalisation of relations between men and women. This is what Engels pointed to in his controversial writings on the subject. In early capitalism, before the predominance of the factory system, the outworking system meant that both sexes could act as joint producers. It would be wrong to idealise this period as it clearly wasn’t a golden age in any sense but it did give women a relative freedom from the previous degrees of sexual and economic control by men. But the rise of the factory system meant not just that the individual wage labourer no longer controlled his or her work, but that the whole system of reproduction of the working class was put into jeopardy, as was so clearly demonstrated by Marx and Engels. [23]
Hence the improvement in living standards, protective legislation and the family wage. These were in the interests of capital, but it is also true that the working class of both sexes welcomed the move away from the factories by women.
Since the second world war the family has changed drastically yet again. Women’s increased role in the workforce, coupled with greater ability to control our bodies (contraception, legal abortion), has developed a whole new number of attitudes. Marriage is not on the decline, but the number of divorces is increasing dramatically. Women and men are not rejecting the institution of marriage, but no longer feel it has to be for life. Control over reproduction and a degree of economic independence for women means more than one partner (or none at all – witness the growth of single parent families) becomes an option. [24]
Childbirth rates in virtually every advanced capitalist country (including Eastern Europe) have dropped dramatically, an indication that where women have a choice, it is not to spend their lives in childbirth. Migration is also a feature of late capitalism. As old industries decline, workers within the advanced capitalisms are forced to leave their families to seek work. As certain industries expand, workers from Southern Europe and Asia are brought to the industrial heartlands to fill the demand for cheap, pliable labour. Such movement has huge effects on traditional ideas, including ideas of the family. Yet the family remains a stifling, stultifying place where attitudes and roles are taught and learned, where prejudices and values are transmitted through the generations. It changes to fit the needs of capitalism but doesn’t disappear. It will take an upheaval outside the family to begin to achieve that.
 
What keeps the family going?
So what keeps the family going today? If we don’t accept that it is the material interest of men, then what is it? Its existence depends upon two fundamental factors, although there are many subsidiary things involved as well.
First we have to look at the economic interests of capital in maintaining the family. The role the family plays in reproducing the existing workforce and the next generation of workers has been amply documented. [25] The existence of the family wage (even if today it barely covers the reproduction of the family and needs to be supplemented by state benefits and by women’s mainly part time work) and unpaid labour in the home allow the costs of reproduction to be borne very cheaply.
If the system were capable of sustained economic expansion over many decades, then, hypothetically, the economic functions of the family could be replaced by other mechanisms. As Irene Bruegel has demonstrated conclusively, it would be possible for the system to increase total surplus value if most (if not all) housework and child care were carried out by capitalistically organised paid labour, ‘freeing’ all women to produce value and surplus value for capital. [26] But to reorganise reproduction in this way would involve massive expenditure on investment in new childcare facilities and probably a complete restructuring of the housing stock. This is not something which is going to be undertaken in the present crisis ridden phase of the system – especially since the reserve army of the unemployed is amply large enough for the system’s likely labour needs.
And so women are left with the responsibility for childbirth and childcare. This above explains why the family and women’s oppression continue. Women’s roles as mothers and childrearers structure their whole lives. Part-time working is a product of their role as mothers. Unequal and generally low pay is a product of them not being considered as breadwinners. From the beginning of their lives in capitalist society, the assumption is that they are going to be something different from men. Their pinnacle of achievement is presented as motherhood and marriage.
Theoretically there is no reason why women should care for children and perform the bulk of the housework, just because they give birth to children. But in a world of privatised reproduction, of a rigid sexual division of labour, where jobs are not paid at the same rate as men’s, for most families there is really no alternative. It ‘makes sense’ for the woman to be the one to stay at home, and so the circle continues.
Talk of sharing housework, of men taking on the role of ‘housewife’ in such a world are only possible for a tiny minority of people where the woman has a profession or skill which enables her to earn as much or more than the man. Even then the ideas of a society which is based on women’s inequality are difficult to combat. For the mass of workers such role sharing is pure utopianism.
The material significance of the family for capitalism is reinforced by ideological considerations. I don’t mean by this that capitalists are male chauvinists who want to keep women inferior to men (although they usually are). Rather, the family provides some of the ideological cement that holds the system together.
At every stage in its development the system has had to establish structures that bind those that it exploits to it. These continue to exist at later stages in its development when its own economic dynamic demands new structures. The family is integrated into a complex network of such structures. These take advantage of the way housewives, isolated in the home and cut off from the wider collectivities that form around industrial production, are more susceptible to unchanging ideas about ‘one’s place in society’; dependent upon their husbands for a livelihood they can be persuaded that any sort of social change is a threat to their family and their security. Or, again, these structures rely on the way the male worker, having to worry about the security of his wife and children as well as himself personally, is likely to think twice before getting involved in a strike, occupation or insurrection. The slogan of ‘defence of the family’ becomes a slogan for mobilising working people in defence of the status quo. So even when capitalism no longer directly needs some element in the structures associated with the family in the past (for instance, it no longer needs anti-abortion legislation now that it does not look to an army many millions strong to defend itself against its rivals) it only abandons that element under enormous pressure. For it cannot afford to damage structures, that however marginal to its central economic interests, help bind workers to present day society.
Again, hypothetically, given unlimited economic expansion for a long period of time, the system could develop new ideological structures to replace those identified with preservation of the present family. But that is not the condition in which the system finds itself. Today it clings to any means of support it can find – which is why in Southern Italy or Northern Ireland it has not been able to dispense with archaic structures like the Mafia or the Orange Order. It is even less likely to contemplate abandoning a structure, like the family, which continues to provide it with certain economic services.
The Marxist theory of the family tries to explain women’s continued oppression in the context of women’s role as childbearer and rearer. Hartmann claims that Marxism is ‘sex-blind’; in other words can explain why people are in certain places but cannot explain why these people are women. Yet the theory does precisely that. It locates women’s oppression historically, or locates its continued existence in the individual responsibility for reproduction, which in turn structures the whole of women’s lives. It also puts a solution to that problem in terms of a socialism which would begin to break down both the material conditions which create women’s oppression, and the ideas which have arisen from them – ideas with which we are so familiar, about the family and childcare being natural, women in the home being natural. It can do so by switching responsibility for childcare from the individual to society as a whole. That on its own would open up a new world for millions of women and allow us to behave as equals in a new society.
 
Conclusion
Theories of patriarchy are not in fact theories of women’s liberation. Instead of starting with an assessment of the material position of women in capitalist society, they start with crude biological assessments of the positions of men and women. They point no way forward for women’s liberation. Why then have they become so popular? Here we have to look very briefly at how the women’s movement has developed since the late sixties.
The women’s movement started in the late sixties as the result of women’s changing role in society. Women’s entry into the workforce, and increased control over contraception, meant that women had new ideas about their role, their careers, their aspirations. Such ideas were fed upon and developed by a massive expansion of higher education, which, although it discriminated against women in many areas, meant that for the first time women were able to enter relatively well paid, professional jobs with at least nominally equal pay. For most women this was a huge advance on the lives of their mothers and grandmothers.
But old ideas about women lagged behind reality. True, ideas about sex and sexuality changed, but the old view of woman as wife and mother still persisted. All sorts of legal anomalies meant that women were often treated as little better than children when it came to buying goods on hire purchase or obtaining mortgages. Advertising still portrayed an idealised view of women in the home which bore little contact with reality.
It was out of the conflict between this economic and social reality and the old ideals that ideas of women’s liberation sprang. Women somehow felt that they were as good as any man and the reality of their lives was that they were indeed usually doing more than most men, being burdened in the home as well.
In the early years of the women’s movement, the feeling was that everything not only could change but was changing. The aftermath of 1968 left a large radicalised layer open to the ideas of the women’s movement. Many of the ideas put forward by women inside the women’s movement (overwhelmingly the educated professionals) struck a chord with working class women. Changes in consciousness are difficult to measure, but a quick glance at the mass circulation women’s magazines Woman and Woman’s Own over the last fifteen years will show the extent to which sex, unemployment, tampons and many other social issues are dealt with alongside the usual features on film stars and the royal family. There was always a huge gap between the women’s movement and working class women, and little contact between the two but at least the women’s movement talked about organising in the working class.
Today things are rather different. The lack of general economic struggles of the last five years and the lack of political confidence within the working class has resulted in widespread demoralisation among sections of those radicalised in the 60s and early 70s. The women’s movement appears to have suffered this particularly acutely. Now the pages of Spare Rib are not where you will find out about the latest strikes involving women, but rather where you can reflect on whether celibacy is your personal answer to the problem of sleeping with men. The latest abortion campaign against Corrie would never have sustained itself had it not been for socialist organisations and the (often male) trade union movement. An occupation by 200 women at Lee Jeans has been largely ignored by the women’s movement.
The feeling is that nothing can be done, so all we can do is sort out our own ideas. Consequently, arguments about changing the whole of society are replaced by exhortations to change our own lifestyles. Instead of activity we are confronted with an abstract moralism which demands that the small number of men (and women) who accept the ideas of women’s liberation purge themselves of ‘deviations’ as a substitute for changing society. The logic is that if we change the attitudes of men we can change the world – as though it were men, not capitalism, which is the problem. It is from these ideas that the theory of patriarchy has developed and which now in turn reinforces these ideas.
As I have said it in no way points us forward to how we liberate ourselves. Instead it demands theoretical correctness from the few while accepting inaction by the many. Some women today are taking the theory to its conclusion and arguing for separate lifestyles within capitalism – separate homes, single sex schools, separate social lives. Not only do these ‘solutions’ fail to see the connection between material being and consciousness, and how that consciousness changes, but they are also profoundly elitist. They assume a certain level of income, which means a certain level of housing and a certain choice about where one lives, sends ones children to school and so on. For most women the choice simply isn’t there. When Hartmann talks about the divorce rate evening up between the classes, she doesn’t consider how miserable life was for women and men of the working classes who for generations couldn’t divorce. Even today where divorce is relatively simple to obtain, there must be hundreds of thousands of couples who stay together out of material constraint (they can’t afford two mortgages, the council will not rehouse if one leaves the marital home, there is virtually no cheap private accommodation). For the mass of the working class, such solutions are simply Utopian and we should treat them as such.
We should not just reject the theory of patriarchy and all the idealist talk which accompanies it, we have to assert that as Marxists we have a theory of women’s liberation which can be achieved and which can lead to the liberation of the whole of humanity from capitalist exploitation and alienation. To do so we have to reject the notion underlying the theories of patriarchy, of the little woman analysis, which as Joan Smith describes, pictures ‘women at the hearth, men on the battlefield’. [27] This is a picture which was never really true of whole sections of the working class, and in fact was based much more on the family of ‘the banker, the middle manager, the industrialist and their clerks and skilled workers’ than it was on the family of ‘the casual labourer, the handyman and the immigrant worker’. [28]
If it wasn’t true then, today it is a manifestly absurd view of women. The typical woman today works in waged labour for the majority of her adult life. Typically she leaves work for the period until her children attend school and then goes back to fulltime work. Even 20% of women with children under 5 work usually part time. The full time housewife is a myth when 40% of the workforce are women and where women are entering work at a faster rate than men. Women are also joining trade unions at a much faster rate than men.
The myth has a number of advantages for capital. It enables them to foist poor wages, conditions and hours on women. It makes women feel that their job is not their ‘real’ work which makes them less likely to organise at work, and more likely to acquiesce to unemployment. It promotes the double burden of waged and housework for women. But it is nonetheless, a myth.
When we look at women as workers and not as isolated housewives, our response becomes different. We see that women as part of the class organised in workplaces can build the cohesion and confidence to challenge and eventually overthrow capitalism. That has to be our aim, and in the process of building a revolutionary party which can lead the class to overthrow capitalism we have to have a picture of the class which contains women as an integral part of the workforce. But, it is usually argued, this doesn’t solve the problem that men are sexist even in the party and even after the revolution. No one could deny this was true. But our solution to it depends on whether we see fighting sexism as something separate from class struggle, or as an integral part of it. If it is the latter than our strategy cannot be for an autonomous movement separate from the party. We have to make the party and the socialist revolution reflect women’s aspirations and demands as part of the demands of the class. That means recognising the reality of women’s oppression, which often makes it harder for women to get involved at all levels of political life, and which puts on them the double burden of childcare and housework, as well as waged work.
To try to overcome this disadvantage which all women suffer, we need special mechanisms, a women’s paper, meetings, attempts to get women party members to take an active and leading part in all aspects of our work. All these recognise the real problems that women have, and also attempt to overcome them in a material way, not by exhortation. What is clear is that concessions to any theory of patriarchy, or to the idea that men are the enemy, are not only inoperable but point to the wrong problem, to the manifestations of society rather than to its root. Socialist revolution, the abolition of class society, alone provides an answer to how we win our liberation.

Notes
1. Juliet Mitchell, Psychoanalysis and Feminism, London 1975.
2. Sally Alexander and Barbara Taylor, In Defence of Patriarchy, New Statesman, January 1980.
3. German Ideology, Moscow 1964, p. 35.
4. Roberta Hamilton, The Liberation of Women, London 1978, p. 1.
5. Christine Delphy, The Main Enemy, WRRC 1977.
6. Heidi Hartmann, The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism, Capital and Class, no. 8, Summer 1979.
7. Ibid.
8. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, London 1976, p. 517.
9. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England, Moscow 1973.
10. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, London 1976, p. 521.
11. Hartmann, op. cit.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. Ruth Milkman, Women’s work and economic crisis: some lessons of the Great Depression, Review of Radical Political Economy, 1976.
15. Helen Brak in Bessel and Feuchtwanger, Social Change and Political Development in Weimar Germany, London 1981, pp. 162–3.
16. Hartmann, op. cit.
17. Engels, The Origins of the Family, Moscow n.d.
18. Hartmann, op. cit.
19. Engels, op. cit., This is a point ignored by Hartmann. It was also ignored by Joan Smith when she tried to develop an analysis based upon the two ‘modes’ (IS [old series] 100).
20. Sheila Rowbotham, Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, London 1973.
21. Hartmann, op. cit.
22. The arguments I have presented owe a great deal to the excellent article by Johanna Brenner Women’s Self-Organisation, A Marxist Justification, Against the Current, New York, Fall 1980.
23. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, London 1976. Engels, Conditions of the Working Class, op. cit.
24. Hartmann dismisses the increased divorce rate as simply an evening up between classes. Even if that were true why should it happen now? Because for the first time working class women have more chance of doing what upper class women have always been able to do: they have some degree of economic independence – however miserable – and are not tied to an exhausting life of childbirth and fear of pregnancy. (It is interesting to remember that in all the recent abortion campaigns one of our major and most successful arguments has been that working class women are only getting because of the 1967 Act what rich women always had—safe legal abortions.)
25. In particular the discussion in IS (old series) 100, 104 and IS (new series) 1 and 3 between Joan Smith and Irene Bruegel.
26. Irene Bruegel, What Keeps the Family Going?, IS (new series) 1.
27. Joan Smith, Women’s oppression and Male Alienation, IS (new series) 3.
28. Ibid.



The Past is Before Us: Feminism in action since the 1960s
Sheila Rowbotham
Pandora £15.00 hardback
“I SEE the liberation of women as inseparable from the creation of a society which is not structured on oppression and competition, though this is not to trust in the ideal future to deliver freedom without autonomous struggle in the here and now. I am a socialist feminist – although I do not conceive of socialism as a fixed set of dogma but as a process of political creating formed from the movement of people against inequality, injustice and humiliation.”
A major new book by one of the founders of the women’s movement in Britain is something of an event, especially when its subject matter is the history of the movement itself. Certainly this is Sheila Rowbotham’s most important work since Beyond the Fragments came out ten years ago.
Whereas that book was greeted by the Guardian woman’s page as an exciting new project, The Past is Before Us has so far caused very little stir. Where it has been reviewed, the reaction of other feminists has often been lukewarm.
The reason lies in part in the sort of political message Sheila Rowbotham puts across. The introduction, which contains the passage quoted above, states clearly her commitment to a socialist feminism which is concerned with more than “one form of subordination.”
This is in itself remarkable. The trajectory of those feminists who once called themselves socialist has largely been to the right in recent years. They have drifted towards embracing patriarchy theory, adopting the idea that “male power” – backed by male violence – is the key mechanism of women’s oppression.
The crisis of the women’s movement from the late seventies onwards had a particularly severe effect on socialist feminists. They felt defensive in the face of more aggressively separatist feminists. And because their major critique of socialism seemed very often to comprise of attacks on left groups and their male domination, they felt disarmed when it came to any strategy for women’s liberation.
An editorial in Feminist Review written by socialist feminists in 1982 complained that:
“Socialist feminists as a group have initiated relatively little political activity and have been at the forefront of few campaigns although individual socialist feminists have been politically active. The November 1980 socialist feminist conference on imperialism, although important, also had the effect of minimising women’s struggles in this country and of discouraging organisation.”
Faced with decline and inertia, socialist feminists joined the Labour Party. The political development represented a move away from women fighting directly for their own liberation. Beyond the Fragments was, whatever the intentions of its authors, a useful recruiting agent for the Labour Party.
However, the experience of ten years of Thatcherism has had a contradictory effect. Although many on the left have accepted the ideas of new realism, abandoning any real hope of change through struggle, there has also been resistance to this development.
The Past is Before Us represents part of that resistance. The book is a statement of continuing commitment to socialist feminism.
What polemic there is in the book is aimed at those who want to pull the original aims of the women’s movement towards radical feminism or at the theorists of separation. Sheila Rowbotham is critical of theories of the family which explain oppression in terms of violence, domination or submission. She regrets developments in the women’s movement which have led to increased acceptance of such ideas.
“An attempt to understand the ambiguity in relations between men and women, and to explore the economic, social and psychological factors that contributed to dependence and control in the family, was displaced by a much starker portrayal which symbolically polarized relations between men and women. Instead of actual relationships between human beings, inherently evil and inherently good forces confronted each other. Implicitly, violence in the family was presented as the reality behind the false ideal.”
Again, she attacks the “common-sense” of many feminists on the question of the “male trade unions”. Bea Campbell’s critique of the unions shows
“a peculiar passion ... reserved for a polemic against a particular economistic image of class militancy which is continually equated with male domination. This feature is shared by much feminist writing on trade unions from this period. There is an elision here. Certainly there have been historical connections and certainly demands for higher wages cannot solve all social ills. But by the mid-1980s what had begun as a critique was in danger of becoming a frozen stance. A beleaguered and battered labour movement was being depicted as if it was still as strong as it had been in the previous decade.”
These arguments are very important. They put forward an alternative to those dominant even among socialist feminists in recent years, and they at least attempt to link ideas of feminism with those of the working class movement. Sheila Rowbotham’s attacks are mainly reserved for those to die right of her.
Although she mentions and quotes from the publications of many left groups over die past twenty years, she does so in a non-sectarian way and does not attempt to score points against those (Leninist organisations like the SWP, for example) with whom she disagrees.
The Past is Before Us is, therefore, very much in tune with the sorts of arguments put forward by her co-author of Beyond the Fragments, Lynne Segal, in her attack on radical feminism, Is the Future Female? Both reflect the sorts of politics put forward by the Socialist Society and the recent Chesterfield Socialist Conferences. A recent issue of the Socialist Society’s magazine Interlink carried an article by Lynne Segal bemoaning those moving to the right who had used Beyond the Fragments for their own ends.
But the strengths of the book shouldn’t blind us to its weaknesses. It is worth talking about two: one appears to be a question of style but in reality both are questions of politics. The first problem is the way the book is written. It contains a lot of original source material from leaflets and long; forgotten publications, which give some of die flavour of the early women’s movement. The material is grouped around various subjects and themes such as sexual politics, the family, the unions and paid work.
The chapters tend to overwhelm with detail, rather than enlighten. The consciously non-polemical style of the writing adds to this problem. It makes the book feel much less weighty or engaging than, for example, Is the Future Female? or indeed Beyond the Fragments. This style is not accidental, but stems from the idea that one cannot be too certain or dogmatic about political ideas. Its effect is to blunt the ideas which are being put across.
The second and much more fundamental problem is the nature of socialist feminism itself. Sheila Rowbotham’s message is that socialism has been transformed by the advent of feminism in the past twenty years. Yet most feminists’ view of the transformation is one sided. They see feminist influence as a totally positive thing, yet it clearly has had a number of negative effects.
It has, for example, denied that class struggle is the key means of transforming society. It accepts that trade unionism is male dominated and therefore will not help women. Any who doubt that feminist ideas can be used by the right of the Labour movement should look at the relative ease with which they are incorporated by Neil Kinnock or John Edmonds.
Sheila Rowbotham recognises this.
“Nearly two decades on it is incontrovertible that there are many feminist visions of the future we seek. There remain divisions of right and left, and there are differences between women based on class and race, for example.”
But she has no clear idea how the problem can be overcome. The difficulty is that socialist feminism has always attempted to cross organisation based on class with organisation based on gender. Class organisation has been dismissed by most feminists in recent years. But attempts at gender organisation have ended in diversity and division as class differences come to the fore.
Sheila Rowbotham recognises that we can no longer speak of a single women’s movement. This is clearly true in terms of both politics and organisation. What does exist is a form of cultural feminism based on lifestyles and academia rather than activity and struggle.
She also recognises that “women’s liberation has raised questions that range beyond feminist organisations”. What this seems to be arguing for is a new socialist organisation, rather than a new women’s movement.
“The growth of a women’s liberation culture in the widest sense has not, as we have seen, solved the problem of how this social force can change the existing framework of political power.”
Implicit in this is a rejection of much of the (especially recent) history of die women’s movement, in favour of some sort of socialist organisation.
But her view of socialist organisation draws on Utopian socialist and libertarian traditions, which stress pre-figurative forms of organisation, and therefore fit quite well with the idea of separate and autonomous organisation. The problem with these theories however, is that socialism and women’s liberation remain at the level of good ideas. There is no understanding of how they can be achieved. Again the conclusion of the book recognises this:
“It is a new combination of Utopia and strategy that is wanting. If the women’s movement has been hotter on Utopias than strategies, the reverse has been true of modern socialism. It would seem to me an element of exchange might be helpful.”
Yet it is precisely revolutionary organisation, the Leninism which Sheila Rowbotham finds so unappealing, which has been able to combine both a vision of the future and an understanding of the need to organise around immediate issues.
The women’s movement on the other hand, through not understanding the need to organise on the basis of class, lost its ability to organise seriously on the day to day issues. As a consequence it has also lost what inspiration it gave in its early days.
 







With new attacks on abortion rights working their way through parliament the question of women’s liberation is again in the public eye. Here we reproduce a debate on the subject between Sheila Rowbotham, co-author of Beyond the Fragments, and Lindsey German, editor of SWR and author of a new book, Sex, Class and Socialism.






Sheila Rowbotham
I WANT to start by describing some of the social changes which gave rise to the modern women’s liberation movement which developed in the late 1960s.
It’s important to understand the background to new movements to make sense of the form they take today.
There were changes going on in the class structure in Western capitalist countries which affected women. Many of the young women attracted to the women’s movement were neither manual workers nor employers. They were part of a strata educated through the welfare state, whose jobs took them into the greatly expanded clerical, administrative and welfare fields.
When these young women had children, they were thrown into the isolation of die home after being told they were completely equal to their male peers. The sense of being cheated, the anger that comes from an expectation that isn’t realised, is in the early women’s movement writings.
There were also a lot of contradictory ideas about freedom and sexuality around at the time. Although there was evidence about the dangers of the pill, there was an optimism that it could transform relationships.
While aspects of the new sexual freedom were liberatory for young women, the weakening of old paternalistic controls hurled young women into a world that was quite unlike their mothers’. They found themselves stranded in terms of values, neither accepting the old morality nor able to assert their own alternative. This led to a questioning of what became known in die 1960s as permissiveness. The aim was not to introduce a new form of puritanism, but to question the male defined terms of sexual freedom.
For most working class women circumstances were somewhat different. There had been a slow and steady improvement in very basic living conditions, although they were far from ideal. Pay was still low and inequality was marked in terms of different types of jobs and different pay.
Trade union women in the late 1960s were talking about equal rights at work. They were trying to combine paid work with child care. They had different grievances from the young women attracted to women’s liberation. But the ideas of equality were in the air.
Capitalism was offering equality while holding back the actual means for women to live as equals.
The political ideas around in die 1960s had an enormous influence on the emergence of the women’s movement. Probably the most important was the civil rights movement in the US, where the consciousness raising groups were started. A new political language emerged from the struggle of black people in the US. People talked about space in terms of power, about identity and how they were regarded in society. This was not the language and politics of the European Marxist left.
The radicalism of the American student movement contributed concepts like “the personal is political”, and “prefigurative change”.
The borderline between asserting the capacity to change in the here and now and the freezing of alternatives into a Utopia is narrow. But a politics which is incapable of talking about moral responsibility and individual action becomes deterministic and removed. Also a purely oppositional politics gives little sense of how life could be lived differently.
So during the 1970s and 1980s the social movements like feminism have raised important questions for socialists.
Socialism isn’t something fixed on tablets of stone. It is a living historical creation.
Feminists pointed to the inadequacy of only looking at the polarisation between the manual working class and employers. That is an important contradiction in society, but there are other forms of conflict.
Another argument was how should we approach welfare and the state? Marxists had been opposed to coercive aspects of the state but the approach to the welfare state had not been suspicious enough. Marxists had said it was important to get more for workers out of the capitalist state, which was fine, but the women’s movement raised the question of relationships of power.
There is a struggle against unequal power relations even within the benign aspects of the state.
The feminists have also contested the over simple assumption that women’s emancipation is just about going out to work. For there were, and still are, inequalities between men and women within the workforce. Women in segregated positions were not necessarily able to organise and resist.
Within the trade union movement there are also inequalities. People are not able to play an equal part because of forms of discrimination which aren’t just to do with class.
The focus within modern socialism on work neglected the wider problem of how to reorganise everyday life.
The women’s movement has been pushing towards much wider ideas about material circumstances.
These are not simply to do with production or even simply to do with something called the economy, but are a lot broader. They are about the time it takes to take children to a nursery and then get to work, about how a supermarket is designed and located, about the availability of public transport. These material everyday issues haven’t been taken up very well in the revolutionary movement or the Labour Party.
The women’s movement has also raised a whole lot of questions about organisation. Ten years ago Lynne Segal, Hilary Wainwright and I wrote Beyond the Fragments.
We wanted to look at what could be learned from the women’s movement about how to organise differently. We weren’t actually saying – although some people thought we were – that the women’s movement had some ideal alternative to the traditions of Leninism.
What we were saying is that every social experience throws up problems about the relationship of different groups and how their agency can combine. This isn’t a completely new problem. In the 19th century radicals were arguing about whether race had priority over gender in the anti-slavery movement.
We said in Beyond the Fragments that to prioritise class raises problems for the other groups. We wanted a politics which took on all the forms of inequality equally.
We also argued Leninist groups reproduce the inequalities which exist in society, they are not some sort of ideal exempt from relations outside.
Ten years on I think we have to examine not only the problems for socialists raised by the women’s movement but the problems which have been raised within the women’s movement itself by some of the implicit approaches to politics inherited from the new left. The innovations have proved double edged.
For example, the slogan “The personal is political” had a very important effect in raising hidden aspects of equality into politics. It used to be said creches were Utopian concerns. But women insisted that child care was not a personal matter. Unless this need was included within politics you can’t have any sense of equal participation and involvement.
But the slogan created all sorts of problems as people tried to live out feelings about how they ought to be. The politicisation of personal life by an effort of will left psychological casualties.
Class politics based on a subjective sense of identity contains snags. It was important to talk about feelings of identity and differences in oppression. However, it led to fragmentation into smaller and smaller categories of oppression which did not solve the underlying issue. Inequalities arose in the social movements as much as in the Leninist parties.
For example black women pointed out that the priorities of the movement were defined by white middle class feminists, regardless of whether they were socialist feminists or radical feminists.
Another problem which faced the women’s movement in the 1980s arose from its success. The long march through the institutions created women’s studies and feminist publishing.
The hard won institutional niches increased the pressure to concentrate simply on women’s conditions. The focus on gender was structured by the relative ascendancy of these fields as the grass roots movement dwindled and divided.
Moreover, from the late 1970s the working class movement hit difficulties and society became more conservative. The assertion of the interests of a particular group and the focus on gender became much more appealing. It seemed more clear cut than the socialist feminism which argued, “Well, there’s all these different kinds of subordination and oppression and it takes a long time, and there are contradictions.”
If somebody can just say, “Men are rapists”, “Pornography is a form of rape”, then there seems to be a clear enemy.
The cost of separatist clarity was the closing up of discussion around areas which didn’t fit into a simple idea of male/female conflict. Some black women have been particularly critical of these politics, for they face a situation where while conflicts exist between men and women, there is also the need to act together.
Reconciling conflicts between groups and working together has been a painful and destructive struggle for the women’s movement.
There have been two tensions. One has been this pull towards gender, collapsing all other forms of oppression into it.
However, there has also been a contradictory impulse, beyond gender. The peace movement saw groups of women getting involved with an issue which necessarily connects up to other aspects of politics, not simply women’s needs as women.
There was also the eruption in 1984–5 of Women Against Pit Closures which has had a continuing impact on the labour movement because it showed how a strike could be sustained by women organising. The women’s action demonstrated that women’s identities and interests are tied up with their families and communities. An autonomous individual freedom has to be realisable in relation with others.
They raised too the right to control your own community, looking at the way resources are used and allocated. That’s one of the ways that WAPC has linked up with other groups, such as Anti-Apartheid and CND.
I think it is important now for feminists to be aware and critical of the limits in our political assumptions. There have been gains like women’s studies. It is true that gender needs asserting. But this is not all that has to be done. There is still the enormous question of how to change capitalist society. Without such a fundamental transformation only a minority of women will secure improvements.
This means looking outward and recognising that women’s needs and grievances are not static. We need to be continually involved in expanding and redefining feminism because, just like socialism, the women’s movement itself has to change with the movement of women.


Lindsey German
I AGREE with Sheila’s analysis of the early women’s movement. It emerged, as she says, from the social movements of the 1960s and from the objective changes in capitalist society.
By the 1960s, unlike the period before the Second World War there were millions of women working outside the home. An important layer of women went into higher education for the first time. Their aspirations grew, but were in turn frustrated by society.
There were other changes of various sorts, particularly the abortion reform of the late 1960s, the divorce laws and most importantly contraception which gave women an at least limited control over their bodies which wasn’t open to women of previous generations.
Both those factors created the women’s movement of the late 1960s and the early 1970s. Both also colour the movement.
You have the potential for subversion, the anti-capitalist nature of the women’s movement, the fact that it involves very large numbers of socialists and people who want to change the system.
But it’s clear with the benefit of hindsight that there is also the potential for accommodation. We can see the way in which a section of the women’s movement can fit quite nicely within the existing system.
Nonetheless I think it’s important for us to realise that the early women’s movement was heavily influenced by socialist ideas. It was essentially a movement for social change. Women’s liberation and social change were seen as very much part and parcel of the same thing.
However, there was always a tension between the question of class emphasised by socialists and the question of gender.
Although most people in the women’s movement wanted social change, there was never really a clear idea about how this could be achieved.
The movement did have an initial impact which couldn’t be denied by anyone who lived through it. For me as a teenager books like The Female Eunuch had a fantastic impact in terms of very subversive ideas.
But the movement could have that impact without necessarily leading anywhere. By the mid 1970s the first burst of enthusiasm had begun to go. Even as late as 1976 there was still the Trico strike and a number of other equal pay strikes. But by the mid 1970s and even more so by the late 1970s you began to see a decline in the level of strikes and a downturn in the general confidence in the working class movement. There was a crisis of the revolutionary left and therefore also a crisis of the women’s movement.
This took its deepest form in Italy, which had the largest revolutionary left in Europe – with three daily papers and large organisations. But by 1976–7 there was a massive crisis about where the left and the working class was going. There was also a huge revolt by women.
A splintering resulted from the coincidence of this decline of the revolutionary left and the simultaneous growth of feminism. There was an increased level of separatism, a fragmentation of the left and a fragmentation of the women’s movement.
In Britain by the late 1970s you had the emergence inside the women’s movement of demands which were central in shifting it to the right. The first was the way in which male violence was seen increasingly as the major reason for women’s oppression.
Essentially the movement’s early demands were about equal pay, organisation, nurseries and so on. By the late 1970s there was a shift towards blaming individual men for the problems of women’s oppression and therefore the increased importance given to violence against women.
The second area was the development of the theory of patriarchy. This theory has been going as long as people have been writing about women’s oppression. But it was developed to become all embracing. It became accepted that women’s oppression couldn’t be explained in terms of class society.
The acceptance of these ideas represented a defeat for socialist feminism. Socialist, collective and class ideas retreated and became isolated in terms of the women’s movement as a whole.
The women’s movement became increasingly anti-men. Heidi Hartmann wrote in the late 1970s about male workers being in an alliance with capitalism in order to exclude women from certain jobs.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s Bea Campbell popularised the idea that somehow male trade unions are the oppressors, no longer just individual men. In other words the people who most feminists had been working with just a few years before now became the key problem. This was just at the time of Thatcher’s election and the attack on the trade unions.
So, by the late 1970s and early 1980s the women’s movement was on the retreat in all sorts of ways.
Although the authors of Beyond the Fragments never intended to encourage people to join the Labour Party, that is what the book actually did. It was attempting to find new ways of organising, but essentially it was concerned with attacking Leninist organisation, and people saw this as a justification for seeing the Labour Party as a vehicle for change.
The move into the Labour Party meant socialist feminism was increasingly defined in terms of the Labour Party and reformism.
Today I would identify three strands of feminism. The first is bourgeois feminism, which has always been around, even in the 1960s with the National Organisation of Women in the US and so on.
Particularly in the US, there are many business women who in a sense are in quite liberated positions where they can compete on equal terms with men and have no notion of social change at all. For example, Dianne Feinstein in San Francisco opposed maternity leave because she thought it gave women an unfair advantage on the labour market!
Even in Britain, where the process has developed less, something like a fifth of the banking investment managers in the City of London today are women. Airlines are apparently worried that their business classes aren’t oriented enough towards women.
This might help a few individual women, but is irrelevant to most women who are still very much at the bottom of the pile.
There is also the continuation of separatist feminism, which has gone increasingly in cultural directions. The increased readership of books containing these ideas doesn’t mobilise any particular audience, but does succeed in popularising the theories about rape and pornography.
The third strand is socialist feminism, which is what we’re most concerned with. The problem today is that the majority of people who define themselves as socialist feminists don’t really think of socialism in the same sense as Sheila or I.
They are not really interested in the self-activity of the working class or indeed of groups of the oppressed. They are much more interested in achieving reform through the Labour Party, through women’s committees or by getting a few more women MPs than in real change from below.
Sheila and others with similar ideas are very much a minority even among socialist feminists.
Therefore, in talking about a strategy for women’s liberation, we need to be clear about the limitations of not just the women’s movement, but also of socialist feminism.
Socialism has always had things to say about the personal aspects of people’s lives. Marx talked in Capital about child labour in the factories, infant mortality, how people live and the environment. Engels talked about housing and the adulteration of food in The Condition of the Working Class in England.
Certainly the initial impact of women’s liberation on socialism was big. But we also have to say that there’s a negative side.
A lot of feminist ideas actually pull away from socialism. The denial of class struggle as the key to changing society is widespread among many socialist feminists.
The idea that trade unionism is male dominated, that it has nothing to offer women – regardless of the fact that women are joining trade unions in all sorts of industries – is also very dominant among feminists.
Feminist ideas can blur the differences between right and left, certainly in the Labour Party. A few years ago people like Ann Pettifor were saying the key questions were not those between left and right – such as the witch hunt of the Militant which was dismissed as macho politics – but those that concerned gender.
Feminism hasn’t always had a very positive impact on socialism. Nor has it a great deal to contribute organisationally.
Take the question of autonomous organisation. Most people in the women’s movement say the key thing is that women have the right to organise separately.
The basis of autonomism is that all women have something in common. I agree that all women are oppressed, but the way you are oppressed is very different depending on which class you come from.
If you are rich enough to avoid suffering in the same way as the exploited classes, then you can find all sorts of ways of mediating your oppression.
The cross class agenda of autonomous organisation doesn’t really take this into account.
It’s no accident that there is no longer one women’s movement. Fragmentation has resulted from being unable to square the contradictions in the politics, to say there is one thing we believe in and are going to fight for.
The diversity that now exists can be very harmful when it comes to real struggle over things like abortion rights.
The fight for women’s liberation needs socialist organisation. We need to start from a recognition of what causes oppression – that it is not patriarchy, but something inseparable from class society.
The reproduction of labour power is the crucial reason for the existence of the family. It is a product of class society and of capitalism in particular. Therefore it’s only with the overthrow of class society that you can talk about ending that oppression.
Sheila talked about the need for a combination of Utopia and strategy and to be able to link the two: a vision of the future and an idea of how we get there.
I think that’s absolutely right. But without wanting to gloss over the failings and inadequacies of revolutionary organisations, the record of the last ten to 20 years shows it is only a revolutionary organisation which has really been able to combine the vision of the future and the understanding of how we need to organise now on the immediate issues.
It’s a Leninist revolutionary organisation, rooted in the working class, which holds the key to women’s liberation.
Far from women workers being excluded from that kind of organisation or being on the outside of the working class there are now about nine million women working in this country. They are increasingly central to key areas of work.
More of these women workers will begin to organise in unions and begin to fight for their own liberation. But unless there is a revolutionary organisation which is capable of relating to and leading those struggles then I believe women’s liberation will remain Utopian, instead of the absolute necessity which it has to be.
 

