 Lucero: Bolivian Agrarian Reform - 1 (December 1959)





Adolfo Gilly  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Héctor Lucero
Bolivian Agrarian Reform
Its Situation and Tasks After Six Years
(December 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 9, Spring 1960, pp. 9–19.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


I
The Situation Of Agriculture
Some Figures
Agriculture is the main activity of the population of Bolivia, Its peasants comprise 2,125,000 persons, 63% of the total population. [1] (The 1950 census gives the figure of 1,703,371, estimated as being 63% of the total, so that the proportion practically does not vary, if it is taken into account that the forest-dwelling part of the population is not included in this figure. Of all these persons, the census estimates that only 100,000 speak Spanish.)
Agriculture is also the activity that contributes the highest quota to the national product in goods and services: in the 1950-55 period, 29% came from this sector, while mining and petroleum contributed only 25%.
According to the 1950 census, agrarian property in Bolivia comprised 80.8 million acres. Of these lands, 1,616,000 acres are under cultivation (although the CEPAL estimates the figure as considerably less, only about 988,400 acres). The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, for its part, estimates the total agricultural area as 53,299,000 acres (51,891,000 of natural pastures and 1,408,000 of tilled land), and the forest area as 116,137,000 acres, thus leaving 104,523,000 acres of non-cultivatable land.
By a comparison of these figures, the conclusion is reached that the proportion of agricultural land under cultivation is very small, since it represents only between 2% and 3% of the total rural area. According to the 1950 census, 90% of this cultivated land is located on the Altiplano [the high plateau south of La Paz] and in the valleys, whereas the eastern plains (which comprise two-thirds of Bolivian territory) have only 10%.
In relation with the country’s total population, this gives a cultivated area of only two-fifths of an acre per person, which is a very low figure, as is proved by a comparison with the other countries of Latin America: in 1955, Bolivia had 0.40 tilled acre per inhabitant; Mexico, 1.88; Chile, 1.61; Ecuador, 1.11; Brazil, 0.86.
If only the active agricultural population is considered, this figure rises to 1.66 acre per active person, which is only a very slight extension; in any case it is a question of highly eroded and impoverished land.
This quantity is not very far from that of China, where the estimate is of 2.42 acres per family. [2]
The amount of irrigated land is also very small. In reality, there exist only two irrigation dams: La Angostura, in Cochabamba, which irrigates some 24,700 acres; and Tacagua, in Oruro, some 12,800. Despite the great natural possibilities for irrigation works, the rest of agriculture – practically all of it – is dependent on meteorological factors that are irregular and often unfavorable. Work on the irrigation project of Villamontes, in Santa Cruz, has been stopped, and there is a risk that the part already built (more or less half) will be destroyed and lost. Irrigation is one of the most crying needs of Bolivian agriculture.
A comparison of the 1955 figures on agricultural production with the population in this sector gives a value per active person of $119, or £42. This figure is equal to one-fourth of the gross product per active person in the rest of the national economy, and also to about one-fourth of the income per active person in agriculture in Latin America as a whole ($393, or £140) – which gives an idea of the very low level of existing productivity. If the total agricultural population is taken into account, the gross product scarcely reaches $40, or £14, per person (whereas it is $180, or £64, for the same year, in non-agricultural activities).
This explains why, with so high a proportion of agricultural population, Bolivia’s imports of foodstuffs and farm- and ranch-produced raw materials reached 38.5% of its total imports, representing the most serious drain on the country’s foreign exchange. [3]
After the promulgation of the decree of agrarian reform in August 1953, production fell approximately 15% (1954 harvest compared to that of 1950). This reduction was caused, among other reasons, by a considerable reduction of the tilled area, especially in potatoes, Indian corn, and wheat. The agitation and uncertainty about the agrarian reform had a bearing on this reduction.
But at the same time it is important to note that a remarkable increase in yield per acre in Indian corn and potatoes was recorded, which shows how the peasant, even without indispensable aid for improving his husbandry, raises the yield of his labor when he is tilling his own land and not that of the landlord. The figures are as follows:



Harvested Area, Production, and Yields of Main Agricultural Products




 


 


1950


 


1954


 


1955




Products


Area
(a)


Production
(b)


Yield
(c)


Area
(a)


Production
(b)


Yield
(c)


Area
(a)


Production
(b)


Yield
(c)




Hulled corn


257.7


124.0


1,057


105.0


  85.0


1,781


111.1


  90.0


1,781




Potatoes


209.8


140.0


1,485


  82.3


100.0


2,671


  98.8


120.0


2,671




Hulled barley


152.7


  44.2


   637


  173.0 


  50.0


   637


155.7


  45.0


   637




Wheat


187.5


  41.0


   481


   84.3


  17.5


   456


   84.3


  17.5


   456




Hulled rice


  30.9


  14.4


1,027


   21.3


  10.0


1,027


   22.5


  10.5


1,027




a) in thousands of acres; b) in thousands of tons (metric or “long”); c) in pounds per acres.



The basic situation, however, the extremely low yield of agriculture, is not a result of the agrarian reform, but an inheritance from the methods of cultivation and the system of land ownership in effect in Bolivia for centuries. The semi-feudal system constituted the greatest stumbling-block for any agrarian development. [4]
This age-old stagnation in agriculture was increased by the upsurge in mining production for the world market. It turned out to be more profitable for the big mines, instead of stimulating agricultural development, to buy foodstuffs and raw materials abroad, thus increasing the country’s dependence on the world market, and maintaining the internal stagnation, not only by their purchasing policy but also by the deformation on the economy as a whole (roads, railways, electric power, credits, etc) in favor of mining.
The April revolution and the agrarian reform nationalized the big mining companies and broke the feudal regime in the countryside. They did not, however, change the rest of the conditions produced thereby: backwardness in the methods of exploitation, imbalance between the population and the land under cultivation, lack of roads, etc, and furthermore produced some additional problems. Plowing by a wooden-stick plow (when not by a foot-plow, i.e. a simple stick pushed by the foot) continued to be the dominant reality and the symbol of Bolivian agriculture. All this had a bearing on the stagnation in production.
The agrarian reform created the conditions for a development of production, but only the conditions; they were not put to profit by complementary measures, as will be seen below.
 
Two Agrarian Reforms
What is, in figures, the extent of the agrarian reform?
In the first place, there are two agrarian reforms: the legal one and the de facto one. The de facto agrarian) reform, carried out by the peasants, starting in 1952, and especially in 1953 and 1954, by the armed seizure and parcelling-out of the land, was the factor that determined the proclamation of the August 1953 decree, so as to act as a brake on the seizures.
The reform carried out from below by the peasants themselves embraced the vastest traditionally peasant zones of the country. No exact figures about its extent exist, but the parcelling out of land was carried out especially in the departments of La Paz, Cochabamba. Potosi, and Oruro, involving the majority of the estates, and on a smaller (though still extensive) scale in Tarija and Chuquisaca. The eastern departments of Santa Cruz, Beni, and Pando (the eastern plains) underwent this process only in a reflected manner, because of the different character of the exploitation and the farm population existing there (these departments represent only 10% of the Bolivian cultivated land, and there are no Indian peasants there).
On the other hand, the legal reform, according to the dispositions of the 1953 decree, fell far behind the de facto expropriations. Here are the figures:
According to the 1950 census, there were in the country 86,534 farm properties, with a total area of 80,925,000 acres. Of this total, up till August 1959, according to the data of the Servicio Nacional de Reforma Agraria, there have been attributed and turned over to the peasants – with legal titles – only 806 properties, with a total area of 1,872,800 acres. The number of persons granted titles scarcely reaches 29,216. (The same source estimates the number of peasant heads of families, that is, with a right to a parcel of land, as 532,680).
That is to say that there remained to be legally distributed, on the sixth anniversary of the agrarian reform, no less than 79,072,000 acres. Even if it is taken into consideration that, out of this total, a good part represents properties in the east that have not been claimed by the peasants, the figure of land distributed turns out to be ridiculous, and even more so the number of peasants who have “legally” become owners of land: 29,216, in contrast to the 2,000,000 peasants in the country.
In the same way that there are two agrarian reforms, there are two obstructions to agrarian reform.
On the one hand, the legal agrarian reform, the delivery of title-deeds to the peasants, is paralyzed by the enormous bureaucratic apparatus created by the decree on agrarian reform and by the government. Judgments for the attribution of land remain stuck in this apparatus. The Central Campesina de Ucureña has explained the incredible red tape that each judgment has to go through before the title-deed is granted to the peasant. [5]
On the other hand, from the viewpoint of capitalist law, the validity of these title-deeds could be rapidly rendered questionable by a new reactionary regime in power. A Silist deputy has already demonstrated how the government itself is preparing the conditions so that the landowners can at the proper moment demand the invalidation of these title-deeds and the return of their lands. [6]
The de facto agrarian reform, concerning the lands that the peasants occupied and have been working for their own account since 1952, 1953, and 1954 (years of the wave of land seizures), has also suffered from another obstacle: the peasant has the land, but all the other factors of production (seeds, fertilizers, irrigation, methods and tools of cultivation, marketing, etc) remain the same as before. The peasant has been left to his fate. The agrarian reform has stopped at the simple possession of the land.
Productivity has remained stagnant at a very low level. For example, in the region of Lake Titicaca, with the primitive methods of cultivation in use, yields are obtained of only 2,670 to 3,560 pounds of potatoes per acre, while on the Peruvian Altiplano some 8,900 pounds per acre are achieved.
The same occurs with stock-raising, whose yields, according to the CEPAL, are “impressively low.” And stock-raising is of great importance in the production of rural Bolivia, since it contributes more than 40% to the total gross product of the farm sector. In sheep-raising, predominant on the Altiplano, there is a yield of wool of not much over one pound per animal, which is only one fifth or sixth of the average yields of other countries; and a yield in meat of 22 pounds per animal, which is less than half of that obtained in countries whose stock-raising is more advanced. [7]
To the very limited area under cultivation per inhabitant, there must be added the fact that the land in question has for centuries been subjected to inefficient exploitation, without manure, fertilizers, etc, and is in an advanced stage of erosion, especially on the Altiplano – all of which results in very low fertility. On the Altiplano (except in the more fertile regions round Lake Titicaca) only a fraction of the tillable land is exploited each year, the rest being left fallow for periods as long as nine years. For example, in the province of Dalence (Oruro), out of 35,600 acres in exploitation, only about 8,900 acres, that is, one fourth, are actually cultivated each year.
All these figures, due to the primitive methods used, could be greatly increased with only slight improvements. But the MNR government, in this aspect, has not carried out the slightest agrarian reform. It is, for its petty-bourgeois leadership, a responsibility as grave as or graver than the paralysis in the delivery of title-deeds to the peasantry.
On both fronts, the capitalist government not only have paralyzed the agrarian reform, but in fact – despite using it as a propaganda theme – are sabotaging it, working against it, working for the landowner. Under the exigencies of imperialism, and with its help, they have surrounded the peasant by a double barrier: the barrier of law and the barrier of hunger. Lately, they have been trying to prepare the military barrier.


II
Situation of the Peasantry
Living Standards
Although production has remained stationary or fallen off, the revolution has meant a considerable rise in the peasant’s standard of living.
The standard of living has risen generally in terms of consumption, since the peasant no longer has to pay land rent to the landowner. The surplus of labor that went into the hands of the owner of the land now remains for the peasant himself.
But more important for the peasant than the relative rise in his consumption – which has fallen again with the general impoverishment caused by the Stabilization Plan – has been the change in his social situation, the suppression of the personal services of the feudal type that bound him to the landowner and the land: “pongueaje” and “mitanaje.”
Herein lies the main difference from the previous regime, and the principal reason why the peasant is resisting and will resist, arms in hand, any attempt at a return to the past. The increase in his trade-union and political gains, in his human dignity, do not appear in statistics, but they do in the consciousness of every peasant, as good things, just as concrete as wheat and corn.
The trade union, the union militia, universal franchise, discussion and participation – even though limited – in the political life of the country, the victories over the landowners and their political agents, all violently expelled from the Bolivian countryside: all these mean, for the peasant, a rise in his living standards.
This rise has meant, furthermore, an automatic rise in living standards, in gains, and in freedoms, for the rest of the laboring population, for it is known that its situation, even in its privileged sectors, is permanently conditioned by the situation of the more numerous and more exploited strata.
 
“Comunidades” [A]
Furthermore, there has been an improvement in the situation of even those peasants who already possessed land before the agrarian reform, as is the case with many “comunidades.” The “comunidades” are generally to be counted among the most impoverished sectors of the peasantry. Their number before the agrarian reform (1950 census) reached 3,779, with a total of 320,818 members of “comunidades.”
As a result of the permanent appropriation of their lands by the neighboring landowners, the “comunidades” have been left with the poorest land, with the poorest yield. Furthermore, they bear in themselves the germs of their own dissolution: in many of them, each peasant is the owner of his plot of land, there remaining in common only the pasture-lands, and there have been formed strata of rich, middle, and poor peasants who have the worst and smallest plots. The first-named have gone on increasing their properties at the cost of the last, with loans, etc. What is more, the “comunidades” are accustomed to give work to peasants from outside themselves, the upper stratum thus transforming itself into an exploiter of outside labor – very ill-paid, of course.
Now these “comunidades” were under the permanent pressure of the neighboring landowners, under the exactions of the authorities of the provincial or departmental capital (police, judges, mayors, et al.) and of the middlemen for the sale of their products, and lacked any support or aid. With the growth of peasant power since the April revolution, all these abuses, when they have not been entirely abolished, have been driven back very considerably, and the Indian of a “comunidad” enjoys a series of liberties and possibilities that were previously denied him, including access to the market (although the abuses of the middlemen have not stopped).
 
Stagnation of the Revolution
Nevertheless, in spite of the great gains achieved, the peasantry has been deeply affected by the stoppage in the advance of the revolution. The whole weight of the country’s backwardness, which the petty-bourgeois leadership has been powerless to overcome even in part, continues to lie on the peasant.
Under the pressure of the peasants themselves, one of whose most burning and constant concerns is education, the government have made a certain effort to combat illiteracy, that had been totally neglected by the regimes of the oligarchy, have built schools in the countryside, have considerably increased the number of primary teachers, etc.
But in face of the hair-raising figures on illiteracy – 70% of the population – what has been done is very little. Such illiteracy cannot be radically fought against from above, by merely official action, without appealing to a mobilization of the peasant masses themselves for this goal, and, above all, without raising in large measure the material standard of living. The great peasant masses remain isolated from the main circuit of culture. Furthermore, at no moment has the problem of teaching the peasantry to read and write in its own native language (and not in Spanish, indeed a foreign language for them) been faced up to – the only effective way of fighting illiteracy not only among the children but among the whole adult peasantry. [8]
Such social gains as social security have not reached the rural regions. Medical and hygienic care continue to be very deficient. Infant mortality reaches one of the highest levels in Latin America: 150 per thousand up to one year, and 30.36 from one to four years, for the country as a whole – which presupposes a still higher level for the rural regions, where there is practically no medical and hygienic care.
The food diet is poor in an absolute sense, inferior to that of the Latin American countries of the lowest consumption levels. According to statistics, in the peasant families of the Altiplano (poor zones), the following is the annual per capita consumption of the main foods in the diet: wheat, 31 lb; meat, 9 lb, 4 oz; potatoes, 84 lb, 4 oz; corn, 64 lb, 8 oz; sugar, 2 lb, 3 oz; rice, 1 lb, 1 oz. [9]
The extremely low per capita income, in comparison with other under-developed countries in Latin America, has already been pointed out. Other data aid in determining the social situation of the peasantry. The lack of roads and bridges to connect the zones of production with the market is very great. What is more, transportation is expensive: a Bolivian peasant pays more to travel with his products in a truck than does a US passenger in a latest-model bus. [10]
The scanty electrification of the country is felt not only in industry and the mines, but especially, as is logical, in the countryside: 70% of the Bolivian population does not enjoy the benefits of electricity, a percentage in which the entire peasantry is included. [11]
 
Available Land
The problem of the land is posed in some zones under a new aspect: that of the excess of population for the available land. This is aggravated by the fact that agricultural zones of potentially great richness are cut off and isolated from the consumption markets (for example, the upper Beni, 62.5 miles from La Paz). In some regions of the Altiplano and the valleys a high demographic pressure exists. Whereas in Santa Cruz there is a density of 2.1 inhabitants per square mile, in Cochabamba this figure rises to 25.4, in La Paz to 20.2, and in Sucre to 15.5. These averages, however, do not give a real idea of the density in the zones of greatest agricultural concentration: for example, in the Go-chabambine provinces of Jordán, Quillacollo, and Punata, the density reaches respectively 170.9, 155.4, and 160.6 per square mile. Furthermore, the increase in population in the Altiplano and in the valleys, where no more land is available (unless the methods of cultivation, irrigation, etc, are changed), is 25,000 persons a year, who can be only partially absorbed by other zones or other activities. The government’s colonization plans, which consisted simply in moving peasants from the Altiplano and the valleys to the eastern plains of Santa Cruz (and lately to tropical zones like Caranavi), and there just abandoning them to their fate – equally with those who stayed in their original places, for that matter – failed, logically, on account of the inadaptability and desertion of the persons moved.
This demographic pressure is being translated in the valley of Cochabamba by a new form of the land problem, in which the young people, when they start a family, demand a new redivision of the already existing little plots of about 2½ acres, while the old people, logically enough, refuse to subdivide even further areas that are already so small. This new sharing-out is called by the peasants the “iguala” [roughly, “an even divvy”], and is one of the sources of conflicts in the valley.
All these problems have received only very small-scale attention from the government. Not only because of their capitalist policy of abandonment of the masses’ needs, but also because of a lack of real communication between the masses and the bourgeois power personified by the state: the raising of the economic, social, and cultural living standards of the great masses of the rural regions, with all their backwardness and the problems this pulls along in its wake, is a task that is impossible without incorporating the initiative of the masses themselves. It cannot be done from above, even if the government felt any interest: it runs up against insurmountable walls.
The government have entrusted to the agencies of imperialism the carrying out of experiments in some of these aspects: the Servicio Agrícola Interamericano (SAI) for production techniques, and the Servicio Cooperative Interamericano de Educación (SCIDE) for education. Both have wasted the country’s money, with a swollen bureaucracy, with very little effective results, and with an abundance of imperialist propaganda, which increases the hostility with which they are received in the countryside. [12]
Some peasant unions in the valley of Cochabamba are maintaining schools, run by juntas formed by the peasants themselves, with much better results than those of the SCIDE, for they are based on the needs, problems, and psychology of the peasant himself. “Comunidades” of the Altiplano also have schools and hire teachers with their own funds, but these are so scarce, and so little adequately trained teaching personnel is available, that the teaching is very backward, and the children take years to learn to read and write.


III
Political Situation in the Countryside
The Peasant Revolution
The peasantry did not participate directly in the insurrection of 9 April 1952. But the revolution had deep repercussions in the rural regions. Above all, the destruction of the army opened the gates so that the peasants, without the threat of being massacred by the forces at the orders of the landowning oligarchy, might hasten to seize the land.
The revolutionary method, from below, arms in hand, used to carry out the agrarian reform, showed itself once more to be the only effective one for the sharing-out of the land and the destruction of agrarian feudalism.
The peasant mobilization, furthermore, gave the mass backing that was indispensable for the support of the workers’ gains achieved by the April insurrection. The COB [Bolivian Trade-Union Federation] was transformed into the expression and the instrument of the worker-peasant alliance sealed after April.
Together with the occupation of the land, a wave of peasant unionism developed. And, together with the unions, peasant militia were formed, with a de facto centralization in Ucureña, the capital of the agrarian reform.
The duality of power established in the country after the April revolution between the capitalist government and the trade unions was and is expressed more deeply than elsewhere in the peasant unions and their militia. In the zones of the greatest peasant concentration and tradition, such as the valley of Cochabamba, a real state within a state was formed. Within its confines, the peasant unions exercised and continue to exercise an authority superior to that of the state: they distribute land, dispense justice, decree judgments, possess militia and places of arrest, authorize or deny transit, and even marry and divorce.
On the disappearance of the latifundia and the expulsion of the big landowners from the countryside, the unions seemed to have lost their reason for existence, if they are to be understood as organs of economic struggle of the toilers of the countryside against the boss that exploits them. But the unions took on a new characteristic: that of being the instruments of defense of the gains that had been won, first of all, the land; and that of being the deliberative and executive organisms for all the problems of peasant life, organs of the peasants’ power. The arming of the peasants and the militia transformed them into one of the pillars of agrarian unionism.
In reality, this mass arming is the force that has prevented or checked the blows of the counter revolution in trying to regain power, and, by its very existence, the deep roll-back of the revolutionary gains that the capitalist government would have desired.
The peasantry has entered into the national political life through its unions. The winning of universal franchise, in the peasant consciousness, is linked up with its political expression through the union. The union or agrarian centre is the central point for any political participation or intervention by the peasantry.
This is one of the most profound and irreversible advances of the Bolivian revolution. Since the April revolution, there has arisen and been formed in Bolivia a peasant different from the traditional one: a peasant who, even with limitations, intervenes in trade-union life, possesses his rifle or sub-machine-gun, has won his own land, feels himself to be an active part and support of the revolution, which did not arrive from above but was made, by himself in the countryside and defended by himself, arms in hand, more than once; he has, collectively, a certain degree of centralization and of political life through the agrarian unions and of participation in, the COB and feels himself to be a factor of some weight in the political life of the nation. This peasant has already ceased to be that backward and apathetic base on which the reaction has always counted for support or protection in order to hem in the proletariat.
 
The Struggles in the Countryside
Several years of the agrarian reform without a noticeable increase in their income, in their material living levels, with the paralysis in the delivery of title-deeds, with the abuses and personal enrichment of the MNR peasant leaders, etc, went on stimulating discontent in the countryside. It was not for all this that the April revolution had been made.
In an apparently isolated form, a new series of peasant struggles began since 1957 and 1958.
* * *
The evolution of the struggles in the countryside formed one of the principal events of the revolution during 1959. This evolution can be graphically summarized in the personal fate of the former Minister of Peasant Affairs, Vicente Alvarez Plata. In April he had to resign as a result of being repudiated by the peasantry of the entire country (which, in its repudiation of the minister, was in reality expressing its discontent with the policy of the government). In the following months he engaged in a campaign to split the peasant organizations of the Altiplano. In November, he was killed by the peasants of Atahuallpani (close to the Peasant Central of Achacachi), during one of his splitting tours at the service of Siles.
* * *
The death of Alvarez Plata is not an isolated deed. It is part of the armed struggle, of the beginning of the peasant war that is developing, from the north of Potosi in 1957–58 to the Cochabamba conflicts and the Achacachi struggles in 1959. Large quantities of weapons continue to pour into the countryside: the peasants are seeking to arm themselves by every means. This is not a matter of individual impulse but a collective tendency, which has the presentiment that new events and still graver clashes are approaching.
The restlessness and clashes in the rural regions do not have their real origins in the internal conflicts within the MNR, although these brought on the outbreak thereof. They are rather the expression of a deep discontent in the peasantry, which for the moment is finding no other outlet to show itself.
They are also the expression of the lack of any workers’ leadership that channels and offers a revolutionary way out for the peasants’ needs and demands. And they express, simultaneously with the combativity and new mobilization that are spreading among the peasantry, the beginning of a decomposition of the forces of the revolution, which, unable to find real ways out, are getting into confused clashes.
The new peasant mobilizations, the death of Alvarez Plata, the resistance to the army in Cochabamba, the “strong point” set up by the peasants in Achacachi [B] – these open a new stage in the political evolution of the peasantry. The rule of the government up till now has been based fundamentally on the separation and difference in levels between the workers’ and the peasants’ struggles, in control over the peasantry, in the de facto dislocation of the worker-peasant alliance by the Lechinist policy of abandoning the peasantry and sabotaging the alliance.
The bases for this rule are disappearing. The ever greater mobilizations are bringing the government directly face to face with the peasantry. The collapse of the Falange since its 19 April defeat is another element that forces the government to present itself as frankly opposed to the peasantry. By losing the Falange, the capitalist government have lost their most priceless instrument for bringing pressure to hold back and confuse the peasantry. They can no longer argue, as they used to do, that any worker or peasant mobilization objectively favors the putschists and brings the revolution into danger. They can no longer dangle the scarecrow of the Falange, which was especially used against the peasantry. Now it is the government who are forced to assume directly the role of holding back peasant advances. All this is speeding up the political evolution of the peasantry, is still further compromising the fundamental bases of the government’s stability, and is developing the preconditions for once more setting up the worker-peasant alliance.
Under these conditions, the best agent of Siles for his policy of holding back and dispersing the peasant forces is the Lechinist leadership, which is demonstrating as never before its treacherous and criminal role. The workers’ leadership, especially that of the miners, is the natural centralizer that the peasants need, all the more so in their present problems. The government’s greatest fear is the regroupment of the workers and the peasants. Its main goal is to keep up the dispersion and paralysis of the COB, to break up any attempt at reunification. For this, its agent is Lechinism, which is acting as. a supplement to the policy of Paz Estenssoro, and is consciously maintaining the division and separation of the workers’ struggles among themselves, of the peasant movements among themselves, and between the workers’ and peasants’ movements as a whole and the petty bourgeoisie.
This action of Lechinism, however, is possible only to the extent that a revolutionary leadership does not arise with sufficient strength, determination, and authority to carry out this regroupment. The objective situation, the development of consciousness among the peasantry and the proletariat, their growing confrontation with the government – all these tend to help such a leadership to emerge, to create better preconditions for it.
But only the concrete presence of the revolutionary Marxist leadership, that of the POR (Partido Obrero Revolucionario), even as a minority but in the fundamental places, can bring about the achievement of this perspective. It is the absence or weakness of this leadership that enables Lechinism to be able to continue its labor of sell-out and capitulation. It is this weakness which, in the last analysis, constitutes the main reason why the elements of stagnation and decomposition of the revolution are developing, why in the rural regions they are expressed by clashes among the peasants themselves and in the abandonment of positions already won.
 
The New Peasant Leadership
The peasant masses have resisted up till today, as the worker masses have done, on the basis of an unheard-of heroism, suffering incredible privations, and witnessing every day the desertion and capitulation of the leaderships. At a frightful level of underconsumption, the peasant and worker masses have defended their revolution, have taken up arms dozens of times against the government themselves, to defend their gains. Their action and armed presence have, fundamentally, prevented the MNR itself from establishing the capitalist dictatorship, as it tried to do with Siles, with Cuadros Quiroga, with Guevara. The masses “cut down to size” various candidates for dictatorship, and not only Unzaga de la Vega.
But the government and imperialism also have gone on speculating on the situation of hunger and impoverishment, on unemployment, on low agricultural production, to make the workers and the revolution retreat. The fundamental motive for the actions of the government has not been economic but political. Their main goal today is not to increase production, but to liquidate the duality of power, to put an end to the power of the unions and militia, especially in the rural regions and the mines. Even undertakings like the various colonizations (Santa Cruz, Caranavi, etc) had as their unconfessed purpose the creation of a counterweight to the poor and combative peasantry of the Altiplano and the valleys. In this purpose, they have, for the moment, failed.
The fall in production and in living standards is a new factor of dispersion of the workers and peasants, and the government want to disperse these forces by any means at all. They demonstrated this by provoking various mine strikes (that of March 1958 was the clearest example), and they demonstrate it in the countryside, where their policy is that of weakening the peasantry by hunger in order later to surround it by arms. This policy is dictated by imperialism. That is the condition it poses for continuing, by its aid, to maintain the MNR in power.
The agrarian reform, made from below, went much further than was suitable or acceptable for the capitalist regime. In order to re-establish the full functioning of capitalism, the agrarian reform must retreat, the countryside – like the mines – must again become a field for capital investment, capitalism must return to the rural regions. Not, this time, in the old form, which cannot be resuscitated, but by eliminating the peasant unions and militia, and clearing the way for a new capitalist concentration of agrarian property; it is not by chance that the MNR theoreticians insist on taking the Mexican revolution as the example of their future.
The peasant movement needs a new national leadership. But the peasantry cannot by itself generate a new centralized leadership. Already at the previous stage it was the petty bourgeoisie that imposed a leadership from above, but basing itself on the Lechinist workers’ leadership. The appearance and acceptance of a new workers’ leadership will open the way to centralize a new peasant leadership on a national scale.
Whatever may be the vicissitudes through which peasant organization and struggles may pass, the capitalist petty bourgeoisie can no longer impose on them from above a more or less viable leadership, nor can capitalism liquidate or uproot the peasant revolution in Bolivia. But a new orientation, a national organization of the struggles, and a national peasant leadership, can emerge only from the junction of the permanent peasant combativity with a new revolutionary proletarian leadership.
The evolution of the peasant situation, of the political consciousness of the peasantry, have been a process of extraordinary richness in this most recent period. In it there exist in potential great possibilities for a new development of the revolution and of the worker-peasant alliance, but at the same time serious dangers of an increase in the decomposition and disorientation of the revolution.
The decisive factor for ensuring that the outcome of this crisis is a revolutionary one and for avoiding a deeper trend towards decomposition and even defeat, is the intervention of the revolutionary Marxist leadership, of the POR. This intervention is the guarantee of once more soldering and re-erecting the worker-peasant alliance, with a programme that corresponds to the present problems and struggles, through the main worker and peasant unions, that are the ones which will bring a definitive solution to the destiny of the revolution.
December 1959
[The present article is, for reasons of space, being published in two parts. The second part, referring more concretely to the programme of transition and the revolutionary party’s tasks in the rural regions, will appear in our next issue. We have, furthermore, considerably reduced section III, also for space considerations, while trying to retain those aspects of the greatest general interest.]



Updating Addendum
In recent months the situation in Bolivia has been affected by important events. Since the present article was written (December 1959), not only have the peasant mobilizations continued to go forward, but the workers also have succeeded in hitting serious blows at their class enemy, strengthening the outlook for a new stage, for new opportunities to pull the revolution out of the stagnation in which the petty-bourgeois leadership of the MNR has been confining it.
Among these events there are to be noted:

The Proclamation of Achacachi, made by the peasants of that region in defense of their land, adopting a series of programmatic points from the POR, and under that party’s inspiration.
 
The armed victory of the miners’ militia in Huanuni, where an insurrection of the Huanuni miners against the trade-union apparatus – terrorist in nature, and armed to the teeth – set up by the government and by the MNR right wing (Guevara), received the support of the miners’ militia of Catavi-Siglo XX, and ended in the complete triumph of the workers.
 
The candidacy of Victor Paz Estenssoro–Juan Lechin, announced in February at the MNR Convention, for the next presidential elections (June 1960), which won out over the candidacy of the MNR right-wing headed by Guevara.
 
The defeat in March of a Guevarist coup d’état against the candidacy of Paz–Lechin, carried out by a sector of the carabineros, who had to surrender after a day of fighting against a sector of the army and the union militia.

The above-mentioned events have for the moment sealed the defeat of that MNR wing that is most tied up with imperialism. The Paz–Lechin candidacy has been strengthened, and it is certain that it will carry with it an important sector of the masses, since the peasants still nurture hopes about Paz Estenssoro for a solution of their problems, and the workers see in Lechin their own leader raised to be the vice-president of the Republic.
Nevertheless, although the MNR may thus for a time maintain its control over the masses, that control will be exercised under very different conditions from those of the past. Not only have the masses worked up intense struggles against the MNR government headed by Siles, but also victories such as that at Huanuni, won by themselves without any aid or support from above, have strengthened their confidence in themselves, and powerfully increased their independence toward the official apparatus of the ruling party and the capitalist state.
The Paz–Lechin candidacy, while giving a certain extension of time to the MNR, means an encouragement for the struggles of the masses; and it is this that is feared by imperialism, the MNR right wing, the oligarchy, and Paz Estenssoro himself. That is why the right-wing opposition has gone to the extent of armed insurrection; and new pressure and struggles may be expected right up till the elections. In this sense, the defeat of the Guevarist coup d’etat means another factor of encouragement for the masses, of weakening of the pro-imperialist tendencies and of Paz’s own position as a brake on the masses.
Because these facts are simultaneously encouraging the workers and peasants to carry forward the struggle to get out of the stagnation in which the revolution now is, Paz Estenssoro will not be able, from the presidency, to provide any real solution to the deeper problems of the revolution. The capitalist regime in Bolivia no longer works, yet Paz Estenssoro, with the help of Lechin, intends above all to defend that regime against the assaults of the masses.
All the problems of agrarian reform, of nationalization of the mines, of workers’ control, of the living levels of the toilers, etc., are posed with greater or lesser sharpness in the next period, in the face of a workers’ and peasants’ movement which, although electorally supporting Paz Estenssoro, has developed a deep critical spirit and a great confidence in its own strength, concentrated and organized in the mass worker and peasant unions and in the armed militia.
To this must be added, as an element in the masses’ development, not only the colonial revolution as a whole, but, much more concretely, the example of the Cuban revolution, which has enormous repercussions in the consciousness of the Bolivian masses.
In the inevitable crisis and confrontation with the masses to which the MNR – this time with Paz Estenssoro and Lechin (its last reserves of prestige) – will find itself led, it is the POR which is called on to put itself at the head of the masses, offering an answer in the form of a programme and an organization for the needs for which the masses are mobilizing in this whole period, and which can find an adequate solution only along the path of struggle for the workers’ and peasants’ government, and its establishment in fact.
All the problems of the peasants’ revolution raised in this article will arise even more acutely in the next period, in the face of the incapacity of the capitalist regime and its “left” (Paz Estenssoro–Lechin) to bring to them the slightest effective solution.

Notes
1. Unless otherwise indicated, all figures in this article are taken from El desarrollo economico de Bolivia, a study made by the Economic Comission for Latin America, United Nations (Comisión Economica para America Latina, CEPAL) in 1957. It is difficult or impossible to obtain more recent statistics that are reliable and well-organized.
2. Solomon Adler, La Economía China, Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1957.
3. Agriculture could, within a short time, not only completely satisfy national consumption, but also provide foreign exchange by means of various export items (some of which are exported today on a limited scale): rubber, chestnuts, coca, coffee, cocoa, pyrethrum, tea, quinine, vanilla, etc.
4. The CEPAL describes this phenomenon as follows: Among the causes at the origin of the backwardness of agriculture in Bolivia, there must be mentioned in the first place the system of land-holding which was in effect until August 1953, the date on which the decree of agrarian reform was issued. The latifundist and semi-feudal system existing until that date proved to be almost completely impenetrable to the advances of agricultural technique, and in the majority of the estates the use of extremely antiquated methods of exploitation persisted, while the peasant continued to have miserable living standards. The estate-owner – usually absentee – unloaded his responsibility on to a bailiff, who had no more technical knowledge than his employer, and who tried to force production out of land that was steadily more exhausted without concerning himself about restoring to it its lost fertility. The application of the minimum norms of animal health or plant genetics, and the use of fertilizers and soil-conservation methods, were virtually unknown practices. In the same way, the tools of labor were generally very primitive, similar to those used in colonial times. For his part, the peasant, who had to devote between two and four days of the week to toiling on the owner’s land, as a compensation for the use and products of a little plot or “sayana,” generally followed the same methods of production as these used on the estate. The result of all this was very low unit yields, which contributed to giving agricultural activity a mere subsistence character, without any definite market purpose. The great mass of the peasantry took for sale in the urban centres only a minimum fraction of its production, for the purpose of obtaining the monetary means to buy those goods that it could not produce on its own land. For this same reason, the native almost never set any value on his personal labor, which often prevented enterprises of a market type from competing with him.
To this there must be added the personal obligations and unpaid labor of a feudal type owed by the tenant and his family to the landowner and the “estate mansion,” and his situation as a serf bound to the land, much more oppressive and onerous than the simple labor-rent relationship indicated here.
5. On 20 December 1958 the Central de Ucureña approved the following resolution, to be presented by its fraternal delegation to the IIIrd Peasant Congress in La Paz:
Whereas:
Despite the passage of more than five years since the promulgation of the Fundamental Law of Agrarian Reform, it has not been applied with due despatch, thus causing, by this delay, demoralization and distrust in its benefits, and creating an oppositional atmosphere which is put to its own profit by the reaction for its purposes of trying to win back power.
Agrarian procedure is very costly and slow because of the intervention of too many functionaries, slowing down the timely application of the law.
A claim deposited five years ago with the Junta Rural has gone through a regular Calvary, and in the majority of cases still continues its heavy-footed advance.
After the two required hearings have been held, the plans and reports of the experts are obtained, and brought before the Agrarian Judge, where, the claim having been formalized, the proof of the demand is brought forward, with the presentation of ownership deeds, a certificate of the tax-list value of the estate, and the testimony of witnesses.
Once judgment has been pronounced, the records are presented to the National Council of the Agrarian Reform, where they are taken over by one of the Secretariats. Then they go on to the Technical and Juridical Department for the respective reports needed by the officer called the Vocal Relator in order to prepare his Writ of Judgment. Once this has been approved and the parties notified, either of them may have special recourse to an appeal for reconsideration, the applicability or inapplicability of which is resolved by the Plenum of the Council, which is difficult to obtain.
In the hypothetical case that the case has succeeded in getting through all this red tape, it is turned over to the Ministry of Rural Affairs, where, after a report by the Legal Section, a Supreme Resolution is prepared, which is transmitted to the services of the President of the Republic, a higher instance where it undergoes a new revision by their Legal Section, which can annul, at any moment and for any motive, everything that has been previously accomplished.
Once the respective Supreme Resolution has been decreed, the case goes back once again to the Ministry, and thence to the Council; from the Council to the original Agrarian Tribunal, for a new examination, which very often takes place with no reference to the Supreme Resolutions.
Once the reexamination has been carried out, everything goes back to the Council for drawing up the title-deed, for which purpose the records go to the Technical Department to have the lines of demarcation drawn up, and to the Title Section to have the title-deed made act.
The title-deed having been drawn up, it is signed by the President of the National Council of the Agrarian Reform, and then taken to the President of the Republic, with whose signature it returns once more to the Council.
Lastly, the title-deed is retained until a certain date is reached, and, contrary to the provisions of Article 103, overelaborate commissions are named for the delivery of the title-deeds, involving immense expense for the National Treasury (in order to use as a pretext later for the non-existence of funds for really necessary and urgent expenses), with the aggravating circumstance that often definitive possession is not even established by a document in legal form.
A certification of the essential legal papers, with the original of the title and an inscription in the Register of Rural Taxes, will serve each party involved as sufficient official title, the two parties being allowed to separate out their original documents.
Whereas:
Because of this slowing-down of justice, there exist fundamental differences between the present situation and labof on the parcels of land, and the data produced by the procedure, with the result that the Writs of Judgment and the Resolutions are different from the reality, aside from the fact that there have been caused great expenses that have upset the peasant’s economy –
Be it resolved:
Sole article: To ask the State Authorities to shorten agrarian procedure, making il; more dynamic and effective, so that it may not be outstripped by the revolutionary process.
6. In a February 1957 interpellation to the Minister of Rural Affairs on the development of the agrarian reform, Deputy Lopez Avila (MNR) stated the matter as follows:
Sometimes I have thought, with deep grief and sadness, of the embarrassing situation of the peasant enjoying title to his property, if political contingencies should produce a change in the present revolutionary regime. Many of them have received title, many of them have occupied their land, but can it be said that the peasants can defend and maintain their property rights forever? I think not; I am pessimistic about this sort of thing, fellow deputies, for the following reasons: by Decree 03525 of 15 January 1953, disposition was made that the payment that the peasants must take to the landowners as a result of the agrarian expropriation must be carried out by means of the system of 25-year bonds; in the meantime, all the plots of land, the harvests, the tools, remained legally mortgaged to the Agricultural Bank of Bolivia. And who was it that was to issue the bonds? The state, under the guarantee of the signatures of the Controller-General of the Republic and the Treasurer-General of the Nation. Very well, fellow deputies, these bonds do not exist; therefore, the peasant has not paid the value of the land granted him by the agrarian reform. So then, when, from the classic viewpoint of contracts, the cancellation or payment of the thing or goods transferred is lacking, the contract is imperfect, and the agreement has not been formally carried out (Article 19 of the Political Constitution, and Article 290 of the Civil Code). It must be added that Deputy Lopez Avila is a landowner in Chuquisaca ...
7. An FAO expert, A. Quezada (Estudio socio-economico y agropecuario de la provincia Dalence, quoted by the CEPAL) describes as follows the livestock situation in the Altiplano, Department of Oruro:
There are no enclosures or special pasture areas; no selection of pasturage is made; there is no rotation of pasture-crops; no forage has been introduced except barley; there are no silos; basic notions about the feeding of animals are unknown; there are no pure-bred animals; the peasants have not even the elementary genetic or veterinary understanding. As a result of the aforementioned negative factors, the weight and productivity of the animals are excessively low. In this zone it requires approximately 30 to 62 acres to support one cow; from 10 to 20 for a llama; from 5 to 10 for a sheep. All the animals that are bred are native; any exotic ones have become acclimated and degenerated. They are given scarcely any salt; they receive neither vaccination nor medication. The climate, especially the dryness, is also unfavorable.
In this zone a cow gives birth, on an average, every three years. It is milked for one month, with a yield of about one quart of milk a day. Sheep are shorn every two years, with a yield of 1½ pounds of wool per head. The ewes produce, on the average, one lamb per year. They are milked for two weeks, with a daily yield of about 3½ ounces of milk per head. There are few hogs. Their condition is lamentable, as can be demonstrated by how little weight they reach (a maximum of 77 pounds). That is to say, they have all the characteristics of purely subsistence livestock.
8. Asthenio Averanga M., in Aspectos generales de la población boliviana, 1956, p. 94, demonstrates, in statistical tables with corresponding graphs, the direct correlation between the population that speaks Spanish and that which can read and write, province by province: the respective curves follow almost parallel trajectories. [The main native languages are Quechua and Aymara.]
9. A. Quezada, op. cit., consumption of a typical Indian family of Dalence (Oruro).
10. J. Roy Alvarez (a UN technician), Revista de la Facultad de Economía de Oruro, no. 10–18:
A passenger who travels in the back of a truck, seated as best he can manage on its freight and unprotected from the weather, pays 8 dollar-cents per kilometre [13 dollar-cents per mile]. In the United States, the bus passenger, with a reclinable seat and air conditioning, pays about ten dollar-cent per mile.
11. It is of interest to quote the figures of the CEPAL on electrical consumption compared to other countries, as an indication of the level of general development. In the following table, for Bolivia and Chile there has been discounted the industrial consumption of the big mines, but not the corresponding mining population. Figures are of annual kWh per inhabitant in 1954: Bolivia, 57; Uruguay, 359; Argentina, 339; Chile, 329; Brazil, 205; Cuba, 174; Colombia, 157; Peru, 148; Ecuador, 64; Dominican Republic, 55; Nicaragua, 45; El Salvador, 40; Paraguay, 33.
12. Lucha Obrera (no. 102, first half of January 1959) recorded the following information:
The peasants of Ucureña have approved a resolution to be presented by its fraternal delegation to the Peasant Congress in La Paz, judging the labors of the Servicio Agricola Interamericano (SAI): that “it goes along without any control” without fulfilling the plans foreseen. The resolution shows that the SAI has not increased agricultural production; that it has not directly taught the peasants any improvements in cultivation; that it has no aided in obtaining modern technical tools and means of labor that make agricultural mechanization possible.
That besides not having fulfilled these projects, the SAI has pushed aside national agronomic engineers, and used an incompetent foreign element that is settled in the principal capitals of the Republic and in the United States, visiting only on very rare occasions the place of their work, the countryside, of whose needs they are ignorant, as they are of the idiosyncrasies of the Bolivian Indian.
That the SAI has a many-branched bureaucratic plant that is vegetating in offices with luxury and comfort imported from the United States, while the Bolivian Indian is struggling in a daily fight against drought, hail, phytoptera, dust-storms, frosts, ticks, the steady erosion of the land, and other calamities, without any of the technical leadership, which is, however, so trumpeted and publicized, with a profusion of photographs that are a fiction and a snare.
That the SAI has granted scholarships to its own employees so that they may go through the different states of the Colossus of the North, wasting Bolivian money that could be used for the practical solution of the basic problems of agriculture, seeing that the scholarship-holders have brought back no benefits to the country on their return from their tours.
That the SAI has covered up for all the big landowners, who, as a revenge for the agrarian reform, are sabotaging it.


Editor’s Notes
A. “Comunidad”: a form of collective land property and work, inherited from the Incas. It is a survival of primitive communism which has undergone an advanced process of degeneration.
B. See Fourth International, No. 8, Winter 1959–1960.
 

 Lucero: Bolivian Agrarian Reform (December 1959)




Adolfo Gilly  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Héctor Lucero
Bolivian Agrarian Reform
Its Situation and Tasks After Six Years
(December 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 9, Spring 1960, pp. 9–19 & No. 10, Summer 1960, pp. 40–52.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.



I.
The Situation Of Agriculture

II.
Situation of the Peasantry

III.
Political Situation in the Countryside

Updating Addendum

IV.
The “Failure” of the Agrarian Reform

V.
The Worker-Peasant Alliance: Its Bases and Tasks

VI.
The Revolutionary Party and the New Workers’ Leadership
 

 Lucero: Bolivian Agrarian Reform - 2 (December 1959)





Adolfo Gilly  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Héctor Lucero
Bolivian Agrarian Reform
Its Situation and Tasks After Six Years
(December 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 10, Summer 1960, pp. 40–52.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


IV [1]
The “Failure” of the Agrarian Reform
Dual Power and Production
Six years after its official promulgation, the agrarian reform has not fulfilled its promises of a considerable increase in production and in peasant well-being. Its enemies are speculating on its “failure.”
In the first place, experience demonstrates that any revolution, and any agrarian revolution, at its beginnings brings in its wake a fall in production until a reorganization on new bases has been made. Dual power does not make a climate propitious for raising production, living standards, and productivity. It is a climate of uncertainty, struggle, and lack of effective leadership in the life of the nation. It is in the interest of the revolution to pass as quickly as possible through the stage of dual power and set up the new workers’ and peasants’ power which reorganizes on new socialist bases the country’s entire economic and political apparatus.
Now in Bolivia dual power has been prolonged since 9 April 1952. Although the capitalist power controls the cities, although the workers’ and peasants’ power appears to be covered over, held in check, braked, there nonetheless continues to exist a climate of uncertainty, of lack of centralized leadership. In this situation it is impossible to obtain a sustained increase in production either in industry or in agriculture. This fact is brought up by all the capitalist theoreticians of the MNR in order to demand a more reactionary policy. In one thing they are quite right: it is necessary to overcome dual power. But the problem is: who will liquidate it, and in favor of whom? will the capitalist power finish off the workers’ power of the trade unions and militia and impose capitalist-imperialist law, or will the workers’ power finish off the capitalist government and the reigning disorder and impose its own proletarian order? [2]
It has already been observed how the peasant was abandoned by the state, how the agrarian reform was slowed down, both in granting title-deeds and in aid to producers, and how the agrarian economy was left to its own fate and tied down to the same age-old backwardness as always. And lastly other factors have determined the crisis in agrarian reform.
 
Agrarian Reform and Industrial Development
Agrarian production is closely connected with the development of the economy as a whole, and first of all with that of industry. Lenin and Trotsky, basing themselves on the experience of the Soviet state in its first years, assigned primary importance to the relationship between industrial development and the increase in peasant production: the peasant, though he possesses the land, will not increase his production unless he obtains the industrial products he needs by the exchange of his farm products (i.e., bought with the money he receives for them).
Agrarian reform, by incorporating broad peasant sectors into the money economy, the market, potentially creates a greater demand for industrial articles. But if industry does not satisfy this hope, the agrarian economy closes in on itself, folds up into a subsistence economy, and lowers its acquisitive capacity. This is the beginning of a vicious circle, for, with the shrinking of the market, industry produces less, gives work to fewer workers, satisfies even less the needs of the countryside – which continues to close up still further into a subsistence economy.
Bolivian industry can satisfy the peasants’ needs only to a very small extent, nor has there been, of course, the slightest more or less radical planning or orientation of its production in connection with this problem. [3] In the first stage (1952–1956), inflation worked against the peasant, for prices of manufactured articles always rose faster than those of agricultural products. But in the second stage (since 1957) stabilization did not arrange the situation either: the abrupt shrinkage of the consumers’ market in the cities and the new rise in industrial prices had a direct repercussion on the peasant economy.
 
Relationship with the Market
The relationship of the peasant with the market since the reform has been more uncertain even than before. The landowner fulfilled this function, and, though he got away with the better part of the product of peasant labor, there did exist a traditional system of relations of exchange between town and country. The disappearance of the landowner from the greater part of the Bolivian countryside broke off this link, which was not replaced by another equally centralized one. The dispersal of the small peasant economy weakened this contact with the national market and injured production.
Aside from the peasants who go to offer their products directly in fairs in the towns and cities, there exist middlemen who come to the producing areas to buy harvests. In this form of marketing, the peasant has to yield to the middlemen a very high percentage of the price paid by the consumer for his products (although previously his percentage was even less, since the landowner got away with the greater part). This injures both the producer and the consumer, narrows down the market, and conspires against production. [4]
Cooperatives, which ought to have been a first step toward a more profitable relationship with the market, both for peasant consumption and for the marketing of farm products, were not developed by the government.
A limited number of cooperatives were set up. [5] But these, for the most part, functioned not as cooperatives but as “cuperativas” [6], as they were then described. The government assigned each officially registered cooperative a “cupo” of consumers’ products (sugar, flour, rice, tocuyo [coarse cotton cloth], etc.), priced in dollars at the official rate (190 Bolivianos), while the dollar was quoted at Bs 6,000, 7,000, and finally up to 12,000 on the black market. Of course many of these “cooperatives” existed only on paper, to obtain cupos, and even in the real ones the cupos served to a large extent only to enrich a few favored ones, while only a fraction of these low-priced articles reached the peasant.
But with monetary stabilization, the cooperative movement did not succeed in developing, either: the real point is that this movement cannot be developed from above, but only by mobilizing the peasantry, setting into operation its own capacity for initiative. But the peasantry cannot be mobilized for one thing and held back for another, and that is the drama of any capitalist government.
What also conspired against the growth of a genuine movement of cooperatives was the political use that the government and the reaction wanted to make of them. Their intention, with the open support of the clergy, was to set the cooperatives in opposition to the trade unions, the cooperative movement as a counterweight to and substitute for the trade-union movement, till the union movement was finally replaced by the cooperative movement. The peasant resisted this campaign, aimed against his main instrument of defense and struggle, and the discredit therefor fell on the cooperatives.
 
Foreign Trade
Another problem that directly affected agriculture was its relationship with the world market, in the prices of its products (even though they were not destined for export), and in the importation of machines, fertilizers, etc.
As for prices, the importation of a series of agricultural products (rice, wheat, potatoes, etc.) with cheap dollars, though it helped consumption in the cities (and also, especially, those who distributed the cupos and foreign exchange), meant a ruinous competition for production inside the country, harmed the establishment of a normal exchange between town and country, contributed to the reduction of cultivated areas, and helped to accentuate subsistence economy in the rural regions and dependence on foreign trade by the entire country.
As for machinery, fertilizers, insecticides, etc, the primitivism of methods of cultivation had already rendered traditional the scantiness or non-existence of any investment by the country in these departments. Up until 1953, imports of farm machinery represented scarcely 5% of capital goods imports, and 1% of total imports (in a mainly agricultural country!). At that time an increase took place, on the one hand through the machinery brought in by the SAI for its work, and on the other through a series of bloc purchases carried out by agreements with foreign trading companies. But these agreements were destined, not so much to mechanize the rural regions, as to enrich a few favored ones, since, apart from the fact that the machinery was bought at high prices and was in many cases unusable, the adjudication of a tractor, for example, at the official price, was not going to be made generally to the producing peasant but to some “influential politician,” who made a highly profitable deal out of it. The mechanization of the rural regions became a farce, and the dollars destined therefor just went into private pockets. [7]
Monetary stabilization brought an end to deals based on the official exchange rate. But the importation of farm machinery and tools was also frozen. As importation is now free, the country’s foreign exchange is used by importers for products for which there is a solvent market, i.e., those destined for the well-off classes, mainly, apart from foodstuffs. For the peasant, a tractor, which once was a mirage, has now become an impossible dream.
The development of production in a period of agrarian reform has a close connection with foreign trade, and requires a state monopoly of this trade in the hands of the workers and peasants, guaranteeing that their resources shall used first of all for the real needs of development. Without this, there is no progress in farm production, however much land may be distributed. This is another experience confirmed by the Bolivian revolution.
 
Investments in the Rural Regions
The agrarian reform requires increased investment in agriculture, not only in machinery, but also in roads, irrigation works, education, and all the other aspects that have been pointed out. Without this investment, and a parallel and proportionate development of local and national industry, the agrarian reform remains stagnant and shut in on itself.
In a agriculture that scarcely goes beyond the subsistence level, where the landowner has been driven from the rural regions, there exist no normal reserves for investment. These resources can be provided or mobilized only by the state. But if the economy functions on capitalist bases, if capital accumulation is limited to private hands, if the private banks continue to control essential credit, investment is not going to reach rural regions convulsed by the revolution and in the hands of insolvent small peasants who – what is WOTS© – are not even “legally” occupying their lands. [8]
With “Bolivian-style” agrarian reform, the rural regions have partially escaped from normal capitalist functioning. Capitalism and its state will invest there only when there are re-established free disposal of the land and the possibility of obtaining and accumulating profits.
The empiricism of the MNR regime toward the rural regions and the agrarian reform in its first years, imposed on it to a large extent by its being overwhelmed by the mass movement, has been replaced by the conscious determination to re-establish capitalism there. This is a political, rather than an economic, operation. Guevara is the theoretician of this attempt, in the only form that is possible and suitable to capitalism: not merely a just plain return of the former latifundists, which has already become impossible, but rather a recognition of the distribution of land as an irreversible fact yet opening the way to a new concentration of farm property in capitalist hands, depriving the peasants once more of the richest lands by “legal” means (court actions, mortgages, usury, and, in the background, the armed forces) and maintaining the stratum of middle and poor peasants needed to provide cheap manpower for the new agrarian bosses. Guevara is the champion of the struggle against “dual power,” “agrarian anarchy,” “peasant fortresses,” and “agrarian caudillos.”
But it is an economic operation as well. The peasantry today has the forces, decisiveness, and weapons to resist too obvious attempts to turn the clock back. But its impoverishment, the abandonment of the countryside, the growing destitution – these are factors of demoralization that the government are consciously cultivating. The excessive subdivision d the subsistence economy not only render impassible even the slightest accumulation by the poor peasant but also create conditions favoring conflicts among the peasants themselves.
The enormous waste of farm manpower, current in all backward countries [9], has not been solved, but indeed aggravated, by the situation in the Bolivian rural regions. “The fund of accumulation hidden in underemployment” is completely wasted. The capitalist government needs to demobilize the countryside politically: that is its most imperious, most pressing, most urgent need. Thus it cannot try to mobilize it economically – far from it. Not only does it not know how to do so, nor does it have the necessary interest, instrumentalities, and authority, but indeed directly it neither can nor finds it suitable to do so.
The landowners, at the time of the revolution, ceased to absorb a considerable part of farm income (although the landowner sector was not suppressed in all regions). Despite the fact that other abuses and exactions against the peasant continued (through judges, functionaries, police, taxes, trade-union bureaucracy, etc.), they were less than before.
With these resources – not to mention others that exist – not only was it possible to raise the peasants’ living standards much more, but also to develop a fund of accumulation, added to the centralized receipts produced by the nationalization of the mines, for economic development.
 
The Failure of the “Progressive” Bourgeoisie
But the intention of the MNR was to create a “progressive” bourgeoisie by means of the redistribution of national income through inflation and currency control, channeling these benefits into private hands. The resources, in the form of credits and exceptionally cheap foreign exchange which the state turned over to this “bourgeoisie,” were in practice to a large extent wrenched by means of inflation from the most numerous productive sector, the peasantry. This “bourgeoisie” did not have a safe and profitable field of investment in Bolivia, and even less in its rural regions, and the capital that the government turned over to it fled the country or was used only for speculative ends. The former current of private mining went on, which places Bolivia among those countries “exporting capital.”
Those resources, centralized and nationalized, would have been sufficient to give the initial impetus to a harmonious development of industry and farming. Instead, industry and farming have gone in a parallel way, but in the other direction: crisis and falling off of production.
What has failed in Bolivia is not agrarian reform but capitalist agrarian reform, administered and directed by the capitalist state. What exists in reality is not a failure but an agrarian crisis. What has reached a crisis is the contradiction between the agrarian revolution, out of capitalist control, carried out by the peasantry, and the continued existence of the capitalist state power and economic structure of the country. The agrarian crisis is the expression in the rural regions of the crisis of dual power.
This crisis capitalism wants to solve in its own favor by a political and economic operation. These are today the bases, as we shall see below, for a worker-peasant alliance.


V
The Worker-Peasant Alliance: Its Bases and Tasks
Agrarian Reform and Permanent Revolution
The Bollivian experience is conclusive: thorough development of the agrarian reform is incompatible with the continuance of the capitalist regime. In spite of its non-socialist nature, the logic of the development of the agrarian reform in this period and in backward countries is anti-capitalist. Either there is set up a workers’ and peasants’ government that from the seat of power upholds and develops the peasant revolution, or the bourgeois government will soon confront the peasant masses with a sabotage of any advance of agrarian reform, in open or tacit alliance with the landowners.
The illusion of the petty-bourgeois parties and of the theoreticians of bourgeois development in backward countries is that agrarian reform, the destruction of feudalism in the rural regions, and the turning over of the land to the peasants, create an internal market for industry and provide the bases for a development of capitalism and the industrial bourgeoisie.
But the first effect of “Bolivian-style” agrarian reform is not to create a broad market (that comes later, if there is development), but to liquidate one of the bases of capitalist strength, investment, and accumulation: the alliance with the landowners, their direct appropriation of unpaid peasant labor.
The agrarian reform upsets the balance of power between the national bourgeoisie and the proletariat. On the one hand, as it is the peasant masses who impose agrarian reform by their armed mobilization (and if not, a real agrarian reform and genuine distribution of the land are not achieved), the proletariat gains an ally that is powerful and in full movement. On the other hand, the liquidation of the economic and political power of the landowners deprives the weak national bourgeoisie of what is – apart from imperialism – its best ally against the advance of the masses.
The development of the peasant revolution speeds up the capitulation and sell-out of the national bourgeoisie to imperialism, its last sure ally against the masses.
In its turn, the peasant revolution, the armed mobilization of the peasantry to win and defend its land, the support given by the peasantry to the regime that emerged from the April revolution (which the peasantry understands as being for the defense of its conquests and its lands), the workers’ and peasants’ alliance in the COB and in mass actions – these have been the absolute base for the maintenance of the revolution.
Without the peasants’ weapons, without the peasants’ unions, without their de facto alliance with the miners’ and workers’ trade unions (despite the sabotage of the leaderships), in a word without dual power, the revolution would long since have been defeated in Bolivia by the capitulation of the petty-bourgeois leadership to the pressure and blows of imperialism and reaction.
Without dual power, under a stable and purely capitalist power (however “progressive” and “democratic” it might have been), the agrarian reform, together with the revolution, would long since have perished.
But, inversely, the maintenance in Bolivia of the capitalist state, of the capitalist regime, is every day objectively working against agrarian reform.
Unless it is accompanied by other measures in an anti-capitalist direction, the agrarian reform will remain isolated and blocked, and with begin to disappoint and disperse the enthusiasm of the masses. Nevertheless, this is not the process of a single day: a peasantry that is armed and occupies its lands in an agrarian country shows a capacity for resistance that can last many long years even though it has not solved the problem of power, especially if the resistance and basic cohesion of the proletariat in its trade unions are maintained, even if it does not go forward.
 
The Question of Power
The problem of power becomes the (key question for the triumph of the peasant revolution and for the agrarian and industrial development of the country. The capitalist power is incapable of pulling the country out of its feudal backwardness and of developing capitalism. As Lenin demonstrated in State Capitalism and the Tax in Kind, workers’ power is the only one that can develop “capitalism,” under the control and direction of the workers’ state, in a backward country.
Trotsky says the same in the second thesis of The Permanent Revolution:
In respect to countries of retarded bourgeois development, especially colonial and semi-colonial ones, the theory of the permanent revolution means that the integral and effective solution of their democratic aims and of their national emancipation can be conceived only by means of the dictatorship of the proletariat, this class seizing power as the oppressed nation, and above all of its peasant masses.
But the problem of power raises the problem of the worker-peasant alliance, without which the struggle for workers’ power in a backward country is inconceivable.
The worker and peasant alliance is the basis of the Latin American revolution. The precondition for its establishment is that the proletariat calls to the struggle, and itself struggles, with its programme for agrarian reform and the defense of the sharing-out of the land, calling on the peasants to fight for the workers’ power, for the workers’ and peasants’ government, that will support and defend the sharing-out of the Hand. [Editorial in the Revista Marxista Latinoamericana, no. 9]
This is the fundamental premise for the worker-peasant alliance in the struggle against the national bourgeoisie, the oligarchy, and imperialism. But in Bolivia, since the April revolution, in the situation of the sharing-out of the land and dual power, this premise needs to be complemented by a programme that shows the peasantry that a favorable outlook for the reform already begun lies in the workers’ power, in a transitional programme between the present stage and the workers’ and peasants’ government.
In Bolivia, afterwards in Cuba, and further in other countries of Latin America, the case occurs where the strength of the mass movement carries out a thorough agrarian reform – which the bourgeoisie or petty bourgeoisie would never have carried out – based on dual power or the beginning of dual power, but the lack or weakness of a revolutionary Marxist leadership prevents it from culminating in workers’ power. A bourgeois regime is set up, but paralleled by a beginning of workers’ power, and shaken in its foundations and in its possibilities of stability by the peasant revolution. This situation is the typical result of the gap existing between the highly revolutionary objective conditions and the backward subjective conditions, in the formation of a revolutionary workers’ leadership of the masses.
 
The Bases of the Worker-Peasant Alliance
It is under these conditions that it is necessary to raise the question: What is the programme for advancing the worker-peasant alliance and, along the way, building this leadership?
It does not take the peasant long to see that the agrarian reform is not a panacea. It is agitated as the basic measure and the masses mobilize behind it, but it needs to be complemented by other measures or it founders. Economic development that raises farm production and peasants’ Hiving standards after the reform is added as one of the bases for the continuation of the alliance.
With the agrarian reform half made (the land distributed for the most part, but nothing more), the peasantry has to see in the workers not only the guarantee and the leadership of the struggle for the land as a centre, but also the support and the orientation and leadership for its economic development. It is by its own narrow economic interests that the peasantry measures the results and advantages of the alliance. It knows that in the proletariat it has the guarantee against a return of the latifundists, and therefore it supports it. But it needs something more to go forward against the capitalist government responsible for the crisis in the agrarian reform.
The alliance, if it is to go forward, needs to be based not only on a resistance to an open return to the former regime of the bosses, but above all on a struggle against the capitalist government and their influence on the peasantry. The solutions and means for raising the alliance to the level of this struggle must be based on the current situation and the current stage.
The worker-peasant alliance has not been broken, but it has ebbed. It is maintained as a front of resistance, of defense of gains already won. It needs to be converted into a front for an advance toward new revolutionary positions.
The cause of this ebb is not merely the policy of the leadership, however great its responsibility may be therein. It is also the ebb in farm production, the retreat toward subsistence economy, the abandonment of peasant needs. The government are aware that these are all factors leading to dispersal. They are profiting by the inactivity and submissiveness of the official labor leadership, its abandonment of the rural regions, in order consciously to accentuate them.
After six years of official agrarian reform, the peasantry has not been able to raise its living levels, its production; it is finding out from experience that land alone is not enough, either with or without title-deeds. That is not what it was expecting from the agrarian reform.
From now on, the workers’ movement must appear in factual action as the guide and practical aid, in plans, in methods of struggle, for raising production and the peasantry’s living levels. It must show in practice, even on a small scale, that only the workers’ and peasants’ power can guarantee the peasants’ gains and improve their situation. The peasantry, which already possesses its land to a large extent, will be won over to the struggle for the workers’ power, against the capitalist government, if from now on the workers’ movement demonstrates the methods and possibilities that this power will have for increasing the production and well-being of the peasantry.
 
Workers’ Power and Agrarian Development
The problem is not simply one of plans. There are plans in many books, and even the CEPAL proposes a series of measures needed to improve the situation in the Bolivian countryside. The problem is, rather, who will apply the plans, what forces and with what methods. That is what will make the peasantry decide: practice, and not just plans. And that is, in synthesis, what constitutes the programme: the measures, the methods, and the forces that apply them.
The problem, then, is a problem of power: who will govern, and for whose benefit. Measures for raising farm production cannot reach the farming regions from above, from the capitalist power. This power cannot, however good the plans it may work up, mobilize the forces for carrying them out. And – the main point – it does not even want to do so.
This sense of initiative can be awakened, mobilized, and led to develop its full creative capacity only by the workers’ power. Workers’ power is not in contradiction to peasant mobilization; on the contrary, it needs it for policy and for the economy. Capitalist power is in contradiction to any mobilization in the rural regions. While it is developing an intense campaign for dispersing and politically demobilizing the peasants, it cannot mobilize them for production.
And, in an agrarian country, without the mobilization and participation of the masses, there is no increase in production, and even less in farm production.
State power is necessary to apply the programme for developing agriculture, and for fitting it in, in a balanced way, with the programme of industrial development. Only on a basis of nationalized industry is it possible to combine both aspects without disparities and convulsive crises. [10] State power is necessary to orient and adequately distribute capital resources, always scant in a backward country, to organize and carry through an investment policy in accordance with the needs of development. Without an investment policy, without an order of priorities in the investment of resources, the programme cannot be anything but an abstraction. This policy and these priorities can be solved only from the position of power.
State power is necessary, lastly, to control and use the resources of credit and foreign trade, without which no development of agricultural production is possible.
This power must be based on proletarian democracy, to ensure the contribution of the whole creative spirit of initiative of the masses and to place under its control the properly balanced development of the different branches of the economy.
The democratic participation of the masses is necessary for the solution of the economic, political, and social problem of the plan: the balance between what industry receives from the agrarian economy and what it gives it; the correlation between accumulation and consumption, between the funds for the construction of basic capital and the funds for wages; the distribution of the national income. Proletarian democracy is necessary both as an economic stimulus and as a factor in the well-balanced development of the plan [Michel Pablo: Economic Problem of Transitional Regimes, in Dictature du proletariat, démocratie, socialisme (Editions de la Quatrième Internationale), p. 26]
 
Where to begin
But the central problem at the present level is: From where and with what forces should we, today, set out to reach power? How is the worker-peasant alliance organized for the struggle for power?
A trial balance concerning the worker-peasant alliance may be struck at a less elevated level: that of the peasantry’s own interests. To re-establish the alliance, it is necessary to take as a basis the peasantry’s interests at this stage, which are: to ensure its right to the land and its gains; to raise its production; to sell its products and be able to acquire what it wants from the cities.
If peasant confidence in the proletariat is to be built up for the struggle against the capitalist government, the peasant must see in the worker an effective aid for an increase in his production and in his living levels. He must see that the worker can really help him in just those matters in which the capitalist power has abandoned him.
It is necessary for the workers’ movement to organize the political defense of the peasantry against the offensive of the capitalist government. It must appear, permanently and openly, as its political ally in the cities and the mines, facing up to the government, calling the peasants to its aid, preventing the sending of troops to the rural regions.
But it must also show itself, in factual actions, to be the only firm hope for the peasantry’s economic interests, to get out of the present situation of crisis. It must thus prove the unity that exists between the immediate individual economic interests of the peasantry, and its support to and participation in the political perspective of the worker-peasant alliance. There is no other way of winning over the peasantry as an ally, not onlly to defend the positions already won, but also to go forward against the enemies who are threatening these positions – the capitalist government and imperialism – and to defeat them.
Pacts and agreements must be worked out between the unions of the peasants and the workers (miners, factory-workers, railwaymen, truck-drivers), so as to supply the pulperías [11] with farm products, to supply the peasant fairs with industrial products at cost prices, to ensure cheap transport for products in both directions, etc. The bank employees, for example, must carry out studies concerning the peasants’ credit needs, and require, through their unions, that the banks extend these credits. The workers’, peasants’, and university unions must make studies and plans for the necessary investments in fertilizers, seeds, irrigation works, etc., in order to raise production quickly and at low cost, and to draw up an adequate policy of investments for the country’s income, as the workers’ controls in the Mining Corporation and in some mines (Huanuni, for example) have already begun to do in an elementary way. The peasant unions, with the help of university people, technicians, et al., must broadcast and apply elementary measures for an increase in production. Together with the workers’ unions, they must guarantee the marketing of farm products at a better price for the peasants, without middlemen, through the pulperias of the mines and factories. Together with the professors’ and primary teachers’ unions, they can adopt measures for overcoming illiteracy and developing teaching, in which the capitalist state shows no interest or initiative, and demand the resources for carrying this out. The teachers, in exchange, will be guaranteed the support of the rural regions for their own problems and demands, as will the other sectors. Similar actions and agreements can be considered with the oil-workers, public-health workers, building-trades workers, mutual-aid associations, etc.
The trade unions must be brought to function as the elementary organs of power on the economic plane. Even with all their limitations, a few successes will have great importance, and will open up the prospect of coming out the other side of an extremely long period of dual power.
In this way, workers’ power will go on raising and building itself inside the situation of dual power, and raising and building the confidence of the great masses in themselves and in the workers’ power.
Without state power, it is obvious that these experiments would be inevitably limited and would not provide an overall and lasting solution for the problems of the revolution. But successes achieved in them, together with unity and support between the workers’ and peasants’ struggles, will show the way for re-establishing the worker-peasant alliance in the struggle for workers’ power. They will show how immense the possibilities of the workers’ and peasants’ power could be. The peasant will see this in practice much more than in explanations or general propaganda.
The workers’ radios, the miners’ radios, constitute a valuable medium for broadcasting and propagating these experiences of unity between workers and peasants. The peasantry needs to be informed, to be consciously won over, right down to its last bases, for the alliance with the workers. The miners’ radios are the instrument for breaking down its isolation, for giving an impulse to its national unification, for uniting it with the struggles of its class brothers in every corner of the country. A campaign by the miners’ unions to provide radio sets to the peasant unions and centres all over the country would have an immense echo, if the peasants know that they can hear broadcasts and news about themselves in their own language, Quechua or Aymara. The possibilities in radio, much broader than those in newspapers, are very vast indeed.
And the same time the central organ of the worker-peasant alliance, the COB, has to be reorganized under new conditions and for new tasks – not, however, as a dependency of or a negotiator with the capitalist power, but as its enemy, as the national centralizer of the power of the unions and militia, now dispersed throughout the country.
The task of politically pulling the peasantry away from the MNR and its government has to he speeded up. Every strike by the factory-workers and miners must call for peasant support, must strengthen itself with this support, which is today of immense importance. It is necessary to revitalize the departmental centres, the emergency committees, as local organs of the worker-peasant alliance, of leadership for the movements, of regional centralization of the workers’ and peasants’ power.
A National Congress of Peasants and a National Congress of Worker and Peasant Labor must be the culmination to seal the alliance and impose its programme on the country.
All these tasks are necessary for once more raising up the worker-peasant alliance and its programme, for pulling the revolution out of its stagnation, for making use of the new mobilizations that are shaking the rural regions, and for preventing them from losing themselves in a confusion that is increasing the symptoms of decomposition of the revolution after so many years without a way out.
The precondition, the prerequisite, for the achievement of these tasks is that of workers’ leadership, the adequate and timely participation of the revolutionary Marxist leadership as the centre of regroupment and stimulus for all the revolutionary forces that the government and their bureaucracy are endeavoring to paralyze and disperse.


VI
The Revolutionary Party and the New Workers’ Leadership
Need of New Leadership
The struggle fully to re-establish the worker-peasant alliance is connected with the struggle for a new workers’ and peasants’ leadership, both trade-union and political. The present leadership has no interest in this alliance; indeed, it is dangerous for itself and for its party, the MNR. But the struggle for the worker-peasant alliance is developing jointly and along the same paths with the struggle for a new workers’ leadership. Decisive therein is the conscious role of the revolutionary Marxist vanguard, the Partido Obrero Revolucionario. [12]
The role of the revolutionary party is indispensable not only in organizing the worker-peasant alliance for the struggle for power, but also in maintaining it after power, to organize and develop production, to build the workers’ state and socialism.
The workers’ state and the building of socialism cannot be developed without the high and conscious participation of the great worker and peasant masses. Proletarian democracy provides the framework for this participation, but the revolutionary party furnishes the conscious orientation, discusses and sets the goals, wins and guarantees for the workers’ vanguard the right to direct the process, and above all ensures a close contact between the broad masses and their leadership.
The agrarian problem is, more than any other, a problem of conscious mobilization, of awakening the spirit of creative initiative and the participation of the great peasant masses. Without this, it is impossible to overcome the gap that separates the age-old backwardness of the rural regions from the highest task of our epoch, the building of socialism. Without the revolutionary party rooted in the masses, this mobilization is impossible; the lever and the tools are lacking.
The role of revolutionary party does not fall on it from heaven the day after the seizure of power. The party itself builds it in the struggle for power, while it is building itself. Without the leading participation of the cadres formed by the revolutionary party in all sectors of the masses, in the economic and political tasks of the workers’ state, there is no building socialism. And without the participation of those cadres among the main sectors of the masses in their struggles against capitalism, there is no struggle for power.
For the struggle for power and for the building of the workers’ state and socialism, the revolutionary Marxist party, the POR, needs to form and develop right in the present stage this staff of cadres.
For the development of the peasant revolution and of the worker-peasant alliance, it needs to form a staff of peasant cadres, rooted in the main sectors of the peasantry, in Ucureña, in North Potosi, in Achacachi, in Ghuquisaca, etc. The party needs to build its own peasant organization, its peasant fraction. In the development of this fraction a fundamental part will be played by the support and experience of the miners’ fractions, especially for close contact between the mines and the rural regions, which the party is trying to consolidate.
The peasant fraction must function in a centralized way on the national and departmental levels, hold its own meetings and conferences (like the last conference at Ucureña), publish its own newspaper. The goal of the peasant cadres of the party in the immediate next stage must be to win positions of union leadership, so that therefrom, with the support of the party leadership and its other organisms, they can begin to demonstrate in practice the application of the transitional programme for the rural regions, spur on the struggles in other sectors, and help on the worker-peasant alliance. From the positions of leadership in the miners’ unions that the party wins, it must help on this same process in the rural regions.
Starting out with a few unions, setting up revolutionary leaderships in various unions, peasants’ or miners’ (and also in other sectors) the party must from these vantage-points launch a campaign for the resurgence of the worker-peasant alliance, transform this union or these unions into a bulwark for the farm regions’ demands and problems, begin to apply measures of pacts, alliances, and practical aid to the peasantry, put into practice – even on a limited scale – some of the transitional measures, some of the immediately applicable points of the programme, of the organization of production, etc., and hold the union up as a practical example of what it is possible for other unions and centres to do. This policy will give an enormous strength to the new leadership, even though its base may in the beginning be only a single union. It will thus put to use in its favor the whole immense force that is represented today – and more every day – by the peasantry, mobilized and ready to fight.
 
The Opportunity for the POR
The other workers’ leaderships – Stalinism, Lechinism – have totally abandoned and failed the peasant revolution. In face of it, they have demonstrated their complete impotence. This is one more advantage for the revolutionary Marxist leadership, the POR, which has shown itself to be the only one that has arisen to guide and provide solutions to the struggles and problems of the peasants at this stage. The road is wide open to the POR to win positions in the peasants’ unions, to build and develop its staff of peasant cadres.
The POR was the only party to give its support to the peasants of North Potosi when the whole reaction was carrying out a national campaign against them. The POR was the only party to call for cessation of the struggle between Ucureña and Cliza, simultaneously demanding the withdrawal of the army from the rural regions, mediation by the workers’ movement, and the calling of a Peasant Conference to solve the problems. The POR was the only party which, right from the first moment, came to the open defense of the peasants of Achacachi, while the other workers’ leaderships were drawing back and echoing the government’s campaign of ca’lumny against the peasants. The orientation of the POR, in its leaflets, in its newspaper, in its delegates at Achacachi, was decisive in keeping up peasant resistance and preventing it from withering away in confusion, lack of orientation, and, especially, isolation. The POR broke through this isolation and broke up the government’s first attempt to hem in Achacachi.
The peasants of Ucureña, of Cliza, of Chuquisaca, of Potosi, and of Achacachi, have shown on each occasion that they are aware of and answer the appeals and guidance of the POR. Nobody can now erase from peasant consciousness the task accomplished, in Achacachi, in Ucureña, in all the zones of peasant mobilization.
The POR needs now more than ever to organize and develop its staff of peasant cadres, to harvest and organize all this prestige and authority, to transform itself into the leading force of the peasant revolution. All possibilities are open for the accomplishment of this task.
The struggle for a new leadership of the revolution is not simply the precondition in order to struggle for the resurgence of the worker-peasant alliance: both struggles must be developed, and develop and influence each other mutually, opening up greater prospects for a new bound forward of the Bolivian revolution, for delivering new and thorough blows against capitalism and imperialism, for strengthening the power of the workers’ and peasants’ unions and militia, and winning over still broader masses to the conscious struggle for their own state power.

VII
The Programme of the Peasant Revolution at the Present Stage
A) Economic Problems
1) Complete transfer of the land to the peasants. Recognition of the ownership of the land by the peasants who occupied it, without any further judicial procedures. Division of the remaining latifundia.
2) Distribution to the peasants of the elementary tools for tillage, to modernize methods of land-cultivation without a big initial capital investment. Manufacture of these tools by industry, thus providing work for sectors that are paralyzed or semi-paralyzed (for example, Pulacayo). Gradual introduction of tractors and other farm-machinery.
3) Mass introduction of seeds selected by the state with the collaboration and participation of the peasant unions.
4) Mass introduction, in the same way, of the use of natural and chemical fertilizers, to intensify production and the most advantageous use of cultivatable land, eliminating the long periods of fallowness now common.
5) Construction of irrigation works, wells, drainage ditches, dams, and defenses against floods, with the contribution of state capital and the organization by the unions of paid peasant labor. Provision of pumps for bringing up water.
6) Abundant cheap credit, the nationalization of the Banco Agricola and an increase in its capitalization, setting up agencies in the main peasant centres, and formation of its board of directors with workers’ and peasants’ representatives. Nationalization without indemnization of private banking, with workers’ control, to put its resources at the service of the country’s needs.
7) Technical aid to the peasantry, with specialized personnel under union control. Requests for the sending of agrarian technicians by the workers’ states, especially those which have recently lived through the experience of their own agrarian reform (China, Jugoslavia, etc.), and also planning technicians.
8) Construction of roads and bridges to get production to market, with capital contributed by the state and organization of paid peasant labor by the unions.
9) Request for credits, in money and machinery, to the workers’ states, for the development and mechanization of agriculture (the Peasant Federation of La Paz has already asked that the Soviet offer of credit be accepted and used for this purpose).
10) General development of the organization of producers’, consumers’, and sales cooperatives, based on the successful experience of countries like China. State aid for the formation of cooperatives, in technicians and in money. Reorganization of the Dirección de Cooperativas, suppressing its whole sterile bureaucracy and designating representatives of the workers and peasants. Request to the workers’ states for aid in the form of specialists in cooperativism. Organization of production and marketing of manufactured articles by the peasantry in order to utilize integrally the time in which it is not occupied with farm tasks. Setting of prices by the state for each harvest, before sowing, in accordance with a plan of agricultural development worked up by the peasants’ and workers’ unions of the entire country. Elimination of all middlemen in marketing.
12) Plan of agrarian development, including all the foregoing points, worked up by the unions, with technical help, which visualizes solutions for the problem of the scarcity of land in relation with population growth: plans for colonization (voluntarily accepted by the peasants and with complete backing by the state for their installation and first years of stay), for agricultural technification (even on an elementary scale), for the intensification of crops, occupation of manpower in public works for the rural regions (such as those indicated above), and for development of industry. Working up of simple plans on the provincial and local scales, for the peasants and farm unions of each province and district. The general plan of agrarian development must necessarily be coordinated with the state monopoly of foreign trade and the plan for industrial development.
 
B) Social Problems
1) Organization of labor and mutual aid by the peasants themselves, through their own organisms such as unions, committees, etc.
2) Construction of schools, in the form already indicated.
3) Struggle against illiteracy in children and adults. Teaching to read and write in their own language, Quechua or Aymara. Improvement in the number of primary teachers, in their training, and in their pay.
4) Medical and sanitary attention. Construction of dispensaries and hospitals in or near peasant centres. Educational campaigns about sanitary norms and elementary hygiene.
5) Raising of the level of living and comfort in the rural regions, the state collaborating with the peasant in the construction and improvement of his house, his domestic utensils, his dietary habits, etc. Extension to the rural regions of workers’ social gains such as social security.
6) Suppression of all abuses by authorities and functionaries against the peasantry (the peasant unions themselves must organize this task, directly punishing those responsible).
7) Emancipation of peasant women. Inclusion of women in the peasant unions, their life and functioning, their leaderships. Formation of Peasant Women’s Committees in the unions to attend to specifically feminine problems. Participation of women in the militia, organizing auxiliary corps and women’s battalions.
8) Struggle against racial and anti-peasant discrimination in the cities and the state apparatus, and drastic punishments of any persons who keep up these practices.
9) Cultural and political campaign by the miners’ radios, in alliance and agreement with the peasant unions and centres, in Quechua and Aymara. Installation of peasant radios and adequate receiving sets in each peasant union and district.
 
C) Political Problems
1) Trade-union democracy. Union independence from the state and the governing party.
2) Struggle against the bureaucratization of peasant leaders and against union abuses and dictatorships and terrorist methods.
3) Development of the peasant power through the regular functioning of the agrarian unions and centres as the highest and sole authority in each district, solving all problems.
4) Re-enforcement of the militia, increase in peasants’ arms, centralization of the militia by centres, and democratic election of their chiefs and officers by the rank-and-file itself.
5) Withdrawal of any army forces from the rural regions. Propaganda among the military garrisons that may be sent into the rural regions, calling on the soldiers to fraternize with the peasants and go over to their militia in case of fighting.
6) Expulsion from the rural regions and from the country itself of the imperialist agencies SAI and SCIDE.
7) Holding of a National Congress of Peasants, to discuss and approve the programme of the agrarian revolution at the present stage, and to unify peasant forces on a national scale to impose it.
8) Worker-peasant alliance, through the support of the workers’ trade unions for the peasantry’s programme and mobilizations, and the solidarity of the peasantry with the workers’ mobilizations and demands, setting as the maximum goal the establishment of workers’ and peasants’ power to ensure and guarantee all gains.
9) Holding of a National Congress of Worker and Peasant Labor, to discuss all the problems of the country and the revolution, reorganize the COB, establish the programme of the worker-peasant alliance, and impose its solutions as the highest organism of the revolution and the masses.
10) Workers’ and peasants’ government, based on the workers’ and peasants’ unions and their armed militia, as the democratic organs of power and government of the laboring masses in the entire country.
December 1959

Notes
1. For the first part of this article, see our Spring issue.
2. In its already quoted study, the CEPAL sets forth a certain understanding reached by the bourgeoisie on the problem of the fall-off in production. It states:
Nevertheless, it is not unfavorable meteorological conditions alone that can completely explain the great reduction that has occurred in tilled areas. Other factors have had a more decisive influence on the development of agriculture in recent years. Among them there must be pointed out in the first place the faulty way in which the decree of agrarian reform has been applied up until now. The adjudication of lands, in accordance with the norms of this decree, has gone forward at an extraordinarily slow rhythm. The lack of experience and organization in carrying out this kind of work, the almost total lack of surveying personnel, and the relatively complicated procedures for the granting of title-deeds and the distribution of lands, are some of the causes that have motivated this slowness. As a result of this and of the natural post-revolutionary agitation that has existed in the country in these last years, a climate of uncertainty has been created in the countryside, both among the former landowners and among the very peasants favored by the reform. The former have become frightened by the open hostility shown toward them by the peasants, who invade their properties and in fact do not let them come back to their estates. Even those who have done so run into serious difficulties in obtaining laborers. The peasants, for their part, feel insecure because they do not possess legal title, and are afraid of losing at any moment the ownership of the lands which are now being adjudicated. Besides this, they have lacked the necessary technical and financial aid to contribute effectively to their settling themselves down in their new properties. As a result of this prevailing insecurity and the lack of a well-balanced programme of application of the reform, the greater part of the lands directly worked by the former estate-owners has been left practically untilled, and today is used only for grazing – often harmful for the soil – of the peasants’ livestock. In this way, the only lands that continue to be tilled in a permanent way are the former little plots, sayanas, aimed mainly at providing foodstuffs for their owners – which leaves only a very limited part thereof for sale in the markets. This explains the great contradiction that has occurred in the offer of foodstuffs in the urban centres during these last years. In other words, the subsistence character of Bolivian agriculture has become even further accentuated.
3. Industry brings in only 9% of the total national income. But not even its scant development is properly profited by: while factories close, or others cut down production, there exists, for example, an urgent need for tools of a simple sort for agriculture, which is not furnished by national industry, though this is entirely within its present possibilities.
4. According to the CEPAL, a calculation made by the Servicio Agricola Interamericano in May 1956 shows the following break-down in the price of oranges at that date in the city of La Paz:



 


Percentages




Grower


  21




Transportation


  15




Wholesaler


  22




Market semi-wholesaler


  25




Individual city retailer


  17




 


100



5. According to Deputy Lopez Avila, there existed in 1957 some 400 cooperatives, “of which only some 30-odd deserve to be so described: the others are simply buying and selling clubs, have no culture, have no organization, and have not even been taught the basic principles of cooperativism.”
6. The play on words comes from the term “cupo,” a kind of quota.
7. “The existence of an artificially low official exchange rate meant also a considerable stimulus for the importation of equipment in an indiscriminate manner, not subject to any plan. It has been possible to judge in 1956, when a good part of the existing equipment was paralyzed for lack of repair parts and the lack of personnel specialized in handling it.” (CEPAL, in the aforementioned study)
8. The landowners had at their disposal a certain amount of credit which is at present refused to the peasant. For that matter, farm credit was always very low in Bolivia. The CEPAL calculated that between 1950 and 1955 the loans accorded by the Banco Agricola reached less than 0.5% of the total value of Bolivian farm and stock-raising production. Then the supervised credit of the SAI was set up, “which meant a certain increase, but this went by preference to capitalist exploitations in Santa Cruz, and is granted to poor peasants only in minute amounts and with political conditions.
9. But in a country with a huge population of underemployed peasants (it would be more correct to say: village inhabitants), it is not necessary to start with huge capital investments in order to achieve a substantial increase in the average productivity of labor. For what else is underemployment if not the fact that in such backward countries half or two-thirds of the population, living in the villages, are only really working 150 to 200 days a year! (The First Five-Year Plan of India estimated the number of adult males in Indian agriculture at the staggering figure of 70 million people!) The rest of the year, they do nothing. Now if it were possible to give them something to do during the rest of the year, some productive purpose which does not need huge fixed equipment, their annual production, and thus their annual productivity, would tremendously increase. In fact, while doing nothing, they continue to eat. It would be sufficient to give them a little bit more to eat, while getting them to work, in order to treat the largest part, if not the whole, of their increased production as social surplus product, as a social investment fund. [Ernest Germain, The Industrialization of Backward Countries, in our issue No. 4, Autumn 1958.]
Although in Bolivia the population problem is far from being raised in the same terms, it is indubitable that there exists semi-employment or underemployment of the peasantry (64% of the population, at least), which has been much aggravated by the economic retreat provoked by the monetary stabilization imposed by the International Monetary Fund.
10. In the case of backward countries, nationalization of the principal means of production and adoption, right from the beginning, of commercial methods and practices, must be completed as quickly as possible by two supplementary measures: the planning of a speeded-up industrialization, gradual collectivization, of the agrarian economy, especially in accordance with the possibilities of industry. [Michel Pablo: Economic Problems of Transitional Regimes, in Dictature du proletariat, démocratie, socialisme (Editions de la Quatrième Internationale), p. 22]
The socialist renovation of agriculture will be carried out, naturally, not by cooperatives considered as a new form of organization, but by means of cooperatives based on general industrialization. That is to say that technical and socialist progress in agriculture cannot be separated from an increasing predominance of industry in the country’s general economy. [Leon Trotsky, Toward Capitalism or Toward Socialism?, quoted by Michel Pablo, op. cit., p. 23]
There is no doubt but that a harmonious and well-balanced solution of these problems is definitively possible only within the framework of the socialist unification of Latin America, and not in each country isolatedly; but, at this stage, the revolution and the struggle for power have their own rhythms and problems in the various countries.
11. Once literally “company stores,” these almost sole sources of low-priced supplies of foodstuffs, clothing, and other necessities, can still be used, especially in the isolated mining complexes, even after nationalization, to bring pressure on the workers by manipulation of prices, shortages, etc.
12. For fuller development of this section, see the very important Letter from the Secretariat of the Latin American Bureau of the Fourth International to the XVIth Conference of the POR, in March 1959, on whose fundamental formulations this section is based.
 

