

Last week a miner was killed on picket duty and many more were arrested. The scabs and the police have shown how far they are prepared to go. Pickets will now have to use all their resources to win.
One of these resources could be Labour MPs from mining areas. A few turned up at Battersea Power station in London last week.
But that was basically a publicity stunt. They could be made to perform a unique function – with a bit of pressure, perhaps.
The police and scabs will have to think twice about harassing them, so the whole picket will benefit. Miners’ MPs should be made to man as many picket lines as possible – and stay there. Miners should use the coming lobby of parliament to make the left MPs fight.
Stand your MP on the line in front of a scab lorry – and see what happens.



 


PETE GLATTER and
VIC RICHARDS
Richmond, Surrey



 



‘Indonesia with 10,000 nuclear warheads’ (US official’s description of worst case scenario in Russia). Capital took flight from Russia on 15 May. ‘Unsettled by the upheavals in Indonesia, a looming current account deficit and the inexperience of a newly appointed government,’ explained the Economist, ‘investors lighted on the Russian rouble as the currency at next greatest risk of collapse.’ By 27 May a $2.5 billion oil privatisation had collapsed, the stock market was down 50 percent on the beginning of the year and interest rates had soared to 150 percent.
The central bank had spent $1.5 billion in a fortnight to stave off devaluation. Russia’s reserves were down to a dangerously low $14 billion. On 29 May a leading international credit rating agency placed Russia on the same risk level as Lebanon (just below Jamaica). A slight recovery in the following week saw interest rates cut to a mere 60 percent. But shares fell by 16.6 percent in the week ending 13 June due to continuing turmoil in Asia and lack of concrete help from the industrialised countries and the IMF.
In Asia the crash came after a prolonged boom. The crash in Russia comes after an unprecedented slump. Between 1989 and 1997 the Russian economy, measured in terms of gross domestic product (GDP), shrank by 57 percent. Losses in national wealth between 1991 and 1997 are estimated at $1.2 trillion, three times greater than during the Second World War. With manufacturing industry devastated, Russia’s export earnings are dependent on oil, gas and metals. But prices of such commodities plunged from 20 to 40 percent between December 1997 and March 1998 due to falls in demand.
The disaster of Russia’s gamble on the market goes on. But the government’s options are narrowing. High interest rates may stem capital flight and protect the rouble. But they squeeze a debt ridden banking system. According to the economics minister, it will take the best part of a year to get interest rates back down to 25 percent, a level at which a quarter of public spending goes on servicing government debt. So far the government has failed to sell adequate bonds to finance itself. And repayments on existing debts start to mount in three years time. Devaluation might sharpen the competitiveness of Russia’s raw material exports. But Russia’s dependence on manufactured imports means that devaluing the rouble could reignite a catastrophic inflation.
An IMF approved austerity plan includes a 3 percent increase in tax revenue and a 15 percent cut in public spending involving 230,000 public sector job cuts and an end to index linked pensions. The plan reeks of the arrogance of the Russian upper class. Russian enterprises already owe $16 billion in pension contributions and payment arrears rose by over 350 percent during April. Tax dodgers are estimated to have smuggled $25 billion out of Russia since 1991. Tax collected last year amounted to less than 11 percent of GDP. Yet big tax debtors like the giant gas monopoly Gazprom have not even been targeted.
On the other hand, miners on strike, mainly over $573 million in unpaid wages, were accused by a minister of living in houses ‘fit for Hollywood stars’. The miners – joined by teachers, doctors and even scientists – have challenged the government’s ability to implement cuts. Between 15 and 26 May they blockaded key railway lines. The railways lost $75 million. The government earmarked $88 million to settle the dispute. But as usual there is uncertainty about whether the money is actually getting through.
The miners, who face 50,000 job losses this year, became a focus for everyone sick of suffering for a corrupt, vicious and incompetent regime. Elections for three regional governorships went against the government as the crisis broke. Militancy has begun to stir in the crucial oil and gas industries. Not a promising start for a government only two months old with parliamentary elections due next year and a presidential election with no obvious candidate the year after that. The prospects for Russian capitalism look extraordinarily grim.
 



Boris Yeltsin’s sudden dismissal of the entire Russian government on 22 March was unexpected but not irrational. It was a government split by internal feuds and soaked in sleaze. There was no obvious establishment candidate for the presidential election in the year 2000. At the same time Russia is confronted by a renewed economic crisis of such frightening proportions that respectable voices are practically baying for the blood of the poor.
Yeltsin’s nominee as prime minister, Sergei Kiriyenko, was finally accepted by the lower house of the parliament, the Duma, after twice being rejected. Russia’s politicians feared the election which would have followed a third rejection. Sergei Kiriyenko has an impeccable elite pedigree as a former young Communist, banker, oil company director and oil minister. He is also young – only 35 – and untarnished by corruption and scandal. He is little known, so he is neither popular nor unpopular. This gives him, as Moscow News put it, ‘several months’ in which to do ‘the dirty and thankless job’ of hurting ‘a proportion of the population without large scale protests’. If he succeeds he would be the ideal successor to Yeltsin. If he fails he could easily be used as a scapegoat.
Only a few months ago Russia was finally supposed to be stabilising and was described in the Financial Times as ‘the world’s best performing emerging market’. But the Russian economy had shrunk by about half over the previous decade. According to recent figures GDP fell by 28 percent between 1993 and 1996, more than in any major Russian crisis this century. Yet the proportion of tax collected has also fallen over the last five years, from 14 percent of GDP to around 10 percent. World prices of oil, gas and metals, which provide most of Russia’s export earnings, are falling dramatically. The foreign debt now stands at £78 billion.
Russia’s gamble on the market has simultaneously piled up mountains of debt and crippled its ability to pay. Kiriyenko has not come up with any serious ideas for tackling arrears of pay and pensions which have risen to nearly £15.5 billion. By contrast, oil companies – among the worst payers of wages and taxes – have now been allowed to use Russia’s pipeline system for free as part of a programme of government support.
Major parties like the Communists are none too popular. Despite a lot of nationalist and populist rhetoric, they have a record of capitulating at the last moment – as they did over this year’s budget – which gives the government the power to introduce further spending cuts without consulting parliament. They may bargain to the brink over positions in the new government but they are unlikely to risk their considerable privileges by going over it into the unknown.
Such politicians like to blame Russia’s troubles on foreign institutions like the World Bank and the IMF, which wants up to 300,000 job cuts in education and health this year. But these policies suit the core sections of the Russian ruling class in energy and finance. As Sergei Glazyev, a top official in the Federation Council (the upper house of parliament), recently admitted,
‘It means the government is forcing the population to pay for the chaos in government...the main taxpayers are so powerful, they don’t pay tax. It’s easier for the government to cut social welfare, and allow the oligarchy to be relieved of tax.’
Moscow News welcomed the new prime minister with the declaration that ‘the country has long lived beyond its means.’ Yet cuts and economic decline have already had a shattering effect. Life expectancy has plunged; mortality rates have soared. Water and power supplies have failed in the depths of winter. Prisons are breeding grounds of disease. Women have died in childbirth in hospitals without electricity. The homeless freeze to death in the main railway stations. Miners give their lunchboxes away to hungry children. Wages are unpaid for up to three years. Trawlermen’s wives in the far east recently accused the bosses of paying their partners with vodka (recorded as ‘liquid ice cream’) rather than with money.
Despite all this, workers mount a relentless if scattered resistance – bitter, desperate, heroic. Here they go on strike or hold management hostage. There they block a main railway line, go on hunger strike, barricade themselves in and threaten to start a fire. Some strikes are successful, if only temporarily. Some inspire more strikes. There is solidarity, there is class consciousness – it is a huge step forward from the old Soviet straitjacket. But there is no unifying organisation, no systematic vision connecting these struggles with the possibility of an alternative society. The building of a revolutionary organisation could help to begin turning desperation into hope.
 



The Romantic Exiles
E.H. Carr
Serif £13.99
It is said that bistro, the French word for a type of small café comes from the Allied occupation of France after the defeat of Napoleon. Russian officers would shout in their own language ‘Bistra! Bistra!, ‘(Faster! Faster!) to chivvy the waiters of Paris. Whether this was the distinctively Russian contribution to the fast food culture of the early 19th century remains uncertain. One thing is sure: the Parisian waiters had the last laugh. For among the Russian officers who returned home there were those who took with them the ideas of the French Revolution. The Decembrist revolt of 1825 was inspired by such ideas. It was an ill conceived, clumsily executed attempt at an officer led mutiny against Tsar Nicholas I, easily suppressed and brutally repressed with hangings and exile. But it marked the beginning of the revolutionary movement in Russia and electrified a generation of idealistic young aristocrats. Among them was a 13 year old boy called Alexander Herzen, who swore a secret oath with a friend to dedicate his life to the ideals for which the Decembrists had suffered. This book, written by one of the most eminent historians of modern Russia and first published in 1933, is about Herzen and his friends and the ideals they tried to live by.
Herzen was a contemporary of Karl Marx and drew on similar sources of inspiration. The rising waves of revolutionary struggle in the 1820s, 1830s and 1840s held out the promise of a glittering new world which seemed almost within reach. The ideas of the German philosopher Hegel, in which the statics of appearance are belied by the dialectics of change, were taken by both men to constitute, in Herzen’s useful phrase, ‘the algebra of revolution’. Both men spent much of their lives in exile, Marx in grinding poverty, Herzen flitting restlessly with his entourage around the cultural and leisure centres of Europe. Unlike Marx, Herzen proved incapable of progressing beyond the romantic idealism of youth. Romanticism in those days was closely bound up with the ideological legacy of the French Revolution: the essential nobility of the human spirit and the freeing from the shackles of tradition of its highest emotions – passion for justice, sympathy with the oppressed, altruism in love. Noble sentiments, but vague and impractical. Expectations were disappointed. The revolutions of 1848 did not usher in the promised land (though defeated, they nevertheless prompted a renewed surge of capitalist development). The religion of love foundered on the rocks of petty self interest, dishonesty, unfaithfulness and egotistical self indulgence. The young romantic went to his grave an embittered sceptic. Only one material achievement remained to Herzen at the end: the enhancement of the considerable fortune he had inherited from his father.
Herzen’s own legacy to the Russian revolutionary movement was the idealisation of the peasantry as a force which could bring about a uniquely Russian kind of socialism without having to suffer the trials of industrialisation. This became known as Russian Populism or Narodnikism, from the word narod – the people—a term which could be used in a mystical or semi-mystical way. Apart from a brief period during the 1917 revolution, Narodnikism was never as popular among the peasants it espoused as it was among the middle classes, including the lesser gentry landowners. This might seem strange to us now. But it must be remembered that a working class only began to take shape in Russia towards the end of the 19th century and that it was still a minority of the population when it took power in October 1917 at the head of the insurgent peasantry. The middle classes had their own grievances against tsarism but they were too small and insignificant to be able to apply much pressure on their own. As Trotsky put it so graphically in the case of the writer Tolstoy: ‘From the landlord’s manor there runs a short and narrow path straight to the hut of the peasant.’ The aristocratic Tolstoy saw the peasant as the agent of spiritual salvation, the aristocratic Herzen as the raw material of political change.
Built into Narodnikism was the wavering uncertainty of the middle class psyche, resentful of its masters, yet dependent on them for its relative privilege, and not averse to posing as the champion of the dark masses which it nevertheless feared enough to seek the protection of the local barracks commander. Herzen himself had something of a predisposition to throwing himself at the feet of the commander of all the barracks in Russia. What E.H. Carr calls the culminating point of Herzen’s public career came in 1861, when one of the key reforms for which he had been struggling, the emancipation of the serfs, was enacted by the new tsar, Alexander II (serfdom was a kind of rural slavery in which the peasants were tied to the land and could be sold with it; emancipation came at the cost of huge redemption payments which were only cancelled more than 40 years later as a result of the 1905 Revolution). Carr continues the story:
‘Alexander II had nobly justified the hopes which they had rested on him. Herzen was filled with joy and pride; and when, after some delay, the text of the proclamation reached London, he was determined to hold a monster fête, at Orsett House, to celebrate this cardinal event in the history of his country ... Herzen had nourished the secret intention of drinking to the health of the tsar at the dinner – a gesture of reconciliation which would, he felt, make a sensation throughout the Russian world. A few minutes before the guests arrived, tragic news was brought in. A riot had broken out in Warsaw, and the Russian troops were firing on the Polish mob ... an atmosphere of gloom descended on the festival ... the occasion remained in Herzen’s memory as an embarrassing blend of jollification and mourning.’
This is, in fact, one of the relatively few occasions on which Carr releases the reader from a claustrophobically minute examination of the personal lives of Herzen and his circle. We get a blow by blow account of how Herzen’s wife deceived him – and herself – with the poet Georg Herwegh. Of Herzen’s political ideas, career as a publicist, activities as the editor of the influential paper The Bell, there are only glimpses.
It is not Herzen’s human failings which make him so attractive to Carr. It is his political frailty. Herzen ultimately gave way to the prevailing mood of demoralisation and pessimism, surrendered himself, gave in, gave up. Isaiah Berlin, who, like Carr, was an admirer of Herzen and an unsympathetic biographer of Marx (Carr’s own work is subtitled A ‘Study in Fanaticism’) remarked on Marx’s unusual ability to keep going in the face of triumphant reaction throughout Europe. Berlin makes it clear that this was due to Marx’s narrow mindedness and emotional insensitivity.
So Herzen, the tasteful, stylish failure, makes a more interesting historical subject for Carr than Marx, with his political stamina.
 



‘This is the collapse of a system.’
Svetlana Babayeva, The Inflation of Power, Izvestiya, 9 September 1998.
‘We are watching the death of the Russian state.’
Paul Goble (director of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty), The Baltic Times, 1–7 October 1998.
The Russian ruling class has, in the last ten years, lost two empires – the outer empire, which included the whole of Eastern Europe, and the inner empire, the Soviet Union – and it has been unable to regain a firm footing even in Russia itself. It has lost its position as a world superpower and now, enfeebled, has to concern itself instead with such matters as the danger posed by atomic submarines rusting away in their berths. Its armed forces are a byword for desperate poverty, murderous bullying, unwillingness to serve and lack of will to fight. It has abandoned the remnants of its Stalinist ideology without finding a convincing replacement. Its economy is in tatters. Much of its manufacturing industry has effectively ceased to exist. Its gamble on selling its raw materials abroad has failed, owing to the collapse in prices following the Asian crisis. Its financial system, such as it was, is a smoking ruin. It has defaulted on its external debt and its currency is an international joke. The state, with which it once identified itself, is fragmenting with at least three unsuccessful attempts at stable government in 1998 alone. It has a growing fear of revolt from below, with nightmarish memories of ragged people looting the palaces in 1917; the Yeltsin family is not the only one to be snapping up property abroad in case it has to flee. [1]
Neither Western nor Russian experts are clear about the nature and causes of this crisis. Some have had their reputations destroyed like Richard Layard, the leading British economist and adviser on the transition in Russia and joint author of The Coming Russian Boom which ‘introduces Westerners to a Russia that is far healthier and more promising than the one they have read about in the papers, and shows how the greatest political-economic challenge of the post Cold War world has become a resounding and exemplary triumph’. [2] Others have become incoherent. Introducing his survey of Russia for 1998, Donald N. Jensen, one of the top officials of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, for many years a prime source of reliable information on the region (as well as a notorious mouthpiece of Western propaganda), has concluded that ‘no single description of the Russian political system seems adequate.’ [3] If such expertise, backed by considerable resources and experience, is insufficient to arrive at a clear picture of the post-Soviet regime in Russia, then ordinary people can hardly be expected to get much in the way of clarity from the press, the radio and the TV.
A lot of the confusion has to do with traditional divisions between left and right, especially during the period of the Cold War. Both right and left shared the view that the Soviet Union was in some real sense communist or socialist. The right tended to see it as a totalitarian state in which the rulers sought to control every aspect of human life, while the left found something progressive and admirable about the Soviet commitment to planning and state control. The left’s illusions in Stalinism have had little influence since the collapse of the Soviet Union, which itself contributed to much of the left’s rightward evolution. The right’s illusions in the accuracy of totalitarianism as a model of the Soviet system have had a more lasting impact. Two points about the theory are more important here. The first is that it was one of the few ‘academically respectable’ attempts to explain the Soviet system as a whole. This partly accounts for the tendency among specialists seeking to explain the decline and fall of the Soviet Union to fall back on totalitarianism theory. [4] The second point is that totalitarian theorists made a qualitative distinction between totalitarian regimes (i.e. Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union) and non-totalitarian ones, even if the latter were as unpleasantly authoritarian as Franco’s Spain or Pinochet’s Chile. If there is a qualitative difference between totalitarianism and authoritarianism, then the gulf between a democratic republic like post-Soviet Russia and the totalitarian regime which preceded it should have been unbridgeable. Yet the fact is that the Soviet Union of Stalin and his heirs evolved into Russia and the other successor states of today without a major cataclysm – certainly nothing to compare with the huge changes which accompanied Stalin’s own rise to power.
It was common ground among the theorists of totalitarianism that the way political power was organised was the fundamental feature of the Soviet system (much of the left too saw the role of the Soviet Communist Party, for example, as crucial to the progressive nature of the USSR). However, political power must always be seen in the context of the essential question: who controls the means of production, and what is the relationship between them and the actual producers? These relations of production constitute the economic base of society which underpins a particular political regime. This was the argument of those who insisted that far from being socialist the USSR under Stalin and his successors developed as a form of state capitalism. Forty years on, the same basic tools enable us to make sense of the transition from Stalinist to post-Stalinist regimes at a time when most of the left has thought it was witnessing the demoralising collapse of the ‘socialist bloc’. As Alex Callinicos puts it:
The social meaning of the East European revolutions was obscured by their most visible aspect, the collapse of the Stalinist one party states. But an economically dominant class must be distinguished from the specific political form through which it both secures its own cohesion and establishes its rule over society. The German bourgeoisie remained economically dominant throughout the twentieth century, despite a succession of changes of political regime – the quasi-absolutist Second Reich, the parliamentary Weimar Republic, the Nazi dictatorship, and finally the Bundesrepublik. [5]
The distinction between social structure and political regime is also vital to an understanding of the crisis of the ruling class in Russia today. It will be argued here that the ruling class has retained its control of the means of production since Soviet times, merely shifting its grip by means of privatisation. It has, as a result, continued to dominate the main successor state to the Soviet Union. But specific elements involved in the transition, especially the economic crisis and the loss of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), have disorganised and disorientated the ruling class and the state and have substantially diminished their internal cohesion with the result that Russia today is in the deepest crisis.
 
The Problem of the Transition from Bureaucratic State Capitalism
The essential problem of the Russian economy can be simply stated. To overcome Russia’s historic backwardness, Russia’s rulers, from Stalin onwards, drove the economy forward to compete militarily and economically with the West. The context and essential nature of this state capitalist industrialisation was well captured – despite his rejection of the theory – by Richard Sakwa:
Political competition with the West was now transformed into an economic race, but one whose standards and measure of achievement were set in the West ... In the context of socialism in one country Stalinism was primarily a war machine, with emphasis on heavy industry, a way of industrialising the country to sustain its military potential. [6]
For six decades this worked well enough for the Soviet Union to be able to defeat Nazi invasion and then maintain itself for nearly half a century as a credible opponent of the world’s biggest power, the United States. But as the world economy grew more integrated in the post-war period the penalties of isolated industrialisation grew. By the 1980s the Soviet economy was clearly falling behind in this race.
In particular this centrally directed, military-industrialisation drive had important organisational and structural consequences for the Soviet economy which in the long run undermined its capacity to adjust and maintain its position. Organisationally Russia was run by the Soviet nomenklatura – the central political bureaucracy – which was to a large extent a managerial organisation. [7] From top to bottom, the CPSU, the key institution of the Soviet regime, spent more time and effort on the economy than on any other single area. A content analysis of the decrees issued by the Central Committee of the CPSU between 1966 and 1980 showed a 50 percent concentration on economic issues compared with 9 percent on foreign affairs and 8 percent on agitational work. As far as anyone can judge, this 50 percent figure is typical of the Party as a whole. ‘Party secretaries receive medals and gold stars not for the state of party work in their area, or for the political maturity of the party organisation,’ said Leningrad first secretary Gerasimov in 1988, ‘but for record harvests and new factories’. [8] It was unusual for the Party’s regional leaders (the pool from which Politburo members were drawn) not to have spent a considerable period in the management of one of their key local industries or of agriculture. This was even more the case in the huge new oil and gas regions of Western Siberia. [9]
However, the Soviet economy was not dominated by the regional Party leaderships but by upwards of 100 ministries, each of which controlled a particular branch of industry. These giant economic bureaucracies originally developed as the main mechanisms for implementing Stalin’s forced industrialisation in the 1930s. The economic ministries were inured to Stalinist motivation, priorities, methods and habits: military competition with the West; the development of heavy and military industry at the expense of infrastructure, social infrastructure and consumer goods and services; achievement of plan targets through the application of pressure and ‘storming’; and, last but not least, empire building and the defence of one’s own ‘empire’ against encroachment by other ministries. If the ruthlessness of the branch ministries mellowed somewhat over the years, then this was a change of degree, not of kind. Referring to the domination of the regional and local authorities by the ministries in 1984, the journal Kommunist revealingly commented on ‘how the ministries have practically “torn asunder” entire cities such as Bratsk, Togliatti, Miass, each building “their own” part of town at a respectable distance from “the others”.’ Regional and local officials were locked into this industrial structure: ‘Successful plan fulfilment by local factories was more important to them than a smoothly functioning regional economy’. [10] Despite much open debate and a clumsy attempt at reform the ministries retained their power until the end of the Soviet era.
Structurally, the conditions of enforced relative isolation also meant building up a parallel economy to that of the West. To achieve the same ends as the United States, Russia’s rulers had to devote roughly two to three times the relative share of resources compared to the situation in the US. To support this it was necessary to develop a more powerful industrial sector than would be normal for an economy at the levels of development achieved by the former USSR. As economies grow there appears to be a broad but systematic relationship between the production shares of agriculture, industry and services. But because global competition forced the Russian economy to support an industrial base in advance of its level of overall development the gap between the actual industrial share and what would be predicted for a more typical economy at that level of development was considerable. In 1979, 62 percent of output came from industry compared to a predicted share of 40 percent. Resources elsewhere were squeezed, accounting for infamous weaknesses in housing, community services, distribution and so on. Even in the industrial sector much development remained significantly behind the West, operating at lower levels of productivity. Too often, from a global point of view, Russia had the wrong type of industry in the wrong place; plants were too large, turning out too diversified a range of products with equipment that was less efficient than that elsewhere in the world economy. [11]
By the mid-1980s it became evident that radical surgery was needed. Initially this took the form of Gorbachev’s programme of perestroika or restructuring but as problems worsened the momentum developed to go further. When internal divisions at the top led a section of Russia’s rulers to launch an unsuccessful coup against Gorbachev in 1991 they were motivated less by opposition to shifting to a more market economy than by their determination to limit democratisation and to hold on to as much of the Soviet empire as was possible.
Reformers on the other hand believed that it was necessary to weaken the ties of empire and to have a degree of democratisation to break the blockages in the bureaucratic system. With this they believed they could ensure that as much control as possible remained with those who had traditionally held it while allowing for some rejigging of the internal balance of power and some addition of new blood which could help reinvigorate the system. Secondly, they could keep their grip on power by ensuring that any protest from below was kept within bounds and diverted into harmless channels. Thirdly, they would redraw the lines of Russia’s influence along its borders over the states that were now gaining nominal independence as well as over old neighbours using more flexible forms of informal domination.
None of these objectives have been attained successfully. Many accounts of what has gone wrong explain what actually happened as a battle between the reformers and recalcitrant forces of the old order and society at large. But, though there is some truth in this, to explain the development of Russia since 1991 solely in these terms is to accept the reformers’ self-definition of the problems and to miss the wider logic of the changes. In fact it is now much clearer that the reformers were always operating at something of a tangent to the real processes of change. One obvious manifestation of this has been ‘the revolving door’ which has led to the recycling of the same personalities as government crises have developed since 1991 even as the policies they have been associated with have stuttered or failed.
When the Soviet pattern of development came under increasing pressure in the 1980s there were, in the abstract, essentially two ways out of the situation. One was to find the resources necessary to improve the productive structure of the economy. By massive planned external investment and assistance it might have been possible to renovate the decrepit industrial structures as well as to build up the missing parts of the economy, including a decent service sector, to answer the need of the population. The alternative was to allow the market to reallocate production by eliminating ‘inefficient’ production and pulling the economy backwards toward an integration into the world economy at a lower level of development.
The resources for the first type of transformation were in the West under the control of generations of leaders and businessmen whose concern with power and profit had already denied the poor of the world this kind of assistance. There was no chance therefore that this would be forthcoming to the former Soviet bloc and Russia in particular. Moreover even a more minimal aid programme geared to the direct reconstruction of production in Russia was seen to smack too much of Keynesian state control. Under the influence of neo-market liberal ideology, however, Russia’s rulers believed, and were encouraged to believe by their Western advisers, that there was a third way. The hope was that the market could achieve the same ends of restructuring and refurbishment without a long run negative impact on Russia’s position in the international division of labour. It was recognised that output would fall but it was hoped that this would be short lived and the economy would follow a U shaped curve – down and then up. And when it moved it up it would spring forward as the dynamism of the market was unleashed.
This idea rested on the mistaken view that what was holding Russia back was firstly state property, secondly bureaucratic management and thirdly insufficiently close ties to the world market. Thus the focus of discussion was the bureaucratic nature of the Soviet system rather than the contradiction between the internal economic structures and the wider logic of the world economy. The argument was now that if property relations were privatised, the market given greater scope in the economy, then managers would seize the initiative and use the world economy to pull the economy up. As Arthur Young, an 18th century contemporary of Adam Smith had put it, the ‘magic of property’ would ‘turn sand into gold’. The writers of The Economist, never deterred by the experience of the real world, put it this way as late as 1995: ‘The main problem with Soviet industry was not that it was short of technological expertise, or even capital. The ingredient it conspicuously lacked was competitive management.’ [12] This can now be seen to have been a monumental delusion, though one that carried away the establishment, East and West.
 
Myths of the world economy
The potential of foreign demand to transform the Russian economy depended partly on the level of demand and partly on the capacity of the Russian economy to supply the goods demanded beyond its borders. The relatively slower growth of the world economy in the 1990s, even in its good years, has, however, limited external demand. Equally the inability of Russian producers, lacking substantial assistance, to produce the goods wanted at the price and quality required in the West has meant that demand has been weak. Even in the defence sector there have been enormous problems and Russia’s share of the global arms trade is estimated to have fallen from around 35 percent in the 1980s to 10 percent in 1997. [13]
Beyond this the only sectors of the Russian economy that have been producing goods saleable in the world economy have been oil and gas and base metals. A simple test of the link between the world economy and the rest of Russian industry is the all but non-existent face of Russian goods in the West. Even the Lada, perhaps the most visible consumer face of the old Soviet system, has largely disappeared. If we look at the European Union we find that in 1996 the whole of the former USSR only supplied 4.6 percent of its imports and the share of manufactured products from Russia was around 1.3 percent of total EU imports. [14]
The overall level of foreign trade has fallen dramatically along with the rest of the economy. Economists distinguish between the volume and value of foreign trade. If the price of a commodity like oil rises or falls then the value of trade can change without the volume of oil traded necessarily changing. Table 1 shows that the volume of oil and gas traded with the West has risen, even as output of oil has been slashed and output of gas has stagnated. The value of this trade has fluctuated with the changing price of energy, rising (especially in 1992 and 1993) and then falling in 1997 and dragging the economy down with it in 1998. Beyond the oil, gas and metals sectors, trade volumes and values have fallen across the economy so that today the Russian economy certainly has no deeper trade relations with the world economy than it had earlier. Moreover the trade level today is to an extent inflated because what appeared in 1989-1991 as internal trade of the old USSR now appears as external trade between Russia and the newly independent ex-Soviet states in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).



TABLE 1: OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION IN RUSSIA [15]




Oil (Millions of Tonnes)




 


Total


Consumption


Non-CIS
export


CIS
export




1988


568.8


 




1989


552.2




1990


516.2


310.0


 




1991


462.3


296.0




1992


399.3


276.0


  66.2


  67.4




1993


353.9


234.0


  79.9


  50.2




1994


317.8


196.2


  95.4


  32.8




1995


307.0


193.2


  96.2


  26.1




1996


301.2


184.0


105.4


  20.6









Natural Gas (Billions of Cubic Metres)




1988


589.8


 




1989


615.8




1990


640.6


478.5


  94.3


  88.9




1991


643.4


475.0


  90.0


  92.2




1992


641.0


450.5


  87.9


106.5




1993


618.4


453.6


  96.0


  75.4




1994


607.2


439.0


109.6


  74.7




1995


595.5


407.2


121.9


  70.3




1996


601.5


407.6


128.0


  70.3




 


(including gas condensates)



One of the apparent peculiarities of this trade pattern which has confused many commentators is the way that Russia has managed to develop a considerable balance of payments surplus in its merchandise trade. Given the dire state of the economy this is the opposite of what might be expected. Imports should be being sucked in to replace the consumer and producer goods that domestic industry cannot produce. But although consumption imports have risen this surplus has grown in recent years to a considerable level. The major explanation for this appears to be that dollars earned in exporting are then taken straight out of the economy again as capital flight so that they are not available to pay for imports but only to build up the balances of Russian capitalists abroad.
This began before the collapse. It now appears, for example, that before 1991 the TASS wire service – supposedly representative of the Soviet regime – was insisting on its services in the West being paid for into a Frankfurt bank account. Then much of the Soviet gold stock appeared to ‘vanish’. The outflow immediately intensified with liberalisation. One prominent Western adviser to the Russian government suggested that ‘to judge from conversations with well informed businessmen and government officials, 10–20 percent of the oil and at least one third of the metals exported from Russia in 1992 were smuggled out of the country. Naturally, the revenues from these sales stayed in bank accounts abroad.’ [16] Since then the total scale of the movement is uncertain with a multiplicity of estimates for the years 1992–1996 ranging from some $61 billion to $89 billion. [17] In addition to this it is important to note that, as in much of the poorer parts of the world, debt repayments on official loans have continued to act as a further drain on the hard currency earnings of the Russian economy.
Capital flight is one way of putting into perspective the other great failure – the lack of foreign investment. So limited has been the level of inward foreign investment that it perhaps runs at less than 10 percent of the level of capital flight. To understand this investment failure it is important here to make two kinds of distinctions. The first is between financial aid to the Russian government and real productive investment. The second is between promised aid/investment and delivered aid/investment. Most of the huge figures talked about in the press represent financial assistance rather than investment. This is not directly invested in the productive structure of the economy but it is used to keep payments flowing around the state and financial systems and back to the West. Account then also has to be taken of the fact that much in both categories is promised rather than delivered.
The idea that foreign direct investment could transform the Russian economy was always a fallacy. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries undertake more than 90 percent of direct foreign investment. But 70 percent of all global foreign direct investment goes to the OECD countries. This helps explain why foreign investment has not transformed the lot of the poor of the world. It simply does not reach them. Moreover what investment does occur beyond the OECD is highly concentrated, ‘almost three quarters of private capital to developing countries in the 1990s went to only 12, mostly middle income countries’. [18] There was therefore little chance of major flows to the former Eastern bloc. In fact cumulative foreign direct investment in the whole of Eastern Europe in the years 1989-1996 was around $44 billion. This sounds large but we can put it into perspective by noting that in the shorter period 1991-1995 cumulative foreign direct investment into Britain was some $86 billion. [19] Thus the people of Eastern Europe have received around 50 percent of the investment that foreign companies have made in Britain with its 58 million population. Of this $44 billion Russia got under $6 billion – half the investment in Hungary with its population of some 10 million or the equivalent of some 7 percent of British investment in 1991–1995. The whole of Russia has received no more than a reasonably sized development area in the UK and much less than London. Or, to put it another way, less than a quarter of what India received in the same period.
The story becomes worse if the geographical location of investment is explored. After an initial surge in investment linked to energy and resource exploitation which drew some resources into the provinces it has been Moscow and the central region that has received the lion’s share of investment – more than 60 percent in 1995–1996. Even the second city, St Petersburg, has received little-less than 10 percent of the total in 1995 and less than 5 percent in 1996. Thus what foreign investment there is serves to increase the degree of uneven development in the economy as a whole. [20]
Nor do international agencies alter the picture. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is a source of both financial assistance and productive investment but what few of its loans have gone to production have been concentrated in gas and oil. Beyond this its flagship industrial loans include £17 million for a brewery and £29 million for a chewing gum factory! [21] For all the talk, therefore, of foreign investment the reality is that ‘all [foreign direct investment] is coming from people who really have no choice but to be here – like McDonald’s – in order to sell their products’. [22] Thus, ‘far from acting as catalyst to domestic economic recovery, the external regime with its reliance on primary goods exports heightens the susceptibility of the Russian economy to external shocks, reduces the potential for increasing competitiveness of manufacturers and entrenches sectional and regional elites’. [23]
 
The ‘Market’ in Russia
The failure of the world economy to bring relief to Russia intensified the internal contradictions within the Russian economy. After the failed coup of 1991 Yeltsin was able to wrest control from Gorbachev and, as the Soviet Union fractured, he had support to begin a reform programme in the Russian Federation. In October 1991 the Russian Congress voted 876 to 16 for economic reform and in November 1991 Yeltsin appointed Gaidar as finance minister to lead the economic reform. The Gaidar group self-consciously saw themselves as a ‘kamikaze cabinet’ (their term). They assumed that their polices would produce ‘creative destruction’ and therefore ‘the bigger the shock the greater the therapy’. Seeing themselves as engaged in an heroic battle for the soul of Russia they argued that it was only possible to jump over a chasm in one leap and therefore the most extreme policies were justified.
These policies had three major components – privatisation, liberalisation and macro-economic stabilisation. The problem was that these preceded any attempt to restructure Russian industry. The justification for this was that these policies themselves would force restructuring as enterprises would have to improve to survive. So long as this worked, privatisation, even if it was corrupt, would be justifiable because it would produce a new and more dynamic managerial class.
Observers inside and outside Russia therefore initially looked benignly on this process. Segei Kovalev, a usually reliable source, claims that Chubias, the man in charge of privatisation, said of what was happening, ‘they steal and steal and steal. They are stealing absolutely everything and it is impossible to stop them. But let them steal and take their property. Then they will become owners and decent administrators of this property.’ [24] In the West there was the same attitude. George Soros, the financier, argued, ‘it’s robber capitalism, it’s lawless, but at the same time very vital and viable.’ The Economist went even further arguing that in so far as the ‘Mafia’ had benefited from privatisation it was now time to legitimise it: ‘The resulting gentrification of the mafia would be neither fair not pretty. But it would be part of the necessary process of capital accumulation.’ [25]
In fact, of course, what happened was that monopolies used whatever power they had to try to hold on to their positions. Thus in January 1992 prices were freed from central control with the hope that as they rose this would in the short run absorb excess money and eliminate shortages by reducing demand (and increasing some supply), but instead they produced rapid inflation and monetary crisis. Parallel to this was the rapid development of a new banking system. At one point banks were being created at the rate of 40 a week and it seemed that anyone who had a minimal amount of capital (in 1993 $70,000 was enough) could start up a bank. The number of banks grew to over 2,500 in 1994 and then began to come down, as failures occurred and licences were withdrawn, to just over 2,000 at the end of 1996 and 1,800 by mid-1997.
These banks fell into four groups. Firstly, there were the branches of foreign banks. Secondly, there were the converted Soviet banks including the Central Bank, Sberbank (the savings banks in which what deposits the population had tended to be kept) and other parts of the old state banking system such as Mosbusiness Bank, Bank Vozrozhdenie, Promstroibank. Alongside these are a third group of ‘pocket banks’ created by large enterprises to act as their banking ‘arms’. These range in size from the banks of the Gazprom natural gas monopoly of Viktor Chernomyrdin – the bizarrely named Imperial Bank (10th in size in 1997) and the National Reserve Bank (17th) – to minor outfits associated with smaller enterprises. Then fourthly there are private banks set up by individuals and groups. Neither of the latter two categories of bank have extended structures of branches or mass deposit bases since they were essentially created to meet specific needs or for market speculation. It is not surprising then that the OECD could say with typical understatement that ‘commercial banks remain essentially inactive in the area of investment’. [26] In fact much of the banking sector depended in the first instance on foreign exchange speculation and this was soon to be supplemented by government bond dealings. They also acted as conduits by which loans coming into the country (including the huge loans from Western institutions like the World Bank and IMF) ‘disappeared’. At the same time they were also one of the mechanisms by which capital flowed out of Russia to the West. And this is to say nothing of the more ‘fully criminal’ money laundering in which many were clearly involved. In addition, to survive the top banks also began to trade in political influence which they soon found so lucrative that the boss of Menatep unguardedly boasted that ‘politics is the most profitable part of the business’. [27]
This was reinforced by the so called ‘shares for loans’ scheme which was a method of ‘privatising’ some of the jewels in the crown of Russian raw material production. In 1995 a group of Moscow banks proposed to the government that they could help finance the budget deficit if the government was prepared to back their loans with shares in the remaining state industries which included many of the ‘jewels’ controlling energy and raw materials. The Yeltsin government accepted the basic idea but insisted on an option to repay credits and, if they could not, that the enterprises should be competitively auctioned. When the government failed to find the resources to repay loans to the banks the result was high farce as the banks effectively auctioned off the enterprises to themselves. It was these shares for loans schemes that consolidated the role of the so called ‘oligarchs’, the leaders of the financial industrial groups (FIGs). One of these, Boris Berezovsky, in an interview with the Financial Times that caused ripples in Russia, claimed in 1996 that seven oligarchs now controlled more than half of the Rusian economy. [28] FIGs in their publicity handouts were likened to Chaebol in Korea and Keiretsu in Japan. In fact these FIGs would soon be exposed as weak and often parasitic structures behind which more powerful interests could operate. [29]
In the short run they appeared to thrive as an attempt was made to stabilise the financial economy after the initial inflationary surge. Inflation was forced down from some 2,600 percent in 1992 to 840 percent in 1993, 200 percent in 1994, 130 percent in 1995 and 20 percent in 1996–1997. As this happened Russia’s image in world markets began to improve and in 1996 the Russian government was able to raise its first international loan and gain a listing on the New York stock exchange. In 1997 they could proudly boast a rating as a ‘promising emerging market.’ Yet all of this was accompanied by the continued decline in production. As Yavlinsky put it in the spring of 1998, ‘We have low inflation, a low budget deficit, but we have almost no economic activity’. [30]
But this rouble stabilisation was a peculiar thing. Firstly the government borrowed enormous sums to achieve it. One part of this came from institutions like the IMF which was gradually sucked in to lending on an ever vaster scale. In July 1998 it agreed, for example, to new loans of $22 billion of which the first payment of $4 billion had been made when the economy crashed. The second source came from government issued short term loans, the treasury bills – the so called GKOs – and bonds or OFZs. These were sold to domestic and foreign investors at enormous interest rates. With the IMF giving its seal of approval larger amounts of speculative capital flowed into Russia, running for a time at levels that made real foreign investment look puny. But this state and private debt pyramid (linked in to the dubious domestic banking sector) depended on the state being able to maintain its payments.
Even without the impact of the Asian crisis this was a self-defeating process. In the first place the high interest rates acted as a further dead weight on investment. ‘Who’s going to invest in Uralmash when investors can make much higher returns on government treasury bills?’ asked Korovin, the director of the Uralmash plant in the Urals. [31] Secondly, the pressure was on to cut back state expenditure and the state itself became as guilty of withholding wages as many private firms, which further weakened the chances of any recovery.
These pressures all added to the ‘barterisation’ of part of the economy as enterprises short of cash and depending on credit and mutual relations for their continued existence all did deals with one another. Thus the attempt to create a market economy perversely created a substantial barter economy. Barter rose from 6 percent of industrial output in 1992 to 9 percent in 1993, jumping with the drive to stabilisation to 17 percent in 1994, 22 percent in 1995, 35 percent in 1996 and an estimated 41 percent in 1997. These figures are for the whole industrial sector. But in parts of the economy the barter share was much higher – 52 percent in chemicals and oil, 56 percent in metallurgy and 59 percent in building materials. [32] With this too went increasing delays in the payment of taxes. [33] At the start of 1998 only an estimated 15 percent of enterprises were paying their taxes in full and on time. Worse still from the point of view of ordinary Russians was the rising number of enterprises that delayed wage payments in whatever way they could.
On the other hand a third part of the economy, the dollar economy, remained immune from this. The size of this dollar economy remains difficult to estimate. Calculations by the state statistical agency put personal savings in dollars at the end of 1996 at over $100 billion – recalculations by other authorities put them at $11 billion – still the equivalent of 60 percent of rouble savings. [34] Most of these dollars were held by a relatively few Russians, the Manhattan elite as they are sometimes called, with access to foreign currency and the West. But where it has been possible – which is far from everywhere – ordinary citizens have also tried to convert some roubles into foreign currency as a store of value. Overall, even if we take some of the middle range estimates of the amount of dollars in circulation in Russia or stashed away somewhere, then it is quite possible that they exceeded the value of roubles in circulation even before the crash.
These problems were quickly exposed towards the end of 1997 when oil and other prices began to slide. Between July 1997 and July 1998 the price of oil fell by around a third. Income from oil and other raw materials fell to post-Soviet lows. Since oil alone accounted for some 15 percent of GDP, one quarter of government tax revenues and half the values on the Russian stock market, the implications of this were enormous. The Russian financial markets began to wobble in late 1997. The government pushed up interest rates to over 40 percent to calm nerves. In January and February the stockmarket dived again but recovered in March only to slide once more with interest rates being pushed up now to 150 percent. What was at stake here was not simply the economy. Writing in its Russian Supplement in the spring of 1998 a Financial Times journalist could describe how:
The country’s strongmen are beginning to crave political and economic stability. This small group of bankers, industrialists and regional bosses hit the jackpot during the mass redistribution of wealth that followed the collapse of communism. But now that the mass giveaway – which future generations of Russians may well condemn as the ripoff of the century – is over, Russia’s winners are desperate to fully legitimise these gains. [35]
But central to this, ideologically and politically as well as economically, was financial stability. ‘The strong rouble is for the establishment the sole achievement of seven years of reform. If it collapses, it’s a political catastrophe for the ruling class,’ Andrei Piontowski, a leading Russian commentator, told a Western journalist in the spring of 1998. [36] In March, Yeltsin, provoked in part by wanting to rid himself of a potential challenger, sacked the Chernomyrdin government to replace it with that of a young elite reformer, Kiriyenko. But Kiriyenko, perhaps suspected by those in power of doing too much, proved as unable as Chernomyrdin to hold things together, especially as the effects of the Asian crisis became more widespread. By August apparent pinpricks such as the announcement of the international financier George Soros that he had doubts about the stability of the Russian financial system could create havoc. By this point debt repayments were running at around 30 percent of the budget, but more importantly payments were coming to exceed the cash inflow of a government starved of tax payments. The crash came as August rolled on, despite desperate attempts to sell huge amounts of foreign exchange to shore up the value of the rouble. In the end it was to no avail and the rouble crashed – devalued by 40–50 percent; the state effectively defaulted on its debts; parts of the banking system collapsed and the government fell to give way to political demoralisation and short to medium term paralysis. Prices leapt for ordinary Russians who desperately grabbed what was left on the shelves of shops hoping to put their money into something of value as well as build up some stocks for the future. The whole system was now in turmoil.
 
How deep is the crisis?
The basic dimensions of the catastrophic declines in the real economy before the crash of the summer of 1998 are set out in Table 2. Some Western economists, dismayed at this picture, have tried to argue that these figures exaggerate the crisis because the old data inflated the levels of production while the more recent data fail to properly count all the new private production. Even if this is so, and a good case can be made that it is not, then the crisis of 1998 almost certainly wiped out a significant part of this shadow economy so that the declines indicated in this table cannot be that wide of the mark. [37]



TABLE 2: THE CRISIS OF THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY [38]




 


GNP
Index


Industria
Production
Index


Agricultural
Production
Index


Investment
as % of
GNP


Prices
% change


%
Unemployed




1989


100.0


100.0


 


       5.6


n.a.




1990


  97.0


  99.9


100.0


 


     92.7


n.a.




1991


  92.2


  91.9


  95.0


23


1,526.0


n.a.




1992


  78.8


  75.4


  86.5


18


   875.0


4.7




1993


  72.0


  64.7


  83.0


13


   307.4


5.5




1994


  62.8


  51.2


  73.0


11


   197.4


7.5




1995


  60.2


  49.5


  67.2


10


     47.7


8.9




1996


  56.9


  47.0


  63.8


  9


     17.0


9.3




1997


  57.1


  47.9


  63.9


  8


n.a.


n.a.



The scale of the fall in gross national output registered in Table 2 is quite simply all but unknown in economic history save in the exceptional circumstances of defeat in war. And even in these exceptional conditions there are relatively few parallels. During the First World War, for example, output in Russia fell by 25 percent, during the Civil War it fell by 23 percent and during the Second World War it fell by 21 percent. Yet in the years 1992–1996 alone the decline was 28 percent. [39] After several years of hope that output would finally start a painful recovery it did rise by 0.4 percent in 1997. But even before the crisis of late August 1998 the preliminary figures for the first half year of 1998 suggested that output was down on the year before – the July 1998 figures suggested a fall of 4.5 percent for GDP, 9.4 percent for industrial output and 16.7 percent for agricultural production. [40]
Within the figures of total output it is industrial production which has fallen the furthest and its scale has gone far beyond what was predicted or what can be justified by even the most fervent free market ideologist. Moreover, the contraction has been evident even in areas that should be relatively strong. Despite the prominence of the oil industry, for example, oil production has fallen between 1988 and 1997 by around 50 percent, reflecting the depletion of fields, the lack of investment and a management more concerned to plunder oil resources than develop them. Gas production has held up better but has been more or less stagnant over the period as a whole. Beyond this, old style Soviet industry has suffered, with mechanical engineering experiencing a huge contraction of some 70 percent between 1989 and 1996. But so too has light industry which might have been expected to expand, with falls greater than much of heavy industry. The OECD talks of the ‘long free fall in light industry and food processing’ – part of what used to be called group B industries. [41] As two Russian economists put it:
Though much has been said about structural ‘perestroika’ (restructuring), no real changes have occurred in the increase in the specific weight of branches of group B. On the contrary ... starting from 1992 their specific weight reduced significantly. At the same time the share of extractive industries increased from 15.5 percent in 1989 to 24.6 percent in 1996 ... the recession in manufacturing industry was bigger than in extractive ones ... in almost all branches, the reduction of progressive types of production occurred at faster rates. [42]
In fact we can go further than this and argue that what has actually happened is what has been called a ‘perverse restructuring’ of the industrial sector. This makes little long run sense because it represents an accentuation rather than a resolution of the structural problems of Russian industry and can only compound the difficulties of recovery. [43]
This is not a ‘healthy’ process of deindustrialisation. What has occurred is qualitatively different from the process of Western deindustrialisation. There, the share of industry in total output fell but the absolute value of industrial output often grew, reflecting the fact that fewer workers and machines produce more, so enabling resources to be transferred to services. In Russia the opposite process has underpinned the deindustrialisation of the economy. Absolute industrial output has collapsed because fewer workers often produce less, so forcing up the relative share of the services sector.
There is a huge crisis also in agricultural production (which is also periodically affected by erratic natural conditions with 1998 threatening to be a very bad year). The agricultural disaster is one of the great secrets of the transition. Whereas the state of the Russian harvest was once the focus of much general reporting in the West, it has receded into the background, if not disappeared completely. Perhaps this is just as well, as Table 3 shows. The area of land under cultivation has fallen. While higher value food imports have grown to feed the rich, at the bottom of society the falling standard of living has reduced meat consumption at the same time as agricultural production has also been affected by much of the confusion and inefficiency affecting the rest of economic life. Livestock herds have dramatically declined, as Table 3 shows. The obvious comparison here is with collectivisation for which comparative data is provided in the last lines of Table 3.



TABLE 3: SOME ASPECTS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION
IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION [44]




 


1990


1991


1992


1993


1994


1995


1996


% Change
1990–1996


% Change
1928–1933
USSR




Grain Production (millions tons)


116.7


89.1


106.9


99.1


81.3


63.4


69.3


−40.1


−6.7




Potatoes (millions tons)


30.8


34.3


38.3


37.7


33.8


39.9


38.5


+25.0


−6.2




Eggs (billions)


47.5


46.9


42.9


40.3


37.5


33.8


31.5


−33.7


−67.6




Cattle (million)


57.0


54.7


52.2


48.9


43.3


39.7


35.8


−40.6


−44.3




Cows (million)


20.5


20.6


20.2


19.8


18.4


17.4


16.2


−21.0


−33.8




Hogs (million)


38.3


35.4


31.5


28.6


24.9


22.6


19.5


−49.1


−55.0




Sheep and goats (million)


58.2


55.3


51.4


43.7


34.5


28.0


23.6


−59.4


−65.1



For enthusiasts of the transition the one bright spot in this sorry tale is supposed to be the performance of the services sector. Anyone arriving in Moscow finds a city apparently bustling with life beneath a skyline of tall buildings overloaded with neon signs. This has led impressionistic commentators, including visiting economists and journalists, to speak highly of the transition. But two more sceptical commentators highlight the problem:
Assume that one of the market economies of Western Europe were suddenly to cease all industrial and infrastructure investment, and to decide instead to use its resources for the exclusive purpose of building hotels, restaurants, casinos, cathedrals and luxury villas in and around the capital. In the short run, there would most certainly be an impression of astonishing wealth, but the longer term price to be paid would be disastrous. That obviously applies to Russia as well. [45]
In fact, telling though this comment is, it nevertheless still grants too much credit to the ‘services revolution’. In reality there has been little absolute growth in the weak services sector. Employment in the credit and financial sectors expanded from 400,000 to 800,000 in 1990–1995 and in catering and retail trading it rose by 13 percent from 5.9 to 6.7 million in the same period. But employment in the rest of the services sector either remained stagnant or fell. Because overall employment declined by some 12 percent in 1990–1995 the relative stagnation of services caused its share of employment (and output) to rise but this is hardly the same as vigorous expansion. Even the small business sector – the hoped for breeding ground of a new class of entrepreneurs ‘untainted’ by the old order – has been largely stagnant. With major cuts in the level of mass consumption the capacity for sustained consumer growth is highly restricted and the accumulation of wealth in the hands of a relatively small group at the top can only provide the basis for a limited expansion for a few mainly dealing in Western goods. [46]
Table 2 shows the dire situation in respect of investment. No transition theorist has satisfactorily explained how a dynamic economy can be created by destroying investment. It should be remembered that part of the original driving force behind perestroika was the need to make more productive use of investment. But the fall in investment suggests that capital accumulation in production has all but been eliminated. This is confirmed by the figures on the age of Russia’s capital stock. The average age of plant and equipment rose from 9.5 to 10.8 years between 1980 and 1990 but between 1990 and 1995 it rose from 10.8 to 14.1 years. If, in 1980, 35.5 percent of plant and equipment had been under 5 years old, the figure in 1990 was 29.4 percent but in 1995 a mere 10 percent. As a group of OECD authors put it, ‘the ageing of plants and equipment is all the more ominous for the resumption of growth as large parts of even the relatively recent productive assets are technologically obsolete’. In the crucial oil sector, for example, half the pipelines are over 20 years old. [47]
Table 4 sets out some of the key indicators of the social impact of the economic crisis. Lack of space prevents us undertaking a full discussion of this data although we shall return to selected aspects of it later. Here, to the extent that these figures need commentary, we can simply quote UNICEF’s monitoring reports lamenting ‘the demographic implosion’, ‘appalling’ numbers of excess deaths (1995); the ‘staggering’ fall in life expectancy for males (1996) which is now lower than in India; the ‘tragic rise’ in the deaths of young people including through suicide (1998) and so on. [49] We should also note that some of these series need to be treated cumulatively. Thus between 1990 and 1997 the rise in mortality over the 1989 level has led to between 2.6 and 2.9 million excess deaths attributable to the transition. It can similarly be estimated that the cumulative fall in births has been of the order of 4.5 to 5 million in the same period. [50]



TABLE 4: SOME MEASURES OF THE SOCIAL CRISIS IN RUSSIA [48]




 


Gini
coefficient*


Real wages
(1989 = 100)


Birth rate
(per 1,000)


Death rate
(per 1,000)


Marriage rate
(per 1,000)


Infant
mortality
(per 1,000
live births)


Life expectancy
(years)




Male


Female




1980


−


−


15.9


11.0


10.6


22.0


61.5


73.0




1985


−


−


16.6


11.3


  9.7


20.8


62.3


73.3




1989


0.271


100.0


14.8


10.7


  9.4


17.8


64.2


74.5




1990


0.269


109.1


13.6


11.2


  8.9


17.4


63.8


74.3




1991


0.325


102.4


12.2


11.4


  8.6


17.8


63.5


74.3




1992


0.371


68.9


10.8


12.2


  7.1


18.0


62.0


73.8




1993


0.461


69.1


  9.4


14.4


  7.5


19.9


58.9


71.9




1994


0.446


63.7


  9.6


15.6


  7.3


18.6


57.6


71.2




1995


0.471


45.9


  9.3


14.9


  7.3


17.6


58.3


71.7




1996


0.483


52.0


  8.9


14.1


  5.9


17.0


59.9


72.6




*The Gini coefficient measures inequality on a 0 to 1 scale where 0 is perfect equality and
1 perfect inequality with 1 person having all the income




The Crisis of the Ruling Class
There is an irresistible body of evidence to indicate that the people now in charge in Russia are substantially the same as those who ran it in Soviet times. They were known collectively in Russia as the nomenklatura, and today people commonly refer to nomenklatura privatisation or to nomenklatura democracy. According to the Russian academic Olga Kryshtanovskaya, for example, members of the nomenklatura accounted in 1995 for 74.3 percent of the government and 75 percent of Yeltsin’s presidential team. [51] Among the powerful regional elites who do much of the day to day bossing about, the proportion was even higher at 82.3 percent. Even in the new business elite the figure stood at 61 percent. These studies may even understate the level of nomenklatura persistence. Kryshtanovskaya herself admitted that this was the case when it came to the so called new business elite, 39 percent of whom seemed to have no connection with the old regime. She argued that even this significant minority was largely made up of trusted and authorised agents of members of the technocratic and economic nomenklatura who wished to remain in the background.
One of the interesting things about the different elite groups covered by these studies is the extent to which they share a common background in Soviet structures as opposed to the Communist Party or the economy. This was particularly true of the presidential team (63.6 percent) and the regional elite (78.6 percent). A shift from the Party to the Soviets began under Gorbachev and accelerated when the Party lost all credibility as a result of the abortive coup against Gorbachev in August 1991. A US researcher has referred to a typical scene from the autumn of 1991 as being ‘the parade of former CPSU [Communist Party of the Soviet Union] regional leaders who “repossessed” their old office buildings in the name of the people and the soviets’. [52] Many members of the economic nomenklatura eventually chose the Soviets rather than the Party as the means for furthering their careers. Yeltsin himself comes from the construction industry in Sverdlovsk, a key region in the Urals. The Soviet background is therefore not so important in itself. But as a popular stepping stone in the careers of the upper classes it is an important indication of how the continuity between the Soviet and post-Soviet regimes was established.
Beneath these political changes privatisation, far from being the death knell of the old ruling class as free market economists would have it, actually became a crucial means for it to consolidate its economic grip. [53] Kryshtanovskaya describes a crucial example:
‘A ministry would be abolished and in its ruins a business concern would be created in the form of a joint-stock company (same building, same furniture, same personnel); the minister would resign; the controlling parcel of shares would pass into the hands of the state, the rest would be distributed among the leadership of the ministry; as a rule, the second or third figure in the abolished ministry would become the head of the concern.’
This is, in fact, a summary of the ‘privatisation’ of the giant natural gas monopoly Gazprom, one of the largest companies in the world. The privatisation of Gazprom was organised by Viktor Chernomyrdin, the last Soviet minister of gas and the longest serving prime minister of post-Soviet Russia. As it was with Gazprom and Chernomyrdin, so it has been to varying degrees with other big business interests, especially banks and the big exporters of raw materials to which they are related. Despite the important, and recently disastrous, role of banks in Russia, their function has not necessarily been one of control over the big companies with which they have been integrating their operations. There is evidence that the top management in at least three of the six largest oil producers in Russia, including Lukoil, the largest one, bought their own companies, crucially in the ‘loans for shares’ auctions through the agency of banks to which they were allied. [54] In a fourth case, Yukos, the second largest producer, was officially taken over by the Menatep banking group which controls 85 percent of its shares. However, a study of banks in the Russian oil sector concluded:
It is not strictly correct to say that the bank took over the company: rather, a mutually beneficial alliance was formed and confirmed in legal terms after a significant period of development ... A full 70 percent of the assets of the Menatep group are now linked with Yukos. Total annual sales of the enterprises under Rosprom (Menatep’s industrial investment arm) amount to somewhat more than $6 billion, of which $5 billion stem from Yukos. Yukos is a very large company and the size of the bank Menatep is not really of a comparable magnitude. [55]
These are – along with Gazprom – the largest exporters and the most important sources of hard currency earnings in Russia. They are, for what it’s worth, among the most profitable firms in the country, the most closely allied to the state and the most privileged by it. Each has their ‘curator’ in government, a practice which has also spread to the regions. Thus, Yurii Luzhkov, the mayor of Moscow, represents a cluster of building, trading and financial institutions (most notably the Most group). Yurii Neelov, the governor of Yamalo-Nenets, the West Siberian region in which most of Russia’s gas is located, sits on the board of Gazprom. [56] Leonid Polezhaev, the governor of the Omsk region, also in Western Siberia, sits on the board of Sibneft, the sixth largest oil producer in Russia. Sibneft owns the Omsk Oil Refinery, which is one of the largest petrochemicals plants in Russia, and its head offices are located in the region. [57]
A critique of research into ‘elite continuity’ by James Hughes, based on his investigation of seven regional elites, argues that the ruling social groups in Russia were even less variegated than Kryshtanovskaya and a co-worker in Britain, Stephen White, had supposed. For Hughes, the sub-national political elite, ‘broadly uniform ... in terms not only of occupational structure and status but also as regards age, gender and lack of overt party affiliation’, is composed of an increasingly interlocked or integrated group of political-administrative and economic leaders. The old Soviet nomenklatura, he argued, has not only recomposed itself but has also succeeded in dramatically eclipsing other social groups in the elected regional assemblies – professionals, women, young people, employees and workers. He concluded: ‘This is not the differentiated elite that one might have expected to emerge after a sustained period of democratisation’. [58]
It seems a matter of common sense to see continuity among the ruling orders as a stabilising factor in a time of change. Yet such continuity in post-Soviet Russia has gone hand in hand with a historically high level of conflict between different factions in the regime. The last days of the Soviet Union were preceded, indeed brought on by, an attempted coup by one part of the Russian-dominated Soviet leadership against the other (the abortive August 1991 coup against Gorbachev). Splits in the new Russian leadership soon developed and the most well known of them culminated in Yeltsin crushing the parliament by military force. Governments have swung between speeding up economic reform and slowing it down. In 1997, tension between the regional governors and the central authorities focused on an attempt to impose direct rule on the Maritime Province in Russia’s far east via the newly appointed presidential representative, Viktor Kondratenko, who also happened to be the chief of the region’s FSB (the renamed KGB). During the same year the Security Council gained and lost Boris Berezovsky, the ‘oligarch’ who fronts the Logovaz financial-industrial group (which includes Sibneft, Aeroflot and ORT, Russia’s biggest TV station), one of Yeltsin’s key backers in the 1996 presidential elections. This year two governments have fallen in a raging hurricane of financial and economic catastrophe – two and a half, if one counts Chernomyrdin’s unsuccessful bid to get his old job back. The third, under the leadership of Yevgeny Primakov, a compromise figure, remains incomplete and unstable at the time of writing.
If post-Soviet Russia is essentially ruled by the same group of people as in Soviet times, why has so much of its brief existence been dominated by infighting among them? One answer is the apparently permanent and worsening state of economic crisis, to which none of them have a convincing answer. In the absence of effective measures promoting stabilisation and recovery, powerholders are reduced to bickering amongst themselves about their share of the take from a shrinking pot. Everyone fights harder over reduced rations, as Trotsky once remarked.
But the problem goes deeper than this. As we argued earlier, Russian state capitalism was an intensively bureaucratic and pyramidal phenomenon. But the collapse of the Soviet Union went hand-in-hand with the disintegration of the old Communist Party (the CPSU) which had structured ruling class relations into a hierarchy for 60 years. At the same time, there were shifts in the balance of power between different ruling class groups. Given implacable economic decline, such power shifts plus the loss of the CPSU destabilised relationships between the very groups of people most intimately involved in the business of the new state. They are a little like an officer corps which has survived some military disaster almost intact but at the cost of a breakdown in the chain of command, ie in the very thing that made it an effective officer corps. Their cohesiveness has deteriorated and the lack of clarity about who is subordinate to whom and to what degree has stimulated competing claims and conflict. [59]
Back in 1994, the writer and historian Yurii Burtin described the mentality of the Russian upper classes which had emerged from the demise of the Soviet state:
This is the phase of the omnipotence, one could say, the autocracy of the apparat and at the same time its hitherto unprecedented personalisation and personal freedom. Whereas in Soviet times it possessed power and property only on a corporate basis, ‘as a class’, now both have been largely decentralised and given out as personal property to every leading person taken separately – be it a director of a state enterprise, a regional or municipal administrator. You are free to use both as you see fit, at your own discretion, for nobody will tell you: ‘You take not according to your rank,’ nobody will take an interest either in your income or in the sources of this income. [60]
Burtin summed this up as a situation in which the ruling elite is simultaneously ‘uncontrollable and omnipotent’ and ‘disunified ... divided into parties, branches and factions,’ producing ‘leaders who are vying amongst themselves and are ready if need be to prove their supremacy by force.’ He described nomenklatura democracy as having ‘absolutely no chance of being effective and strong’:
Expressing the contradictory interest of different groups of the socially irresponsible upper stratum, it is evidently doomed to live from one coup to another and from one ‘charter of accord’ to another. At the same time, it keeps lying like a log on the path to genuine democracy, democracy for everyone.
It is the particular combination of continuity and change at the ruling class level which is important. Had the nomenklatura been able to go on ruling with its traditional mechanisms, it might have been able to cope in the short term, perhaps even in the medium term, with the ups and downs of different factions without too much in the way of internal disruption. Had the nomenklatura been overthrown, then this kind of problem simply would not have arisen. Ironically, the intra-class conflict which typifies post-Soviet Russia is largely the result of a relatively peaceful, relatively gradual process of reform which was initiated and led largely from within the political establishment.
One aspect of this inability to sustain a clear command structure has been the failure to establish a credible new political system through which (and behind which) bargains can be made. The Soviet system was always run from the top down and when Yeltsin and his reformers came to power in 1991 they continued and in some senses reinforced this. Supported by their Western advisers, they saw market reform and privatisation as a ‘revolution from above’. When this programme generated opposition which began to be expressed in the old congress or parliament Yeltsin resolved the conflict by sending in the tanks at the cost, on some estimates, of around 150 lives in 1993. Out of this debacle came a new presidentially driven constitution in which the new parliament (the Duma) and the Upper House (the Federal Council) had limited powers. Yeltsin and his group now eschewed building a party political base preferring alliances conducted inside and outside of the Duma to achieve their ends.
But it is not only a matter of the political system itself. There has been a major weakening of the Russian state machine. With the shift to the market many of the economic control mechanisms of the old state, the planning structure and many of the economic ministries, became redundant. But the so called power ministries – the ministries of the interior, defence, intelligence, special police, presidential security forces etc – remained intact as the core of the state. However, their powers effectively shrank and weakened as the crisis developed and they began to lose control of social processes in Russia. Indeed, it was not always clear what order should be imposed since the development of the market often ran ahead of legislation so that much of what outsiders imagined to be criminal in Russia (eg money laundering) is not necessarily against the law since there is only very imprecise law to cope with it. The result, as Kryshtanovskaya puts it, is that ‘the law enforcement agencies, for all practical purposes, themselves abandoned their task of safeguarding private commercial structures’. [61] The best known result of this has been the rise of the so called mafia and crony capitalism. If the term ‘mafia’ in Russia applies to illegal organisations carrying out illegal acts, then just as important has been the growing role of legal organisations carrying out illegal acts whether it be in the form of the effective murder of workers in unsafe mines or factories, the scandals over environmental crimes that are producing horrific ill health in certain communities and so on. One manifestation of this has been the way in which state enterprises have been just as reluctant to pay taxes and wages as nominally private ones:
A general observation of the Russian state’s policy in this period was that the government was unable to assert its nominal property rights over state owned assets. An evaluation from the state property committee showed that in most cases the management of government shares through the board representatives chosen had not been efficient, either for the state or for society at large. The biggest non-payers to the state and the biggest non-payers of salaries were precisely those joint-stock companies in which the state representative had responsibility for the management. Furthermore, the higher the position of the government representative, the larger the debt of the joint-stock company. [62]
The failure of the state is also reflected in the rapid growth of the private ‘state’, especially private security forces. Kryshtanovskaya argues that effectively all of these are run by former state security officials, 50 percent from the KGB, 25 percent from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 25 percent from Intelligence and Armed Forces. But the difficulty is, of course, to separate out these structures from the illegal ones as merging can and does take place, especially in the financial sector. Leading criminals have even become deputies in the Duma where they can gain immunity from prosecution. One member of the Duma Commission for Human Rights, had, for example, previously been convicted of theft, armed robbery and rape. [63]
One of the paradoxes of bourgeois democracy is that much of its democracy has been achieved by struggles from below, primarily by workers but at times also including various middle class pressure groups and organisations. In the 1990s the buzz word for this was ‘civil society’ – what was needed in Russia was a network of independent organisations and groups that could express competing interests and both support state and government and pressure it in ‘positive ways’. Yet just because the transition was a top down process, a non-revolutionary change with limited wider participation, no dense network of organisations emerged. Nor, of course, did the reformers always want them if they were likely to block change.
Nevertheless, something does exist. We will look later at the workers’ movement and other movements which have offered opposition. In addition, there are groups that came together to oppose the Chechen war. [64] Some commentators see a wider difficulty in the fact that the middle class have also been victims of the economic decline. What was formerly known as the mass intelligentsia – teachers, doctors, workers in science and culture and so on have all found themselves victims of the maelstrom. As one Russian observer has put it:
It is especially alarming that the ‘centre’ is dissolving. It seems to me that while some are going into business and becoming rich, a large proportion is becoming impoverished. The middle class is eroding... As we know, the middle class is the bulwark of any state – this is that stable group that is engaged in production, that makes it possible to master new technology, to treat and to teach people, to secure future development. [65]
In this situation we can see all types of shifts and splits occurring within the ruling class. The two most important dimensions of these – sometimes competing, sometimes complementing one another – are between the Financial Industrial Groups as power centres and regional divisions. The FIGs have effectively developed as political-economic empires to replace the former economic ministries. But the contours of their holdings vary. While some reformers opposed them for blocking competition others believed the talk that they would provide a new stable basis for economic and political power. In these terms Yeltsin even sent his adviser Sergei Shahkari to Japan to study the possibility of ‘consolidating the ruling elite around a national revival and economic growth programme’. But as huge but weak empires they have depended on working political patronage and their links to the state.
The political patronage they have exercised has served to further weaken and destabilise the political system as client politicians and client media have vied to put the case for their ‘employers’ and stymie the plans of ‘their’ employers’ opponents. The most recent turn in the crisis, by weakening the underpinnings of the system even more appears to have only accentuated this pattern.
A second aspect of this fragmentation has been the split on a regional basis. Russia has 89 republics and regions, each of which has two representatives in the Federation Council (the leaders of the regional executives and legislative bodies). The strength of Russian regional leaders has grown over time. In 1995–1996 regional governors were elected and this gave them greater standing against the central government. Then as the federal government weakened economically and financially their effective power increased further. This was especially true of the handful of regions which concentrated raw material exports and which therefore acted as ‘donor’ regions paying into the national budget, but it also applied more widely, especially where regional forces could find some other lever against the central government. Whatever their background, regional politicians no longer saw themselves solely as agents of the same central institution but also as representatives of regional forces. The situation, which has intensified since, was well described in 1994 by one influential provincial Russian leader:
The centre, aspiring as before to the total control of the entire process of Russian existence, no longer possesses drive belts which would convey the impulses of its orders to the provinces. In the provinces, nothing at all remains of the archaic drive mechanism which existed in communist society. Rupture. Hiatus. The centre exists, the territories exist but effective connection between them is destroyed. [66]
It is this that underpins the fears that the fragmentation that has affected the old Soviet Union might affect the Russian Federation. There have been many regional threats to go it alone since the August crisis. This makes good politics in two senses. Firstly, manipulating, even inventing a ‘regional consciousness’ can help to consolidate political support. Prusak, the Niznyi Novgorod governor has said in these terms that ‘we are not reds or whites but Novgordians.’ Secondly, building up regional support can assist in putting pressure on the central government to win better conditions both for the region and the economic units based there. But to go beyond this towards a real fracturing of the state is an enormous step which at the moment is more talked about than real. Even if we leave aside the issue of the complexity of the bastard political forms and conflicts that this might bring there are two obvious difficulties. The first is that economically even the strong regions are less strong than they appear at first sight. The Tyumen oil region, for example, a major player given the concentration of so much oil wealth, has fractured internally. Although the oil interest has earned resources, it has done so on a basis of decline in production. Nizhni Novgorod has been widely advertised as a successful region. But this was a success which depended on foreign investment which, as we have seen, has been low overall. Moreover, it did not translate into the region having a markedly better system for the rest of its activity (for example, in the period where industrial production fell nationally by 55 percent, production in Nizhni Novgorod still fell by 50 percent) or in its pattern of government. This is the second crucial difficulty for regional leaders wanting to go it alone:
‘Unfortunately, even progressive regions share the problems of conservative regions. It is not possible to be prosperous alone in a country where there are problems’. [67]
It is not suprising, then, that Russia’s rulers do not know which way to turn. Even before the current crash, pessimistic commentators warned that ‘in just less than six years, the country has made the dizzying journey from a superpower to a province that exports raw material and consumes foreign goods’. Unless decline can be halted the conclusion of this analysis would be that ‘in the system of global distribution of world resources, Russia is with increasing confidence occupying the place ‘allotted’ it of a raw material appendage’. [68] At best this pessimism could be mitigated by the hope that uneven development would allow one or two areas and sectors to flourish in the midst of the remains of what was once a powerful state capitalism. In the depths of the crisis in August–September 1998 some even thought this option was not available: ‘As of the start of September there’s nothing to stabilise or reform. It’s back to square one,’ said one commentator. [69]
Every historian of revolution, whether Marxist or not, knows of Lenin’s famous definition of a revolutionary situation as one where the ruling class cannot rule in the old way and the exploited classes are not willing to go on being ruled in the old way. We have seen how the first of these components are clearly in place in Russia as a result of the intensification of the crisis. What is missing is the second.
 
The Crisis and the Working Class
The mass of the population have clearly been victims of the transition and it is not surprising that many look back nostalgically to the living standards that existed in what was once denounced as ‘the era of stagnation’. But this is quite different to looking at the old Soviet system as a golden age or a viable alternative and it is quite striking that opinion polls do not show the mass of people supporting this argument. It would therefore be very dangerous if the left in the West were to fall into this trap.
Firstly, the fact that workers instinctively saw through the argument that the old regime was ‘their’ regime was reflected in the fact that they did not lift a finger to defend it – indeed it was partly their protests that helped to encourage its dissolution. Secondly, as we have seen, even from the point of view of some of the more backward sections of Russia’s rulers there was no possibility of maintaining the old system as it was. To borrow an analogy – to a person on the verge of death the earlier stages of terminal illness look attractive but they are not viable places to which one can return. Thirdly, it was just this weakening of the old regime that gave Russian workers the confidence to begin to act for themselves for the first time for six decades. No longer in fear of automatic repression they have begun to reclaim a basic dignity. This was one of the reasons why the miners’ strikes of 1989 were so important. For the first time for six decades Russian workers were able to experience the simple dignity of being able to march together in columns, no longer as a ritual, but for themselves, ‘thousands of men still with coal dust under their eyes, in their pit helmets and working clothes’. [70]
This points to a fourth crucial point: the issue is not the ‘troubles’ that democracy brings but the lack of a real democracy, from the bottom up. The problem is the way in which the old rulers, with the connivance of their Western counterparts, have been able to hang onto power, however hamfistedly, and to milk the system for their own advantage. The way forward is not, therefore, back to some ‘golden age’ or in the direction of paternalistically welcoming some ‘good’ leader but to use the space that exists to build a real alternative from below. But while this is not difficult to see in abstract, in practice the difficulties are enormous both because of the legacy of ideological confusion left by the old order and the devastating impact of the worsening crisis.
A crisis on the scale of that which has wrecked Russia cannot fail to have a devastating effect on social relations. Mapping how this operates is not easy. The real incomes of those in and out of work have sharply fallen overall. The impact this has had on average consumption levels of foodstuffs is set out in Table 5.



TABLE 5: PER CAPITA HOUSEHOLD FOOD CONSUMPTION OF
SELECTED FOODSTUFFS (kg per year) [71]




Year


Bread


Meat
products


Potatoes


Vegetables


Fruits


Milk
products




1980


112


70


117


92


35


390




1990


  97


70


  94


85


37


378




1991


101


65


  98


87


35


348




1992


104


58


107


78


29


294




1993


107


57


112


77


31


305




1994


101


58


113


71


30


305




1995


102


53


112


83


30


249




1996


  97


48


108


78


31


235



However, wage differentials have also widened so that oil and gas workers now earn much more than, say, lowly paid teachers on 60–70 percent of the average wage. But even this can be misleading when workers are paid in kind or not paid at all for long periods (and then paid in money that has lost part of its value). According to one survey in early 1998, 75 percent of those interviewed had received their wages late in the previous year – 38 percent by 1 to 9 weeks; 19 percent by 9 to 12 weeks, 12 percent by 13 to 24 weeks, and 6 percent by more than 24 weeks. [72] But, however qualified, evidence of the way in which the experience of the mass of the population is permeated by the punishing impact of crisis is to be found in every statistical series. Horror stories abound of the tragedies of individual lives. This has had an enormously debilitating effect. But this has to be set alongside evidence of enormous resilience too, a resilience which is not properly reflected in the pictures shown in the Western press and on TV, of occasional demonstrations in Red Square of old fascists and Stalinists with their pictures of the Tsar and Stalin.
To try to bring some balance to this we can crudely divide popular responses into three kinds. Firstly, what we can call ‘opt out’; secondly, retreat into ‘defensive dependence’; and thirdly, and politically the most important, the guerrilla class war. These are not necessarily mutually exclusive categories. As circumstances change so people move between them and this gives rise to the possibility of greater social explosions as what Rob Ferguson has called ‘the bitter fury of broken hopes’ can turn outwards. [73]
Evidence of hopelessness that can lead people to ‘opt out’ can be found everywhere. The sense of uncertainty and lack of prospects is reflected in the collapse in the birth rate:
People are uncertain about tomorrow – the last thing they want to do is to have children, it is a function of education combined with bad living conditions. People live badly in Somalia too but they do not stop having babies. Education seems to contribute to despair and hopelessness. [74]
Perhaps more graphic still has been the increase in suicide rates across all sectors of the population, though even in the depths of hopelessnes, some attempt can be made to retain a semblance of dignity. For example, one 87 year old in the St Petersburg region, not having received her pension, wrote out a note listing how much she owed and asking forgiveness for her debts before she hanged herself. [75]
But the evidence of ‘opt out’ is there in a no less wretched a way in the resort to the bottle which has been a characteristic of the past few years and which has destroyed so many lives both directly and indirectly. Just as it was said of the poor in 19th century Manchester that their quickest way of escape was the bottle, so today throughout Russia people have turned to vodka on a massive scale. One of the perverse effects of the crisis, even as real wages fell, was to push down the relative price of vodka. In 1984 a bottle cost twice the price of a kilo of sausages – by 1994 it cost a half. Supply also expanded as small scale producers tried to enter what appeared a lucrative market. If annual per capita consumption measured in terms of pure alcohol fell from 14.2 litres in 1984 to 10.7 in 1987 (with the Gorbachev anti-alcohol campaign) then by 1993 it had risen to 14.5 litres. Soviet men on average are consuming between one fifth and one quarter of a litre of vodka a day but often in the form of more intense weekly binge sessions. The result has been a huge increase in deaths, especially amongst middle aged men, which are directly and indirectly attributable to alcohol. The resulting fall in male life expectancy has been ‘without parallel in the modern era’. Put another way, Russia now has ‘mortality rates comparable with India or Guatemala’. [76]
The second reaction, ‘defensive dependency,’ reflects the way in which the crisis has forced the mass of the population to rely on their closest family and friends to develop survival strategies. With huge levels of poverty, falling (and intermittently paid) real wages and savings destroyed by inflation it has been necessary to depend more heavily than ever on family and friendship networks. Although wages might not be paid some benefits such as food can continue to come through the workplace. Beyond this the garden plot, once notorious as a symbol of the inadequate Soviet standard of living, is now even more important than ever to providing basic foods. Some workers, especially the more skilled, find second jobs (usually at lower skill levels). Still others engage in informal economic activity from women sewing to men helping in building and so on – the kind of strategies used by the poor the world over. Those in work have to help those out of work or too old to work to eke out their lives, those paid some kind of wages have to help those whose wages are ‘delayed’. By the mid-1990s private transfers from those in work to those out of work were on one estimate taking up 40 percent of household income. [77]
Behind doors bolted against the world the family can come to seem a haven. Although the crisis has cut the marriage rate by nearly 40 percent between 1989 and 1996 it has not significantly increased the divorce rate, one of the clearest indications of this ‘defensive dependence’. Such dependence is also thought by some analysts to be apparent in other relationships: ‘It is widely believed that there has been an increasing commodification of sexual relations, with a tendency for the formation of temporary sexual relationships on the basis of a clear but implicit economic dependency of one partner on the other’. [78] But the capacity of the family to support one another is limited. A young working couple with depressed incomes can still help an aged parent, but a young working couple with several aged parents and children can mean abject conditions for all. And, of course, however much people may look to the family as a ‘haven’ the world cannot be bolted outside – it seeps in every way. UNICEF, for example, notes that in eastern Europe a similar pattern emerged but when some recovery began the divorce rate rose again suggesting, with some understatement, that ‘the tendency to preserve marriages may have been a rational response to economic hardships and not a reflection of stable and stress free family life: therefore, welfare shocks may have heightened the risk of child abuse in the family.’ To which we may add the risk of wife battering, grandparent battering and so on. [79]
At this point some observers have tried to extend this argument to suggest that this retreat into the personal has been paralleled by a retreat in the workplace where workers have gladly accepted alliances with their managers who, in trying to keep their plants afloat, appear to offer some defence against the crisis. Two US observers write that since the fall of Stalinism, the effect of greater labour market flexibility has been to increase working class dependency on management and that there still exists (although they see it as ‘highly unstable’) ‘an accommodation between workers and managers’. This, however, is a dangerously misleading argument. It builds on arguments made in the past about the former Soviet regime where some thought that management-worker links meant that there was no clear structural class antagonism in that system. Now it is implied that the same is true of the new system.
But this is false in a number of ways. In the first place unemployment is rising, and many workforces have been drastically cut, suggesting that managers are prepared to take ‘tough’ decisions. Secondly, it is important to distinguish between what we can call ‘a coincidence of interest’ and ‘dependence’ and ‘accommodation’. There is no doubt that on occasion managers and workers have tried to defend ‘their’ enterprises together, but there is nothing peculiarly Russian about this. This does not mean that structurally they have the same interests either in the long term or the short term. Were this the case it would be difficult to explain both the evidence of independent worker activity and management and local government opposition to it. It would also be difficult to explain the brutality that characterises managers’ reactions to attempts by workers to show independence. One Russian commentator likens conditions of trade union organisation in parts of the country to those in the United States before 1914, with unsympathetic local governments, local judiciaries and managements working together to sack workers and use violence and intimidation against those who persist in trying to organise. [80]
Contrary to those who emphasise dependence, there is ample evidence of widespread (and up to the time of writing) growing class conflict in Russia. More than this, it is clear that this conflict is occurring in a situation in which workers have few illusions left. Most notably the experience of Stalinism taught them that this offered no kind of life. Equally there is no evidence that workers are turning to the distorted remnants of that system in the Communist Party or its allies. Secondly, the last ten years has also taught that the market offers no solution and for the moment cannot even guarantee the most basic needs for the survival of Russian capitalism. Thirdly, the experience of transition has also ripped aside the credibility of Russia’s rulers and their institutions. This comes out in all the evidence of opinion polls as well as that of actual behaviour as Table 6 shows.



TABLE 6: PERCENTAGE OF RUSSIANS
SURVEYED EXPRESSING A ‘COMPLETE LACK OF TRUST’
IN GROUPS AND INSTITUTIONS IN EARLY 1998 [81]




Army


 


44




Police


60




Private enterprise


70




Courts


50




Local government


61




Political parties


81




Newspapers


52




Trade unions


70




Privatisation funds


85




TV


53




Duma


70




Church


53




President


72



The actual number of recorded strikes is set out in Table 7, from which it is apparent that most strikes have been small scale and local. But they nevertheless exist, and while some of them have an edge of desperation as workers go on hunger strike for back pay others show more assertiveness. In May 1998 a wave of struggle over unpaid wages spilt over into railway blockages. This so called ‘railway war’ began on a small scale with miners taking action but soon attracted wider support in parts of Russia – including from teachers and other white collar workers. One account described these as ‘a French Revolution style grab your pitchfork and go random spasm of raw underclass anger’. But for some it was more than this – one telling poster read, ‘A hungry miner is fiercer than a Chechen’. [82]



TABLE 7: OFFICIALLY RECORDED STRIKES IN RUSSIA IN THE 1990s [83]




Year


Strikes


Strikers
(1000s)


Strikers
per strike


Working
days lost
(1000s)


Working
days lost
per strike




1991


  1,755


238


136


2,314


9.7




1992


  6,273


358


  57


1,893


5.3




1993


     264


120


455


   237


2.0




1994


     514


155


302


   755


4.9




1995


  8,856


489


  55


1,367


2.8




1996


  8,278


664


  80


4,009


6.0




1997


17,007


887


  52


6,001


6.8




1998
(first quarter)


     394


  37


  94


   270


7.2



The problem is that workers find it impossible at the moment to generalise from their struggles both in an ideological and an organisational sense. Ideologically, Stalinism broke any connection between the kind of activities that workers engage in on a day to day basis and the arguments of the socialist and revolutionary tradition about an alternative. At the same time organisationally it is proving immensely difficult for workers to sustain coherent organisation on a broad, long term basis. The larger trade union movement is part of the legacy of the state system. To survive it has had to take on some of the characteristics of more normal trade union work with its leaders oscillating like trade union bureaucrats of old. A smaller independent union movement also exists but neither organisation generates much confidence amongst workers, as is evident from the low opinion of them given to opinion poll questions. This helps to reinforce the localised and unorganised action but can also lead to it having a more explosive capacity to develop.
If building an alternative from below in Russia conceived in isolation may be a long and painful process, its progress may be accelerated by successful challenges to capitalism and the market elsewhere – challenges that can destroy the argument that socialism and Stalinism are automatically to be equated with one another. In the meantime this raises the alternative possibility that the solution to the crisis is some kind of coup.
 
Weimar Russia or What?
The apparent immediate future of Russia is indescribably grim. Output is falling, the value of the rouble has collapsed but yo-yos around its new lower level, inflation is likely to hit 400 to 500 percent by the end of the year, unemployment is growing, imports – including vital food imports – have been slashed, and Yeltsin is in semi-retirement after his failure to get the reappointment of the oil oligarch Chernomyrdin as prime minister. The new government instead is headed by Primakov, an old apparatchik, and Maslyukov, the former head of the Soviet central planning system, and Gerashchenko, the former head of the Soviet Central Bank, are now at the centre of economic policy. Even though they are very different people from a decade ago, it is a sign of the desperation that exists at the top that Primakov is asking for Western food aid as the threat of malnutrition becomes real for some sectors of the population.
To many commentators inside and outside Russia this raises the spectre of Weimar Germany. There too a weak democracy was hit by a catastrophic economic crisis and then overthrown as important sections of the ruling class, to save themselves, swung behind an authoritarian coup. [84] The analogy with Russia is obvious and it can be made closer. The oligarchs, for example, appear to have been distributing their favours widely in order to have a foot in all camps should they need to take refuge in one of them.
But for the moment what appears to exist in Russia is what we can call a ‘balance of weakness’, which makes such a resolution more difficult. This does not mean that individuals may not be tempted to try their luck and go it alone but it does mean that the risk of failure is high. In the first place, all of the political forces in Russia today are weak. There is no political party which has a mass base, no political movement with a coherent and organised base from which it could try to make a bid for power. [85] This throws the onus more on the army. But here too there is disarray.
Analysing the situation from afar it is difficult to judge the nature of the debate in the upper sections of the army. However, it is clear that demoralisation is rife. ‘The army is a mirror of the country as a whole,’ said one member of the Russian Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers (which tries to improve conditions of conscripts and opposed the war in Chechnya). ‘If there is no order in the country how can there be in the army?’ [86] Army numbers have been cut back from 2.8 million in 1992 to 1.7 million in 1996 and it was hoped to bring them down to 1.2 million by the end of 1998. This is a huge demobilisation. It occurs against a background of three effective defeats in the last decade – the retreat from Afghanistan, the loss of Eastern Europe and the humiliation in Chechnya. Chechnya should have been a way back for the army – a model military action in which it could demonstrate its power and that of the Russian state. ‘A couple of hours and one parachute regiment’ would be enough to bring the Chechens to heel, boasted the then defence minister, Marshall Grachev. In the event both conscript and elite forces crumbled against the Chechens and if Grozhny and other parts of Chechnya were left smoking ruins then it was still the Russian army that was humbled. Yeltsin could only extricate his forces with the assistance of a peace negotiated by his potential rival General Lebed. These humiliations were frontal attacks on army morale but it has also been drained away on a daily basis by the growing shortages of equipment, rations and housing. Discipline is often only held together by extreme brutality. Between January and September 1997 some 974 soldiers died, including 314 suicides. The draft is avoided on a mass scale – 30,000 were reported to have dodged the spring 1997 draft. Sometimes officers can act on their own. Some (perhaps most) generals embezzle funds or sell big pieces of equipment while the rank and file sell small pieces. Other officers have to take local initiatives to survive, like the 60 homeless army officersin early 1998 who stormed a new apartment block to seize accommodation for their families in Khimki near Moscow. But in general it seems as if senior commanders try to forge links with regional rulers who can help find employment for troops and keep some resources flowing to feed the rank and file when the centre fails. As the crisis intensified in the early summer of 1998 the newspaper Nezavismaya Gazeta taunted that ‘an army that gets fed dog food wouldn’t give the president a full bore rifle today to prevent any coup’. [87] But to actively assist in a coup would require confidence that someone can supply more than dog food – or at least more dog food.
Beyond this, any prospective coup leaders have to ask themselves the question – which way forward? It is not obvious that anyone at the top knows the answer to this question. The immediate thinking of some liberals is that the economic question had more or less to be abandoned in favour of a struggle to preserve a modicum of democracy until after the next presidential election when it might be possible to rework institutions with less discredited forces and to construct a recovery programme. But the economy will not wait.
The result is a paralysing confusion evident everywhere. The new government brings together changelings from the old order and newer reformers but, at the time of writing, it has neither a stable composition nor a stable programme. Its own difficulties are compounded by the confusion at the global level. The IMF, which has both a general responsibility for the crash in the sense of its encouragement of the leap to the market and a particular responsibility in the way it encouraged the development of the short term bond market built round the ill fated GKOs, continues to chant its market mantra to the extent of insisting that ‘free market’ financial stabilisation is the only way to general stability. A government presiding over a people, part of which faces starvation, is instructed to cut expenditure and to raise taxes, even if it means more unemployment and the closure of much of the rest of Russian industry. Then, it is said, the magic will work and prepare the way for the next boom. But every time this step has been tried it has hit opposition from above as well as fears from below. And the famed world economy, the agent of salvation, is clearly now not exporting growth, but crisis. Not surprisingly, other voices attack these policies. One UN economist, Robert McIntyre, a UN based economist, trenchantly argued before the crash:
Russia’s problem isn’t that it doesn’t bring in enough revenues to meet its obligations. Its problem is that it doesn’t have enough cash to deal with all its financial market obligations. That’s why the IMF has emphasised tax collection ... The IMF bailout was really a subsidy for the oligarchs, for the Russian banks, and for the investors in the financial markets. And it was undertaken in a way that only made real economic problems worse ... [The tax issue] is a false issue. Focusing on tax collection only provides an excuse to continue reneging on the responsibility to confront real problems. [88]
Since then other establishment voices have been raised arguing that Russia must ‘put bread before theory’. [89] But how to do this is equally unclear because it is one thing to introduce controls in an economy that is failing, as in Asia, and quite another in one that is as wrecked as Russia. The current oscillation in policy will undoubtedly be a swing towards the state but this is likely to be just as incoherent and problematic as the swing to the market.
Predicting how this will be resolved is difficult. Certainly financially it appears inevitable that things will get worse before they get better. If the government cannot find a way out then the chances of further instability and fragmentation are high. If the situation remains too uncertain for a coup then an alternative is further fragmentation of Russia, not so much in terms of an explicit break up, but the development of stronger and politically erratic regional leaders.
To preserve something in this situation, much will depend on ordinary Russians fighting battles to preserve their standard of living and the minimal freedoms that they have gained since the collapse of the old Soviet Union. As we have seen, these fights are mainly local at the moment. But Russian workers have a history of revolt in which they have shown that they can move very quickly from conservative positions to much more radical ones even in very difficult circumstances. It would be a mistake to believe that in the absence of an organised nucleus of people arguing for an alternative from below that cannot not happen again.
 



Russia Twenty Years After was one of the very few books of the 1930s which was clear about the counter-revolutionary nature of Stalinism at the time. It tells the messy truth about Russia at the time of industrialisation. And in doing so, it comes surprisingly close to telling us about the nature of Russia today. In order to appreciate the quality of Victor Serge’s achievement, it is worth looking briefly at the circumstances in which he wrote this book. The rise of Stalin to the position of dictator over the Soviet Union was no ordinary defeat for the revolutionary left. There had been defeats before but the left had survived and regrouped. After the Russian revolution of 1905 had been defeated, for example, Lenin remarked that a beaten army learns its lessons well. This was entirely accurate: despite vicious repression, the Russian workers took power within little more than a decade. The coming of Stalin was more like Armageddon. Of the purges which followed, the first and most comprehensive was directed against the Left Opposition within the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). Serge quotes at length from one of the many Trotskyists who took part in the resistance to this political genocide:
On 22 January, 1931, the anniversary of Lenin’s death, all the deported Bolshevik-Leninists of Akmolinsk [Kazakhstan] were arrested and incarcerated in cells infected with typhoid. There were 12 of us, including two women; nine contracted typhoid ...
In the Verkhne-Uralsk prison the Bolshevik-Leninists, to the number of 450, began a hunger strike to protest against the despotism of the local administration. The year before, in the course of a hunger strike, the director Biziukov gave the order to douse our comrades with cold water – this in winter and in Siberia! The order was executed. When our comrades began to barricade the cells, the jailers directed the water hose into their eyes. Our comrade Pogossian lost his sight. In 1931, a turnkey fired a shot through a grille into the chest of comrade Essayan. On the days of revolutionary festivals, we had serious conflicts with the administration. We were either incarcerated or beaten up because we sang the International.
In the Petropavlovsk prison I saw 35 women, eight of them with nursing babies, shut up in a cell of 25 square metres. The only access to air was through the peephole. I shall never forget those piteous and puny children! Taking turns, the mothers held them up to the peephole so that they might breathe a wretched ration of fresh air ...
We began our hunger strike [in Verkhne-Uralsk, against the automatic doubling of sentences] on 11 December, 1933 ... They began to feed us forcibly. Unspeakable violence was the result, the voluntarily famished men battling with the jailers. Our comrades, of course, were trounced. At the end of our strength, they crammed rubber hose down our mouths and throats. The famished men were dragged to the “feeding cell” like so many dogs. Nobody gave in. On the fifteenth day we decided to suspend the strike because the attempts at suicide were becoming too numerous ... [1]
So complete was the destruction that when Russia emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, it contained no organised left of any kind. Stalinist terror obliterated revolutionary socialism in Russia for over 60 years. The same could not be said about other targets of repression: nationalism among the non-Russian peoples of the USSR, the Russian Orthodox Church, the dissident movement of the 1970s – let alone the more tolerated nationalist and monarchist groupings among the Russians themselves.
Trotsky and Victor Serge were prominent among the handful of voices in the 1930s which spoke out insistently against Stalinism without abandoning their socialist principles. But few listened to them. The left throughout the world had already been carved up between Stalinism and social democracy (Labourism, in its British incarnation). Accusations made by the Stalinised Communist parties that Trotskyites were in league with the fascists struck a chord with those for whom the Soviet Union seemed to be the great bulwark against Nazi barbarism. It was in Russia that the armies of fascism were decisively beaten. Stalin and the Red Army were publicly glorified by the left and by right wing leaders like Churchill.
In such circumstances, denunciations of Soviet bureaucracy were likely to get a hostile reception. Revolutionaries like Trotsky and Serge made their stand in the most difficult conditions. Trotsky was murdered. Serge effectively died of hunger a few years later. If they made mistakes, the wonder is that they did not make many more. Trotsky more than anyone kept alive a tradition of revolutionary socialism which was independent of either Stalinism or social democracy. It was a tremendous achievement.
One of the most pernicious aspects of Stalinism was its ability to incorporate former revolutionaries and use their talents in the industrialisation drive before executing them as scapegoats. There is always a pressure on the defeated to accommodate to the victors. The greater the scale of the defeat, the greater the temptation to compromise. Stalinism had the additional advantage of appearing to offer the only way forward for the USSR through industrialisation and the collectivisation of agriculture (in reality, the smashing of the peasantry). A most painful and revealing passage in the postscript to Russia Twenty Years After is the one in which Serge describes the reaction to it of those closest to him:
I put the finishing touches to this book in January 1937. Many of my best friends hesitated to approve its publication. Their attachment to the revolution impelled them to ask if I was not drawing too black a picture of the Soviet Union of today; if the involuntary or even unconscious resentment of an outlaw was not playing some part in the book.
Serge’s response to this is a model of revolutionary courage in the face of adversity:
The past year shows that all the oppositions which, in the last 14 years, stood up against the bureaucratic regime, underrated its profoundly counter-revolutionary power and, still more, its inhumanity. The judgments formulated hitherto by the Left Opposition to which I belonged, sinned only in indulgence and optimism, because the Opposition stuck to preserving at all costs the last chances, however feeble, of a political redressment, of a great reform which would have brought the Soviet Union back to the road of socialism. [2]
It was necessary for revolutionaries to tell the truth about Stalinism. But it was excruciatingly hard to do so. Most of the people with revolutionary aspirations, and there were millions of them, believed the lie. They wanted to believe it. They needed to believe. Their illusions about Stalinism and about the Soviet Union were the product of the most terrible defeats: the defeat of the German Revolution, of the Hungarian Revolution, of the Italian Biennio Rosso, of the British General Strike, of the Chinese Revolution a year later and finally of the Spanish Revolution in the civil war. As Victor Serge shows in this book, Stalinism both grew out of these defeats and contributed to them. The more workers were defeated, the more people’s hopes of bringing about change by their own efforts were dashed. The more these hopes were dashed, the more they pinned their faith on the red star of the Soviet Union, shining bravely in the deepening gloom. The illusions bred by defeat are always about some agency other than the working class holding the key to the future. Of all such illusions, Stalinism has been the greatest and the most destructive.
 
Counter-revolution in Russia
One of the themes to which Serge returns again and again is how alien the early Soviet regime was to the bureaucratic tyranny which replaced it. In October 1917 the Bolsheviks had led a revolution based on the rank and file democracy of the workers’ and soldiers’ Soviets (councils). They had overthrown the unelected Provisional Government, taken Russia out of the First World War, decreed workers’ control over production and given the land to the peasants. The superpowers of the day – Britain, the USA and their allies – made a prolonged attempt to destroy the new regime, already beset by famine and industrial collapse. They invaded Russia, inspired a ruinous civil war and imposed an economic blockade. The civil war period left a terrible mark on the revolutionary regime. Its human foundation was destroyed: the workers of 1917 perished either in battle or through famine, or they disappeared into the countryside. Soviet democracy gave way to militarisation and then to the one-party state. It was a desperate situation, which dictated what Serge rightly calls ‘measures of public safety, sometimes terrible ones’. This ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ may have deprived the anarchists and the more right wing socialists, such as the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, of ‘the right to sabotage, even with the best of intentions’. But such doubtful allies of the Soviet regime, not to speak of dissidents within the ruling party (now renamed as the Communist Party), continued to publish their views quite openly. Only in 1927, the year in which the Trotskyists were expelled, could Stalin’s henchmen proclaim that under the dictatorship of the proletariat there could be a number of parties: one in power, the rest in prison.
In theory and in practice, the prison-state has nothing in common with the measures of public safety of the commune-state in the period of battles: it is the work of the triumphant bureaucrats, who, in order to impose their usurpation, are forced to break with the essential principles of socialism and to refuse the workers any freedom at all. [3]
Everywhere Serge looked, he found the same rupture, both in spirit and in practice. Under the slogan of “Socialism in one country,” the top priority of Soviet foreign policy changed, not without the odd zigzag, from spreading the revolution to cultivating the sympathies of other upper classes. Stalin delivered the Chinese Revolution into the hands of the executioners of the nationalist Kuomintang so as “not to frighten either the Chinese bourgeoisie or the powers”. [4] A brief lurch to the ultra-left had the German Communist Party refusing to unite with the Social Democratic Party against the Nazis, thus allowing Hitler into power. This disaster, though unacknowledged, frightened the Stalinists into a revamped version of their previous tactic. Known as the ‘Popular Front against Fascism’, it was an attempt to submerge the class struggle in an all-class alliance, in the forlorn hope of surrounding Germany with defence treaties which meant something. Even fascist Italy was apparently considered to be a potential ally:
In the August 1936 number of Lo Stato Operaio, official organ of the Italian Communist Party, we find an appeal for the reconciliation of all Italians, from which we quote the following remarkable lines:
Italian people! Fascists of the Old Guard! Young fascists! We communists adopt as our own the fascist programme of 1919 which is a programme of peace, of freedom, of defence of the interests of the workers, and we say to you: Let us fight unitedly to realise this programme! [5]
In Spain, where republicans were fighting a civil war against the fascists, Serge predicted that the Stalinist bureaucracy was intervening “in order to prepare there the repression of the revolutionary tendencies that combat it and to profit by the aid it lends the republic in order to assure its own political hegemony within it”. [6] This is the theme of Ken Loach’s film Land and Freedom. Serge need only have added that the Stalinists achieved this aim at the cost of demoralisation, soon followed by defeat. But what of the situation inside Russia?
Serge lived in the Soviet Union for 17 years, from 1919 to 1936. He had been a machine-gunner in the civil war and had then worked closely with the Bolshevik leadership. Expelled from the CPSU as an oppositionist in 1928 (and briefly held under arrest), he managed to stay clear of the authorities for a further five years, during which he travelled around the USSR and lived for a time in the countryside. In 1933 he was arrested, held in solitary confinement and interrogated before being to deported to Orenburg, where he and his son nearly died of hunger, and here he remained until his expulsion from the Soviet Union in 1936. Serge’s testimony is therefore that of an eyewitness and a participant, someone who can communicate the feel and the smell of Russian life in Stalin’s heyday. He does this with incomparable skill. Two passages in particular stand out from the many which detail more dramatic instances of brutality and injustice. Both are about the struggle and drudgery of everyday life. The first gives the more general picture:
In order to get an idea of the life of the Soviet citizen during these years one must picture the worker preoccupied with obtaining, stamping, checking, and re-registering a bread card, which is refused to half the workers on various pretexts; the housewife, running from one empty store to another, and registering in a queue at the doors of a fishstall early in the evening, pauper No.758, in order to wrangle the next morning over a ration of salt fish; the worker exposed to spying in the shop, coming home to comment at the table on the arrests made the night before; finding rhymed apologies for the death penalty in his paper; not knowing where he can get a spare shirt; fearing to be driven out of the big city by being refused a passport, because his son has married the daughter of a former small merchant; wondering what risky combination to resort to in order to get hold of a dollar and buy some precious medicament at the Torgsin [the State Society for Trading with Foreigners] ... Hemmed in by the police, by poverty, by lies. [7]
The second passage is specifically about women. But since it depicts them in terms of class, it is symbolic of human, social relationships in the USSR as a whole:
The social differentiation obliges us to distinguish the various conditions of Soviet women. The upper strata of society, especially numerous in the centres, have produced the type of elegant and indolent lady, who follows the fashions, the theatre, the concerts, who is desolated when she is unable to get the latest dance records from abroad, who tans herself every year on the beaches of the Crimea or the Caucasus. I have heard the elegant in the literary salons praising the enthusiasm of the Donietz miners and the political wisdom of the Leader. I have seen others, fat and dressed in transparent silks, leaning on the arms of aviation officers, walking past children with bellies swollen from famine who moaned softly as they lay stretched out in the dust. Flies resting on their eyelids and lips tormented them. The ladies turned their heads away. After all, they were only little Kazaks or Kirghiz ...
Below this feminine aristocracy is the average housewife of modest means, as needy as she is everywhere else. Still lower – and she constitutes the majority – is the woman of the people, a worker or peasant, who does the washing, goes for water to the fountain or to the river (in winter, it is to a hole punctured in the ice), takes care of the animals, raises the children, receives the drunken man at the end of the week, stands in line in front of the stores, buys a few metres of satinette in order to resell them and, thanks to this brilliant stroke of business, is able to provide shoes for the youngest. The foreign litterateurs do not come to question her while travelling. Disfigured and aged at thirty-five, she sometimes takes to drink. Then you hear her – on the revolutionary holidays – singing in a discordant voice the old popular plaints. [8]
If there is any doubt about the state in which the workers undertook the immense labour of industrialisation, one only has to know that in Omsk, a major Russian city and the capital of western Siberia, the first proper sewers were not built until 1939. [9] This kind of thing was not primarily to do with backwardness but with priorities. The regime which was demanding unheard of sacrifices from its workers was as unsympathetic to them as elegant Soviet ladies were to starving children. The workers and peasants who slaved to construct Soviet industry were the victims of low pay, shortages, absolute police power, famine and disease. Contrary to official propaganda, the welfare state had been all but destroyed and there was even a Soviet version of prescription charges. [10] The restoration of ranks in the Soviet army in 1935 followed the revival of privilege throughout Soviet society. Pay could vary from 70 rubles a month for a woman worker through 1,000 to 10,000 rubles for high communist functionaries and specialists to millions for the painters, poets and novelists who danced attendance on the top leadership. But these differentials were greatly magnified by other forms of privilege:
... the collaborator of a scientific institute gets only 300 to 400 rubles, but he works in two or three institutes, which comes to 1,200 rubles at the end of the month. The newspaper editor, at 250 rubles a month, collaborates on other publications, which trebles his income. The factory director, at 500 or 1,500 rubles, gets himself granted premiums for the execution of plans on the occasion of festivals and anniversaries. The party functionaries and the communist leaders receive gifts of garments made of fine cloth, are lodged by the party in comfortable quarters built for that purpose, have the benefits of watering places in the Caucasus or the Crimea, free of charge or at reduced rates ...
Every category of workers, every factory – and within each factory the ordinary workers, the shock workers, the technical men, the bureaucrats – has its private store, closed to other categories, with special rations and prices, confidential or secret. No displays, just a card that is open-sesame. As a rule, the reserved stores of the foreigners, the high functionaries, the GPU [the secret police], the well-paid specialists, are sufficiently supplied with merchandise. Those of the ordinary workers and of the population at large are dirty and virtually empty. The government intervenes in order to fix the minimum rations of the workers and fixes them at a level appreciably below requirements ... I saw this placard in a bureau: “Grandparents have no right to food cards” ... [11]
The leadership which boasted about having achieved socialism (in 1934!) reversed the great reforms made by the first Soviet government. The right to free abortion, “a capital conquest of the revolution,” was replaced by abortion as a crime in all but the narrowest medical circumstances. Other legal measures restricted divorce through penal taxation, effectively fining couples who wished to separate. New laws re-criminalised homosexuality and pornography – and there was no mucking about with unnecessary details like defining what pornography was. Capital punishment was restored, introduced as a punishment for theft and extended, along with other penalties, to children of 12 (according to Stalinist educationalists, this was justified by the high quality of Soviet education, which turned children into adults by the age of 12 – not, as Serge remarks, that they were allowed to vote or stand in elections, of course). Soviet criminal law had initially been the most advanced in the world, confining itself to defending society rather than punishing or avenging. Now it was no better than fascist law. [12] For such achievements, there was a constant and deafening chorus of praise and approval. The 1936 constitution, for example, was compared to Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. [13] But this was small beer next to the carefully manufactured and orchestrated leadership cult, for which worship is not too strong a word:
Pravda of 28 August, 1936, publishes the translation of an Uzbek poem which attributes to the Leader the creation of the world:



O great Stalin, O leader of the peoples,

Thou who broughtest man to birth,
Thou who fructifiest the earth ...
Thou who makest bloom the spring,
Thou who makest vibrate the musical cords.
Thou, splendour of my spring, O Thou,
Sun reflected by millions of hearts ... [14]



There was no doubt in Serge’s mind that the changes of the Stalin era were profoundly reactionary. But, like Trotsky, he was not sure how far the process of reaction had gone. So on the one hand, he describes the Stalinist bureaucracy, in some detail, as counter-revolutionary, and on the other he argues that nationalisation and planning are for the Russian workers the surviving victories of the revolution. “It has proved possible to rob them of the fruits of these victories,” he adds, almost in the same breath. [15] In Alice in Wonderland, the Cheshire Cat disappears but his smile remains behind. Serge’s argument sounds rather similar. If the workers had been robbed of the fruits of their victories, then nothing remained of them apart from the memory – and nationalisation and planning were not necessarily incompatible with counter-revolution. The Russian Revolution is, as Serge says, “a historical experience of incalculable scope”, and it is partly thanks to him that an non-Stalinised memory of it has been kept alive. But memory is not the same as victory. The idea that from the victories represented by nationalisation and planning Russian workers would derive the confidence to rise up against their Stalinist masters (for this is what Serge was arguing) was profoundly misleading and was bound to lead to demoralisation. The truth was that the common people of the USSR had been bled white by civil war and isolation. They hardly had time to recover before the Stalinist dictatorship butchered a large minority and turned the rest into factory fodder. There was no prospect here of a revolutionary struggle for power in anything but the long term.
The disappointment of Serge’s own expectations seems evident in his 1947 article, Thirty Years After the Russian Revolution, also printed here. Stalinism was by now extending its grip from one state to eight – strengthening its hold throughout Eastern Europe and, in a different form, preparing for power in China. Yet Serge was, if anything, further away from an understanding of what had happened. His defence of the Russian Revolution is all the weaker for two accusations he makes against the Bolshevik Party. [16]
The first is that the creation of the Cheka (the Extraordinary Commission for the Repression of Counter-Revolution) was the “most incomprehensible error” of the Bolsheviks, and one which led directly to Stalin’s secret police, the GPU. The Cheka was not an exclusively Bolshevik creation: supporters of the revolution set up local Chekas for the internal defence of the revolution just as they responded to the call for a Red Army for external defence. The Cheka was a cruel necessity of the civil war, especially at the height of the White offensive in 1919, when the Soviet republic resembled a beleaguered fortress in an area occupying 600 kilometres around Moscow. There were misgivings in the Bolshevik leadership about the growth in the Cheka’s power and it was drastically reduced once the civil war was over. [17] Stalin had to more or less start from scratch when he developed the secret police into an instrument of control over all other institutions. Serge’s second allegation is that the suppression of the Kronstadt revolt in 1921 was a panic overreaction – a prime example of the kind of mistake that was made once the Bolsheviks were in power. The basic facts of the matter were that the fortress of Kronstadt commanded the approaches to Petrograd (later Leningrad, now St Petersburg). Had such a breach been allowed to open up in the heart of Soviet territory, it would almost certainly have restarted the civil war. The suppression of Kronstadt was extremely brutal but it enabled the regime to survive for a few more years. These accusations (criticisms seems too mild a word) let the great imperialist powers, whose pressure distorted the young Soviet regime, off the hook. They suggest by default that a socialist regime could have flourished in Russia despite the failure of the revolution to spread if only it had been nicer. And they imply that Leninism did lead to Stalinism after all, despite all of Serge’s protestations to the contrary.
In Serge’s defence, it must be said that – in addition to his worsening physical condition – the situation was less clear to him than it is with the benefit of hindsight. He sensed that there had been a change in the nature of the regime. We know it. We know that society and production were knocked into a completely different shape. We know that this was the greatest change ever to have taken place in Russia and the other components of the USSR. Even a typically conservative history of the Soviet Union describes it as ‘The Great Rupture’. [18] We know that the secret police with Stalin as its real head replaced the Communist Party, bureaucratised and Stalinised though it was, as the key motivating element in the state machine. Huge bureaucratic ministries controlled every branch of the new industry (there were about 65 of them in the late 1980s). We know that all institutions of any importance were remade and purged over and over again until their leaderships were entirely new, cut off from the past. About 60 percent of the active communists of 1931 had been purged by 1937. Of the 139 members of the CPSU Central Committee elected at the Seventeenth Congress in 1934, 110 (79 percent) were arrested before the Eighteenth Congress in 1939. Of the 1,966 delegates who attended the Seventeenth Congress, only 59 turned up at the Eighteenth Congress: 1,108 (56 percent) had been arrested. The purges led to the wholesale destruction of the industrial managers who had led the first phase of industrialisation. Studies in the mid-1930s showed that only 3 to 8 percent of directors had held the same post for over five years. In 1937-1938, on the eve of the Second World War, Stalin removed more than 75 percent of the officer corps and the high command of the Red Army. We know that the forced labour population was probably around 8 to 9 million and that something in the region of 20 million people died through forced labour, collectivisation and the purges. [19]
It is not simply a matter of political changes, profound though these were. In a matter of ten years the industrialisation drive transformed Russian society and sent it off in a new direction. The official figures are not to be trusted, of course, but they give an idea of the scale of the change. Between 1913 and 1928, the signs are that not only did the USSR not develop, it actually went into reverse. The number of manual workers fell from 14.6 percent of the population to 12.4 percent. At the same time the proportion of peasants rose from 66.7 percent to 74.9 percent. Then it happened. Between 1928 and 1939 manual workers as a percentage of the population rose from 12.4 to 33.7. By 1959 the figure was 50.2 and by 1979 it was 60.0. [20] Then there is the question of the way the new economy was organised. Leonid Polezhaev, the present day governor of Omsk and for many years a leading communist in the economic management of the region, recently wrote: “The Soviet economy – let’s face the truth – was created for war and in the expectation of war.” He exemplifies this in terms of the extreme centralisation, the military organisation of the enterprises and their direct supervision by the state. [21] A leading western academic has put it like this:
Political competition with the West was now transformed into an economic race, but one whose standards and measures of achievement were set in the West ... In the context of socialism in one country Stalinism was primarily a war machine, with the emphasis on heavy industry, a way of industrialising the country to sustain its military potential. [22]
As Tony Cliff and others have argued, the subordination of the Soviet economy and society to the demands of military competition meant that the USSR had made the transition from the “bureaucratically deformed workers’ state” of the 1920s to state capitalism. [23] The position of the workers, their experience of the new order and their attitude towards it, was often best expressed in jokes like this one: Is it possible to build socialism in one country? It is. But its better to live in another country. [24]
 
Conclusion
The vivid, unforgettable impressions which crowd the pages of Russia Twenty Years After are its great strength and its weakness. Serge had some striking insights. He identified the discontent of the non-Russian nationalities as a threat to the regime 50 years before the USSR began to crack up along national lines. He understood that a regime of oppression which identified itself as the bearer of socialism had inspired a tremendous feeling of revulsion against socialism. The consequences of this are, of course, still with us. Nevertheless, this is not a work of analysis and Serge’s account of Stalinism is not always systematic. He devotes two chapters to Stalin’s foreign policy. But he mentions the rise to power of the Nazis in Germany only in passing, although this was a crucial event and one in which Stalinism had played a disastrous role.
On the other hand, Serge wrote this book very much as a companion volume to Trotsky’s The Revolution Betrayed, which he was translating at the time. In this role, Russia Twenty Years After is a superb piece of work which Serge completed in an artistic sense with his magnificent novel The Case of Comrade Tulayev. Russia Twenty Years After begins with the condition of the workers and ends with the prospects for working class struggle. At the time those prospects were in fact minimal. The class struggle in Russia is now an established fact and the common use of phrases like “fear of rising social tension” in Russia is a recognition of this. Serge may have been wrong to be over optimistic. But he was right not to give in to a defeat which seemed final, right to react against fatalism and despair. Out of the bitterness of unimaginable defeats, he transmitted a simple, shattering message of revolutionary hope: “Nothing is ended, everything begins”. [25]
 
Top of the page
 
Notes
I would like to thank Mike Haynes for his help, his advice and for those of his manuscripts which, for some inexplicable reason, remain unpublished.
1. Victor Serge, Russia Twenty Years After (Humanities Press, 1996), pp.72-73.
2. Ibid., pp.288-289.
3. Ibid., p.93.
4. Ibid., p.257.
5. Ibid., p.269.
6. Ibid., p.274.
7. Ibid., p.184; in the richly furnished stores run by the Torgsin (the State Society for Trading with Foreigners) Soviet citizens could get good quality food, soap, shoes, cloth, medicine and other goods unobtainable anywhere else in exchange for hard currency and gold.
8. Ibid., pp.25-26.
9. M.P. Zhuravlev, Omsk: vchera, segodnya, zavtra (Omsk, 1993), p.69.
10. Victor Serge, Russia Twenty Years After, op. cit., p.6.
11. Ibid., pp.5, 179-180.
12. Ibid., pp.24-25, 186-190, 244.
13. Ibid., p.206.
14. Ibid., pp.131, 206.
15. Ibid., p.287.
16. Ibid., pp.309, 313.
17. See, for example, T. Cliff, Lenin, Volume 3 (Bookmarks 1987); J. Rees, In Defence of October (London 1997).
18. M. Heller and A. Nekrich, Utopia in Power, (London, 1986), p.222.
19. R. Sakwa, Soviet Politics (London 1989), pp44-53; T. Cliff, Russia: a Marxist Analysis (London n.d.), p.259.
20. Ibid., p.48.
21. L. Polezhaev, Vpered, na medlennykh tormozakh ... (Moscow 1994), p.75.
22. R. Sakwa, op. cit., pp.47, 59.
23. See, for example, T. Cliff, op. cit.; P. Binns, T. Cliff, C. Harman, Russia: from Workers’ State to State Capitalism (London, 1987).
24. Iosif Raskin, Entsiklopediye Khuliganstvuyshchego Ortodoksa (St Petersburg 1995), p.380. I would like to thank Louis Loizou for providing me with this invaluable source of soviet humour.
25. Victor Serge, Russia Twenty Years After, op. cit., p.287.
 



WORKERS AT at the Vyborgskii paper plant in St Petersburg, Russia, are ending their protest after winning concessions from the plant’s owner, UK-based ALCEM. Union representative Pavel Privalov told reporters that ALCEM has pledged to preserve all jobs and pay wages of not less than 2,500 roubles (£55) a month. In return, workers will allow the new owners to take over the plant. Last October justice ministry troops stormed the plant and opened fire on workers who had barricaded themselves in the administration building to prevent the mill’s foreign owners from assuming control. The example shows that even in the face of such methods workers can make gains by standing together.
PETE GLATTER, South London
 



Beyond the Fall: The Former Soviet Bloc in Transition 1989-1999
Royal Festival Hall
Anthony Suau is a photojournalist with a worldwide reputation. But the reasons for his fascination with the former Soviet bloc are not establishment ones:
‘I was born in the United States in 1956, and was indoctrinated to believe that the Soviet Union intended to destroy my country’s way of life and abolish its personal freedoms. Meanwhile, on the other side of the world, Soviet children were being schooled to believe that the United States sought to corrupt their souls with the selfish ideology of capitalism. The two superpowers, having divided the world between themselves, constructed immense psychological barriers to mutual understanding and reconciliation.’
This is a time in which the savage Slav is once more being cast as a villainous violator of the Flash Gordon virtues of western democracy. So look at the other contrasts captured in these terrible and beautiful pictures. The sleek Russian elite with its murderous backstreet vendettas; the ragged Russian pensioner in his bare, narrow room ‘listening to his television as the picture does not work’; the first Chechen war of 1994-96 – a body crushed into the slush by a tank, a sniper and his mate sighting a rifle with the everyday air of building workers judging an angle. A relentless procession of frozen moments holds the scars and lacerations left by the jagged divides of today’s capitalist system from the centre of Europe to the far Siberian north.
I particularly liked the black stallion at the beginning of the exhibition escaping from human habitation as if chasing an elusive dream of feedom. And the gleaming cash machine, set with all the inappropriate gusto of commercialism amid empty noticeboards on a dilapidated wall in the Czech Republic.
But perhaps the most haunting images are those of the doomed children, playing in the polluted ice in the desolate Arctic city of Norilsk, or falling tenderly asleep in a pool of light in a Romanian slum.
The exhibition is an extraordinary cultural event in other ways too: not only artistically brilliant and politically acute, but – here in the heart of the capital city of New Labour’s corporate dream – open 12 hours a day, seven days a week and free. Such happenings are, of course, under threat. The Royal Festival Hall is phasing out all free exhibitions by the summer and is cutting other free events to the bone. This is, in fact, the last free photographic exhibition. You have little time to catch it, and make a loud complaint.
 



From Pete Glatter pete@pglatter.xxxxxxxx.co.uk
The Wests human rights record, itchy and scratchy at best, has acquired a particularly loud Anglo-Saxon hiss with the rise of Vladimir Putin.
Lord Russell-Johnston, for example, who represented the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, returned to a press conference in Moscow from a day-trip to occupied Chechnya, just as the Russian offensive was about to reach its height, to give a verbal carte blanche for the pulverisation of Grozny. He now understood much better, he said, some of the things the Russian government had been trying to explain. The Chechen regime, he declared, had been corrupt and undemocratic and had failed to provide its citizens with proper education and health services (how this distinguished it from much of the rest of Russia he did not say). Although he was still in favour of a cease-fire in principle, in practice, he appreciated that there was no-one to negotiate it with anyway. It was field day time for the pro-Putin media in Russia, at any rate.
Tony Blair’s visit to Putin, less than two weeks before the presidential election, was notable, as Nezavisimaia gazeta pointed out (14 March), for the dramatic way in which western correspondents suddenly relegated Chechnya to the background. Under the front page headline “Blair boosts Putin”, the paper quoted Blair’s verdict on “Vladimir Putin’s Russia” (no English modesty there about which way the democratic process was going to go): “a strong power, where law and order reign, it is also a democratic and liberal country”.
Putin’s return visit to London the following month was, if anything, even more remarkable, as the business magazine Ekspert (24 April) was at some pains to point out. Explaining that London was the only major capital in western Europe where the wholesale violation of human rights by the Russian federal forces did not put a serious obstacle in the way of such an event, the magazine prominently quoted KGB defector Oleg Gordievsky: “Theoretically, it is not the Queen’s habit to drink tea with murderers who turn up with their hands stained with blood. This invitation is a real miracle for Putin’s reputation.”
A miracle for Putin has been a disaster for those at the sharp end of the struggle for words like democracy and law and order, which tripped so easily from Tony Blair’s lips, as three examples indicate.
Bending to the pressure, not least from such as he, the human rights organisation Memorial failed to make a stand in defence of the Chechen right to self-determination. As a result, Yelena Bonner, the grand old lady of human rights in Russia, felt obliged to leave the organisation to which she and her famous husband, Andrei Sakharov, had been dedicated.
At the last call, Sovetskaya Kalmykia segodnya, a crusading anti-corruption liberal and human rights weekly in a particularly tightly sewn-up province, was facing an uncertain prospect when its Ford Foundation grant runs out in September. The paper’s editor, Larissa Iudina, was murdered two years ago. Her husband has gone on producing the paper in a neighbouring territory with help from outside journalists before shipping it in to Kalmykia.
Irina Grebneva, another crusading female editor, has just hunger-struck her way through a 5-day jail sentence for “hooliganism” in the far east region of Primorye. Her crime appears to have been that she failed to delete the multitude of expletives from transcripts she published in her paper, Arsenievskie vesti (http://personal.primorye.ru/arsvest/N29/N29_10.html, and N30/N30_8.html) of tapes allegedly of the governor, the rather notorious Yevgeny Nazdratenko, and others apparently engaged in arranging the recent mayoral elections in Vladivostok (their man won). The electronic version of the transcripts includes an natty little montage entitled: “Project for a monument to the victors of the struggle against the voters of Primorye”. But the experience was no joke, as the authorities made clear from the start when they kept 57 year-old Grebneva standing up for six-and-a-half hours before taking her off to begin her sentence (http://personal.primorye.ru/bledniy/FOTO/foto.html).
While following the last story I recalled, not for the first time, the admiring if muted noises with which Blair’s visit to Russia was greeted at the time. Blair was defended against me by a specialist I generally admire and respect on the grounds that he hadn’t explicitly condoned the Chechnya offensive. The truth is that Blair’s support for Putin has betrayed the very people who really are trying to turn Russia into a “democratic and liberal country” where “law and order reign”.
 



THE STABBING of a Jew by an Arab in north London is horrific. But we should be quite clear that Arabs are not carriers of anti-Semitism. The home of anti-Semitism lies in the house of the extreme right and the Nazis. The right hate Jews in the same basic way they hate everyone who is different. Arabs are fighting back against 80 years of slaughter and oppression they have suffered at the hands of Zionism and the Israeli state. We should not equate an attack by one misguided individual with Arab resistance to Israeli state terror and discrimination. Zionism has never been a solution to anti-Semitism. Only the unity that comes from the struggle for socialism can do that. That’s why Jewish socialists like me have broken with Zionism.
PETE GLATTER, South London
 



Background
THE LONDON Busmen’s Rank and File Movement is a unique example of mass organisation in the workplace. It never grew into a general opposition movement like the Minority Movement, its immediate forerunner. But the Minority Movement had little organised base in the factories despite its size and influence. The busmen’s movement, on the other hand, led the biggest strikes of the thirties, had organised groups in the garages, won key positions in the union, issued its own mass circulation paper and literature and functioned independently of the union bureaucracy for five years. Bevin, TGWU General Secretary, called it ‘an internal breakaway’.
The Communist Party never controlled the movement but it did provide some of its leaders. The party adopted the policy of building rank and file movements in 1932 during a brief pause in a lurch from left to right. ‘Left’ had meant breakaway red unions and attacks on ‘social fascism’ (the Labour Party). This had helped kill off the Minority Movement and had left the Communist Party without an industrial base. Right was to mean ‘The People’s Front Against Fascism’, or as a Labour Party left put it, ‘trying to help Labour to win a majority in Parliament’. [1] Such zig-zags crippled the Communist Party’s resistance to mass unemployment, wage cuts, rationalisation, falling union membership and the brutal victimisation of militants by employers and union leaders.
In those days, the London busmen had relatively good wages and conditions. They were organised in garage branches (each sending a delegate to a monthly conference) and had quite a militant history. Bevin had separated them from the rest of the passenger transport trade group after a successful bus and tram strike had brought London to a halt in 1924. The London Bus Section had the exceptional status of a national trade group with its own full-time secretary directly under the executive. In 1929, Bevin began to accuse the Communist Party and the Minority Movement of stirring up disputes on the buses. But the Communist Party had no more than a dozen busmen in January 1932, when the London General Omnibus Company (LGOC) decided to impose a 1/- wage cut.
 
The Battle Against the Cuts
THE COMMUNIST Party members got the one union branch where they had influence to pass a resolution against the cuts and to circulate this round the fleet with a call for a mass meeting. This tactic gave form to the busmen’s awakening resistance. As a result of the mass meeting, a growing number of branches endorsed the resolution. Before long the whole fleet stood for rejection and the men’s resentment became so strong that the LGOC was forced to withdraw their terms. The Communist Party recruited in five or six garages and its monthly duplicated paper, The Busman’s Punch, grew rapidly from 1,500 to 8,000 copies.
After a pause to allow the feeling to die down, the company again proposed modified cuts. The officials dragged out the dispute through spring into summer. Word leaked out that Bevin and the Central Bus Committee (CBC) were reaching an agreement with the company behind the busmen’s backs. The tramwaymen accepted a wage cut on the understanding that a similar cut had been agreed with the busmen. On 31 July, the LGOC announced the proposed dismissal of 800 men. Numerous mass meetings threatening strikes forced the company to postpone the dismissals within a few days. On 10 August, Bert Papworth, secretary of Putney branch, called a conference of garage delegates for the 12th. Papworth had been working with the Communist Party for ten years and had just won the union’s silver medal for recruiting 170 new members. The conference represented about half the garages. It attacked Bevin and the CBC, called for mass meetings in the garages and set up a Rank and File Committee to run the campaign against the cuts.
The R&F Committee issued tens of thousands of leaflets and pamphlets among the busmen and the public over the next few weeks. It organised a series of mass meetings culminating in big demonstrations in central London. Its supporters picketed the official delegate conferences. Hundreds of pounds flowed into the campaign fund. ‘In one area, an underground branch called mass meetings and united with tram and bus branches to form a joint committee to prepare action against the cuts.’ [2] Bevin was caught off balance. ‘No section of the union causes me so much trouble as the busmen,’ he complained.
The CBC held a ballot which rejected the modified cuts by 16,500 to 4000 despite the official recommendation to accept. On 30 August, a mass deputation of busmen invaded Transport House and forced their delegate conference to listen to their demands. The conference voted by 51 to 7 that the executive should authorise strike action from 23 September, the day the cuts were due to come into force.
Bevin quickly persuaded the company to make a number of concessions – ‘no doubt fearing that the militants might take control completely’ [3]: no wage cuts, no redundancies, maximum time on duty reduced from nine to eight hours and increased payments for Sunday duties. To get them, the busmen would have to accept the principle of speed-up, which was the main item on the LGOC’s rationalisation programme. In this way Bevin was able to outflank the R&F Committee which had neglected the issue of speed-up in its eagerness to defeat the cuts. He squeezed the draft ‘Speed’ agreement through a delegate conference by eight votes four days before the strike deadline.
Outside the conference, one of the R&F leaders told a mass meeting, ‘It is one thing to secure the acceptance of speeded schedules at this conference and quite another to actually operate those speeded schedules.’ After an eight month battle the company had been forced to withdraw its wage cuts and redundancies completely and to concede a couple of improvements. For a rank and file movement only a few months old and without formal organisation it was a big success.
 
The Strike Against Speed
THE NEW movement prepared itself for the coming struggle at a conference held a couple of weeks after the speed settlement. Union branches were invited to affiliate and set up R&F garage committees, each sending six representatives to the monthly meeting of the central R&F committee. This closely followed the official union structure. The central R&F committee elected an organising committee which controlled the day-today running of the movement and an editorial committee for The Busman’s Punch which was taken over from the Communist Party. Three of the five members of the organising committee were in the Communist Party and all of them paid tribute to the Daily Worker’s support during the dispute. The movement pledged itself to fight within the union against wage-cuts, redundancies and speed and for the closed shop, the 7-hour day and the election of all union officials.
Soon after, one of the Communist Party members of the organising committee won a seat on the CBC, beating his nearest rival by 1,100 votes to 500. The movement also led a successful strike in a small independent garage. But the main issue was the fight against the speeded-up schedules which the LGOC was trying to introduce garage by garage. In the three months following the settlement, seven local garage actions successfully resisted the new schedules. As the R&F committee had predicted, the company was finding it almost impossible to put the speed agreement into effect.
Then, on 17 January 1933, the LGOC posted drastically speeded-up schedules for a route in Forest Gate garage which was known to carry the heaviest traffic in the world. This time the company refused to back down. By midnight the 500 busmen in the garage were on strike. A 300-strong picket made sure that none of the buses went out. Next day, R&F representatives addressed the strikers, several hundred of whom then marched to Upton Park, the neighbouring garage, and brought out a further 1,100 men. The strike spread rapidly as the R&F movement persuaded one union branch after another to call mass meetings on the issue.
Within four days, 26 garages covering nearly 13,000 busmen – over half the fleet – were on strike. Workers at three tramway depots came out in sympathy in defiance of the 1927 Trades Disputes Act which made sympathy strikes illegal and punishable by fines and imprisonment. Tube workers at Morden also voted to strike.
‘In almost every case, in spite of the unofficial character of the strike, in spite of the furious campaign of the capitalist press against the strikers and in defiance of the repeated orders of the reformist union officials to remain at work and their refusal to pay strike benefit, the strike decision, once taken in a particular garage was loyally observed by the men, and in no case did more than three or four buses leave the garages affected.’ [4]
The TGWU executive issued a statement declaring that it was ‘unable to recognise the strike’ as it required its members to ‘observe agreements made on their behalf’. Another significant statement was issued by Lord Ashfield, chairman of the LGOC. ‘In this strike,’ it ran, ‘we stand in the same position as the union leaders.’
On the sixth day, representatives from the striking garages met on the initiative of the R&F movement and decided to send a deputation to the union’s head office. The deputation demanded an immediate meeting of the executive to consider the withdrawal of the Forest Gate schedules and a guarantee against victimisation. The union leaders and the CBC met on the spot, despite their official attitude, and accepted these terms.
Immediately after the strike, the Forest Gate schedules were improved so much that the strikers were saying, ‘It would have been worth a three months’ strike to win such schedules.’ Schedules in other garages which had been a cause of dispute for months were suddenly revised. There were no victimisations. The growing influence of the R&F movement was reflected in the circulation of The Busman’s Punch which leaped to 10,000 copies a month.
George Renshaw, one of the Communist Party’s London organisers, explained how the strike was important ‘not alone for the successes gained, but also for the weaknesses displayed’. Chief among these was the rank and file leadership’s delay in establishing ‘an authoritative central strike leadership’. This
‘was the principal factor in causing doubts and hesitations to arise, and is undoubtedly the reason why only a partial strike was achieved and why larger numbers of tramwaymen and tube workers were not brought into the struggle. The lack of a daily strike bulletin to put authoritative statements before the strikers, the isolation of garage from garage which arose from this left the rank and file strikers open to the full force of the terrific barrage of propaganda poured out by the company and union officials through the press and wireless, and enabled the officials to weaken the strikers by scare stories of garages returning to work.
‘The Central Rank and File Committee, which was already representative of the majority of the garages, should have taken immediate steps to draw in elected representatives of the strikers from every garage in dispute, and to secure the election of a broad representative strike committee at every garage where the men were on strike. Such a strike organisation, consolidated both locally and centrally, issuing frequent statements in a strike bulletin, would have been able to draw many garages into the strike which remained at work more through lack of leadership and lack of knowledge of the situation than through actual unwillingness to join the strikers.
‘The real character of the struggle and the bitterness of the opposition to be expected from the officials was also underestimated. Actually the strike was an attempt to smash the whole agreement which existed between the TGWU and the London Traffic Combine. Had a complete stoppage been achieved, and the company forced to withdraw its whole programme for the speeding up of schedules, it would have constituted a smashing blow at the influence of the reformist officials, and in the eyes of the mass of the busmen would have almost completely destroyed the right of the union bureaucracy to speak in the name of the busmen.’ [5]
The movement held a series of mass meetings to explain the lessons of the strike. Its influence among the tramwaymen began to grow. Its example inspired militants and Communist Party members attempting to build similar movements among the railwaymen, cabmen and dockers. The strike against speed was the first widespread strike to take place under independent leadership. This was a time when there were hundreds of police baton charges against workers, thousands of political arrests and hard labour sentences, when many militants were automatically unemployed and when most strikes ended in defeat. Against this dark background the London Busmen’s Rank and File Movement stood out like a shining light.
 
Interlude: 1933-37
THE UNION bureaucracy lost no time in trying to prevent the movement from establishing itself inside the official union machine. At the biennial conference in July 1933, Bevin accused it of being ‘controlled by outside influences’. The conference obligingly armed the executive with the power to sack any officer who did not keep strictly to the official machinery of the union. Expecting this, the movement had purposely intensified its drive to win elected positions. Ten of the 13 London bus delegates to the conference were R&F men. When, after the conference, the R&F member of the CBC refused to disassociate himself from the movement on request and appealed to the union’s Finance and General Purposes Committee, he was left unchallenged. At the end of the year, the movement won five out of the six seats on the CBC and kept them until 1937.
Meanwhile, the Busman’s Punch was going from strength to strength. The months after the January strike brought a debate on the organisation of the movement. In the June issue, Papworth was pushing ‘the importance of organising R&F groups in the different garages’ and announced that ‘A Hendon member got 121 members in three weeks.’ The meetings on the lessons of the strike should be used to get such groups off the ground. ‘Rank and Filers should endeavour to get on all the committees possible,’ he added, ‘as all these committees ... have some bearing on your everyday life in the day-to-day work.’ By the next issue, the R&F committee was already discussing how to overcome the isolation of garage groups and organising area group meetings which would give them a realistic picture of rank and file feeling.
The Communist Party, on the other hand, was not doing nearly so well by the end of 1933. ‘In the early days of the campaign among the busmen we recruited 60 into our ranks, but the majority (although still actively working in the rank and file movement) have left,’ admitted George Renshaw. ‘We number the rank and file militants in thousands – we count our Communist recruits on our fingers ... The Party does not work in the trade unions and factories as a Party, but as individual militants ... The Party loses its identity in the very movements which it itself has helped to create. The Party is 90 per cent in the streets and only 10 per cent in the factories. Yet the factories are the fortresses. It is 60 per cent non-union. Yet the trade unionists are decisive.’ [6] With the arrival of the People’s Front policy in 1934, the Party subordinated the industrial struggle to parliamentary politics and the wooing of the Labour left.
On 1 July 1933, the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) took over nearly all the local passenger transport services within 30 miles of Charing Cross. The two full-time members of the Board were Lord Ashfield (at £12,500 a year), former chairman of the LGOC, and Frank Pick, formerly Ashfield’s chief lieutenant on the underground. The seven Board members held 38 directorships between them. John Cliff, the TGWU’s assistant general secretary, left his union post to join the Board with special duties in staff matters. The unions and the major employers had wanted nationalisation for some time. The Busman’s Punch called it ‘state capitalism’. The Board paid massive sums in compensation and nearly £26 million in interest to stockholders in its first five years. These payments were used as an excuse for rationalisation and fare increases.
Rationalisation had been delayed by the R&F movement under the old LGOC. But the LPTB was to change the face of the bus industry. Out went the frequent, reliable old ‘B’ type bus which carried 34 passengers at 12mph and stopped wherever you hailed it. In came a 60-passenger monster, hammering down the road at 30mph. Journey times were cut by up to 50 per cent despite heavier traffic, new traffic lights and Belisha crossings. Services on many routes were cut and busmen began to swell the ranks of the unemployed. Between 1935 and 1936, passenger accidents of all kinds shot up by 32 per cent. The formerly friendly relationship between busman and passenger disappeared. Inspectors harassed the crews. Between 1930 and 1935, 3,785 men left the industry. Of these, 877 had died and 1,006 had been discharged through ill-health. Only 343 reached the retirement age of 65. The Board’s wage bill grew by only 2 per cent per employee from 1933 to 1938.
The R&F movement’s answer to this was the demand for a 7-hour day. The cost – about £1 million – could have been amply covered by a cut in the rate of interest on the Board’s stock to 3 per cent. The movement also demanded a common delegate conference and joint negotiating machinery for all the Board’s workers. Over the next few years it made a number of attempts to expand itself into a ‘TOT’ (Trains, Omnibuses, Trams) movement. A TOT conference in 1934 planned a joint campaign on wages and conditions and set up a TOT Anti-Fascist Movement.
But there was some disagreement in the April committee meeting which adopted this perspective. One delegate said that the 7-hour demand was utopian unless there was a TOT movement behind it, as ‘The Board will soon give financial concessions than the 7-hour day or any shorter hours.’ Another argued that the demand was totally unrealistic considering the large number of rest-days then being worked.
Isolated within the bus section, the R&F movement could not resist Bevin and the Board indefinitely, let alone win the 7-hour day. The crucial task was to build a base outside the buses.
The underground, dominated by the right-wing NUR, never showed much interest. But the tramwaymen looked more promising. They had similar problems to the busmen about schedules, earned less and were faced with conversion to the faster and more profitable trolleybuses at tram rates. A ‘Justice for London’s Tramwaymen Committee’, supported by 21 depots was formed in 1935 as slow wage negotiations were causing unrest among the men. But when the Trams Council-advised by the T&G executive – accepted an offer already rejected by the majority of branches, the unofficial committee was unable to lead independent action. It did not build an organised base in the depots such as the busmen’s movement had in the garages. It collapsed in June 1936 after failing to lead two strikes against union officials and threats of dismissals.
A few Green Line coach garages were represented on the central R&F committee. Both they and the London Country Bus section came under the LPTB while in a different area of the union from the central busmen. On 26 July, 1935, Slough and Windsor Green Line garages struck against speed and insufficient rest-days. Bevin blamed the Communist Party and the Minority Movement – which had been dead for three years. 24 of the 33 Green Line garages (nearly 3,000 men) were out within a couple of days. On that second day, Papworth and Snelling, both members of the R&F organising committee and of the CBC, met with full-time officials. Then they went to Slough as R&F representatives and advised a return to work. The strike collapsed. The growing popularity of the movement on the green buses came to an abrupt halt.
Papworth and Snelling were forced to resign from the central R&F committee – they were its two most prominent leaders. They were reinstated within a month on the grounds that they had acted ‘in good faith’. But the movement’s organisation was tightened up. The organising committee was expanded to include one member from each affiliated branch and no member of it was to make a public statement on any dispute until an emergency meeting had decided the whole committee’s position.
The Green Line dispute was the first sign that the movement might be departing from its first principles. It was still stuck in the bus section. Bevin still ruled the rest of the union with a rod of iron. The Communist Party was abandoning the idea of rank and file movements. In February 1935, it had adopted a programme which condemned Labour Party leaders who fostered illusions in ‘Parliamentary and "democratic" methods’. [7] But by June 1936, the London District Committee was openly
advocating that ‘the right to appoint the Transport Board should rest with London’s municipal authorities’, that this would be an ‘extension of democratic control’, and that ‘a solution to the problem requires parliamentary action.’ [8] The movement’s own leaders were no longer unknown rank and file members: they were the elected leaders of 25,000 organised workers. Their power among these men was second only to that of the executive. They mixed with the highest union officials in the course of their union work. In 1935, Papworth was elected top of the poll as one of the two area representatives on the union’s executive.
The R&F leaders apparently found the executive sympathetic to the demand for a 7-hour day on grounds of ill-health. Accordingly, the CBC decided to pursue their aim by official means alone. It took them until May 1936 to get the Board round a negotiating table and even then it consistently refused to consider any reduction in hours. Yet at the bus conference only eight delegates – none of them R&F members – voted for an unofficial strike. An anonymous letter to the Busman’s Punch asked bluntly, ‘why the R&F sold the Busmen?’ Bill Payne, treasurer of the organising committee replied that the aim must be ‘unity in the Section, with the support of the Central Bus Committee and the Executive Committee behind them.’ [9] Eight months later, Payne himself and Bill Jones, secretary of the organising committee, were complaining that
‘After 12 months of talk ... we find ourselves challenged by the Board by their "lousy" proposals, while we find uncertainty and doubt as to the future line of the Central Bus Committee.’ [10]
The movement had never raised any objection to unofficial strikes before the Green Line strike. In January 1935, the bus delegates called a strike over a nonunion conductor who signed up at the last moment. In June – only a month before the Green Line strike – the movement had led an unofficial strike of 5,000 busmen which forced the Board to drop disciplinary charges against a single crew, to pay them for time lost and to overhaul the disciplinary procedure. Support and leadership of unofficial strikes was the real foundation of the movement. The battle against the cut and the strike against speed had created ripples of militancy which spread for several years. J.J. Mills, the busmen’s full-time district secretary, explained how this forced him to act as the servant of the men.
‘When acute difficulties arise and he made reasonable proposals for easement he was frequently turned down until the men threatened to strike; then what he had suggested was secured. This had happened at Hammersmith, Forest Gate, Barking, Mortlake and Hanwell and elsewhere in the last two or three years.’ [11]
Now the movement did a rapid about turn. Within months of the start of official negotiations the CBC was getting strikers back to work before taking their grievances to the Board. The busmen’s delegate conference instructed branches to consult the CBC before taking ‘drastic action’. A promising attempt to involve the craftsmen was dropped when none of their official leaderships would support the 7-hour day demand. Before 1936, the movement’s isolation had been no fault of its own. Now it was cutting itself off. The Board steadfastly refused to discuss the question of hours. Negotiations dragged on into 1937. The TGWU executive reduced the official demand to 7½ hours. This was tamely agreed to by the bus delegates.
By the end of April, time had run out. The Board had been given notice of a strike for 1 May if no agreement was reached. It gave a final refusal on hours but suggested further talks in June, after the coronation of George VI. A joint meeting at the Ministry of Labour got nowhere. Two days before the strike, the executive granted plenary powers to the bus delegate conference. In practice, this gave the movement official control of the bus section. It also placed them in a very exposed position as Bevin could withdraw plenary powers at any time.
On 1 May 1937, the busmen struck as a solid mass. Thousands of them paraded in uniform in a massive May Day march which was five miles long and took 1 hour 35 minutes to pass a given point. On the same day unofficial strikes were spreading from Kent and Sussex to thousands of provincial busmen in Essex, Luton, Bedford, Cambridge, Norwich, Oxford, Northampton and East Yorkshire. But Bevin was able to keep the two disputes quite separate. After all, they were in two completely different sections of the union, concerned different demands and one was official while the other was not! He got the provincial busmen back to work by 5 May. The R&F leaders had failed to develop a flexible combination of ‘official’ and ‘unofficial’ tactics. They were relying more and more on the official machine. It was an ominous development.
 
The Coronation Strike and After
THE CORONATION Strike was one of the biggest British strikes of the 1930s. It became a standard joke among the strikers that the changing of the picket was more popular than the Changing of the Guard. The movement produced a pamphlet whose title – London Busmen Demand the Right to Live a Little Longer – became the slogan of the struggle. Leaflets asked for support from passengers and trade unionists and a special tabloid issue of the Busman’s Punch was produced. Beneath an advert for the strike pamphlet, it asked branch secretaries to ‘form a pamphlet-selling squad and plan its job to cover particularly stations and other busy points, also factories in the dinner-hour and when the workers are leaving.’ Meanwhile, the Board had got the Ministry of Labour to hold a Court of Inquiry into the dispute. It issued an interim report on 4 May. Unable to come to a decision on the 7½-hour day, it recommended further negotiations and a health inquiry. On the same day, the tram and trolley-bus section asked Bevin to grant them plenary powers as well, although their agreement still had some months to run. Naturally, Bevin sat on the idea, and on 5 May a delegate conference accepted his firm recommendation to remain at work. Both sections, he later argued, had previously agreed that it was a purely bus strike for a purely bus claim.
Papworth bitterly attacked Bevin over this at the union inquiry a month after the strike.
‘Even supposing you could not bring the tramwaymen out with us on our application, which I agree you could not in view of the agreement, when you found the Tram members against their will carrying our normal passengers and paying in our normal revenue the situation had changed ... Two days after the strike began three branches circularised the fleet demanding that either the trams should be brought out or that they should be stopped from doing our work. Not one member of our delegate conference ever believed that the executive would permit the conditions of the road as happened during the strike.’
Unfortunately, Papworth himself had been encouraging such illusions for over a year.
On 8 May, the Board made a final offer of negotiations on the basis of the interim report if the strike was called off. A delegate vote rejected the offer by 47 to 3. Three days later, the union executive recommended the same terms again, arguing that they were a ‘75 or 80 per cent victory’. The delegates again rejected this by 46 to 4 and were backed up by a branch vote of 17,459 to 1,776. A R&F leaflet had claimed that this would win the confidence both of other LPTB workers and of the executive. Tramwaymen at Hanwell and Wood Green did, in fact, vote for a sympathy strike. Bevin merely wished the busmen an ironical ‘good luck’.
The movement was working at full stretch. On 5 May, a mass meeting at Shoreditch Town Hall was addressed by Papworth, J.R. Campbell (of the Communist Party), Jennie Lee (of the Independent Labour Party) and no less a figure than Sir Stafford Cripps MP, at that time the leader of the Labour left. Two days later, Papworth led a march to a Daily Worker meeting. The diary of Bill Waters, a rank and file busman, shows how the campaign was carried throughout the London labour movement.
‘30 April. Poplar Town Hall Eve of Strike meeting ... Also midnight meeting of Barking branch ... 3 May. Picket duty 4 to 6 a.m. ... 7 May. Addressed meeting on Bus Strike Position at Cock Hotel on platform of Communist Party ... 9 May. Picket duty 4 to 6 a.m. ... 10 May. Addressed meeting of Bloomsbury branch Socialist Party of Great Britain on Strike position. 11 May. Addressed meeting at Cock Hotel on platform of East Ham Trades Council... 13 May. As 11 May.’
On the 23rd, Waters addressed a meeting in Dagenham after a march from three East London garages. The marchers had their own song, which went to the tune of Clementine:



‘London Busmen stick together
This is your fight see it through
For though buswork may be thrilling
We can prove it’s killing too.
Only four men in a hundred
Reach the age of sixty-five
What’s the use of having a pension
Unless you are still alive.’




Once Coronation Week was over, Londoners began to accustom themselves to trams, trolleybuses and other forms of transport. Clearly, the strike had to be extended. At a rally in Hyde Park on 16 May, Papworth declared that
‘Any means we can adopt to call out other sections of London Transport ... we shall adopt. If it means picketing every tram and trolley-bus depot, every country service bus depot and every tube station in addition to the Main Line railways, the London Busmen will undertake that task. If it means that we have to throw our bodies across the lines of the London Tramway system, we shall throw our bodies across in hundreds and hundreds.’
The pity of it was that this never happened.
Instead, Papworth and Snelling appealed to a meeting of the Trams Council – with the permission of Bevin who already had it sewn up – for an unofficial sympathy strike. They rejected the idea by 31 to 9 and unanimously pledged themselves to ‘assist in carrying out anything the executive council desires.’ So the CBC, clearly at the end of its tether, sent a forlorn request to the executive, to call the trams out officially. This was promptly denied. Over £100,000 had been spent in strike pay.
Bevin was now playing with the busmen like a cat with its prey. On the 25th, their delegates again rejected his advice to approach the Board. He replied to sharp criticisms of his leadership – or lack of it – with biting sarcasm. The CBC had been given plenary powers at their own request and this placed the onus of leadership on them alone. The executive, he concluded hypocritically, had sought ‘purely to assist with advice and help in every possible way’.
He stabbed them in the back the very next day. The executive revoked plenary powers and arranged a return to work within two days on almost exactly the same terms the Board had offered three weeks earlier. Only the day before, the delegates had voted to go on by a majority of nearly 5 to 1. Would they try to continue and spread the strike unofficially? Bevin relied on the assumption that they would not and he was right. They lost the last chance of outmanoeuvring him. Four months later, Payne understood what had happened. They had all been very happy that the strike was official, he remembered bitterly. ‘How wrong we were,’ he wrote in the last issue of the Busman’s Punch.
‘In my judgment, the EC never had any intention of assisting the busmen ... They were all the time concerned about destroying the R&F movement who had been preventing unofficial strikes and organising the men 100 per cent solid behind the EC.’
The movement was still very popular and the June issue of its paper retained an optimistic note. But on 7 June, Bevin suspended all the bus section’s officers except full-timers and paid officials pending an inquiry into their connections with the R&F movement. Protests were the movement’s only sign of life. After the inquiry, the July biennial conference of the union ‘strongly recommended’ the executive to destroy the movement. Papworth, Payne and Jones were expelled and four other leading figures barred from office for up to 3 years. Again there was little response from the movement.
By now it was beginning to split. One faction led by Payne and Snelling wanted to form a breakaway union. They were narrowly defeated in the last meeting of the central R&F committee. In February 1938 they set up the National Passenger Workers’ Union (NPWU). This was the signal for a bitter and wasteful inter-union war. TGWU and NPWU branches in the same garage printed pamphlets attacking each other. It helped to drive the TGWU militants into the arms of the bureaucracy. It finally collapsed after the war when the Trades Disputes Act was abolished and the buses became a TGWU closed shop.
Papworth and Jones were allowed back into the union in April 1938 on condition of a 4-year ban from office and assurances of loyalty to the executive. In 1942, they were re-elected to their old positions. Soon afterwards Papworth was elected to the TUC General Council. Jones later joined him on the TGWU executive and became chairman both of the CBC and of the No.1 Area Passenger Group Committee. ‘During the war and in the years immediately following, the Communists worked closely with the union’s executive and officers.’ [12] So closely, in fact, that the bus driver’s wage fell from 50 per cent above the national average in 1938 to only 17 per cent above it in 1948. This was the real beginning of the decline in the status of bus work.
Despite their high office, Jones and Papworth were quite unable to prevent the 1949 biennial’s 2-1 decision to ban Communists from union office. Jones nevertheless maintained his position (he resigned from the Communist Party) and virtually controlled the bus section from an increasingly right-wing stance for many years. Most of the full-time officials in the London bus section probably owe their appointment to his influence and his presence has graced many a conference of the Communist Parly’s Liaison Committee for the Defence of Trade Unions. The main opposition to him came, ironically enough, from the original Platform, edited for 17 years by George Renshaw, the former London Communist Party organiser. Renshaw left the Communist Party in 1946 over the question of doorstep recruitment and retained until his death the spirit of struggle that his former comrades had so obviouslv lost.
 
The Lessons of the Movement
THE BUSMEN’S movement combined mass agitation in the garages and among the public with an obstinate struggle inside the official union structure. This is what gave it its great strength in the early years. It led its first battles long before capturing electoral control of the section. It used unofficial action to catch the officials off-balance, to take the initiative out of their hands and to bend them to its will. Its leaders fought for elected positions in order to prevent victimisation and to provide unofficial action with some official backing. Both the elected representatives and the paid officials were made to feel the heavy hand of rank and file militancy organised into a permanent mass movement. One false step and the local R&F group would expose you to the world in the pages of the Busman’s Punch.
The movement laboured under tremendous difficulties from the start. Workers everywhere were still suffering the aftereffects of the General Strike. In 1931 alone there were over 100 baton charges against workers and more than 1,300 political arrests. Yet when the busmen marched and picketed, not a finger was laid on them. Unemployment was over 2 million. Yet not a single unofficial strike on the buses weakened at the regular threats of dismissal. But they were isolated, even within their own industry, even within London Transport. They won the bus section for the election of full-time officials but they did not lead a union-wide fight for it. Even so, the movement never really lost ground until its leaders tried to rely on official action only.
The movement could have continued after 1937. The new CBC was mainly composed of R&F supporters who wanted nothing more than the return of ‘the true leaders of the busmen’. But those leaders were controlled by a party which no longer wanted the R&F movement. It seems unlikely that the Communist Party ever recruited large numbers of busmen. But even control of the leaders meant a big responsibility, for the movement was much larger than the party itself. The bigger the organisation, the more crucial becomes the role of leadership. ‘All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a directing authority in order to secure the harmonious working of different activities,’ Marx observed. ‘A single violin player is his own conductor; an orchestra requires a separate one.’ The idea of a rank and file movement is not to destroy all leadership. It is to build an alternative leadership to the reformist one. This cannot be done solely inside the structure controlled by the officials. The truth was that the Communist Party no longer wanted to build such an alternative leadership.
This does not mean that the movement should (or could) have been ‘non-political’. Without the 12 Communist Party members’ careful preparatory work during the first seven months of 1932, the movement would never have existed. The perspective of building, such movements came not only from the shop floor but from the Communist Party’s central committee and from the Red International of Labour Unions. Rank and file militancy needs its own organisation between the party at one extreme and union officialdom at the other. It must find expression independent of the bureaucracy while remaining far broader politically than a revolutionary organisation. A front organisation for the official leadership is just a voting machine which actually disorganises the militants. A front organisation for the party would be sectarian, unable to win the trust of the workers.
A rank and file movement gives revolutionary socialists a far bigger arena than they could otherwise hope for. If they serve the movement faithfully, they can grow much more quickly than before. In a big movement, the party as a whole has to come out into the open much more in front of masses of workers. Party members have to work as an organised unit, not just as individual militants. Their leaders have to be closely linked with this work, the better to integrate the different areas of party work and give a unified lead to the organisation.
The truth is that the ‘Popular Front’ line of the Communist Party, a line that required winning the support of trade union leaders and ‘progressive’ MPs (Liberals as well as Labour), ruled out party support for a real Rank and File movement. The Communist Party played a vital and extremely progressive role in the earlier years of the busmen’s movement. The collapse of that movement followed the party’s swing to the right. For though a genuine Rank and File movement must be far broader than a revolutionary party, it is equally true that without a nucleus of revolutionaries, it will wither and die. By the middle 1930s the Communist Party had ceased to be a revolutionary party.
 



In all the immense coverage devoted to the death in London of Alexander Litvinenko, the former KGB agent, from radiation poisoning, I have yet to find any mention of how convenient the whole affair is for the British and US governments.
First of all, of course, it diverts attention from Iraq and Afghanistan.
But Britain and the US have other reasons for wanting to put pressure on the Russian regime. They want President Putin to make a bigger and less critical commitment to their leadership. They don’t want him flaunting the economic power of Russia’s huge oil and gas resources. And they certainly didn’t want him at the G8 meeting in St Petersburg toning down their expressions of support for Israel during the war with Lebanon.
But because of the disastrous occupations of Iraq and Afghanistan, they are in no position to embark on a major conflict with Russia. Hence the campaign to vilify Russia.
No doubt a lot of the things that are said about authoritarianism in Russia are true. But the prominence that is being given to them, compared, say, with China, Egypt or Pakistan, reflects the political priorities of the Western powers.
We should maintain our support for the right of countries like Ukraine and Georgia to true national independence. We should continue to oppose imperialism east and west. Above all, we should not be fooled into forgetting that the main enemy is at home.
Pete Glatter, South London
 



This Year’s Movement
This year has already seen more militancy among students than last and probably than the year before that. It is often a militancy of a new type. Non-socialist, non-radical students are willing to take more militant action over low-level issues affecting them than ever before. The militancy is not political or anti-capitalist in the way the student revolt was a few years ago. In those days, the key thing was often students’ general disenchantment with capitalism and its works. Issues sometimes had to be half-invented to provide a useful outlet for this feeling.
Today, exactly the opposite is the case. The issues are ones that ordinary students feel intimately affected by for they spring from the raising of the price they have to pay for an education of increasingly doubtful worth in declining living and working conditions. Socialists who rely only on the experience of the past (and this includes many IS students) can be left way behind by student movements before they have time to adjust to them. And the movements themselves can fail because no-one was capable of giving a political lead against local and national student union bureaucrats. The result IS has some influence in about eighty assorted institutions of higher education. Eighty out of more than eight hundred.
 
IS – The Story So Far
The present situation was taking shape last year. At the last student conference last May we put forward a perspective for student work which was recommended by that conference to the EC. This included proposals to set up IS societies, begin serious local opposition to student union bureaucracy, break into the hundreds of polytechnics, colleges of education, etc., where we have no influence and to produce a popular, recruiting pamphlet. All this was with the aim of getting the maximum gains with the minimum of effort (in order to prevent any diversion from our main thrust in the working class) and in the belief that in order to go on recruiting students, who make useful members if only because of their free time, we have to show ourselves to be relevant to them as students as well as a serious organisation with a working class orientation as its first priority.
A draft pamphlet was written in July but its perspective was rejected by the EC and then by the August NC with a small majority. Two main arguments were advanced against it. One said that students only came to socialism through their general disenchantment with capitalist society and its ideology. This assumed that nothing had changed since the first student revolt (described above). This has led to the following practical proposals:


from comrades Thomas and Green of Manchester in the September IB: “Serious theoretical work is necessary before a new strategy can be formed. We have the perspective of doing this work.”
from comrade Harman at the October NC: “CH suggested meetings such as Marxism and Sociology, Marxism and Economics, etc. be held and booklists of useful readings be produced.”


It was largely as a result of this opposition that the pamphlet was rejected in favour of a Student Special. This turned out to be about the general horrors of capitalism, about Ireland, Women’s Liberation, indeed anything and everything except those things that students were actually becoming actively concerned about at Lancaster, Southampton, Sussex, North-West and Huddersfield Polys, Leeds College of Education, Reading and so on. These students, like thousands of others, are facing a continuing threat of attacks on their conditions of study, worsening accommodation, victimization, a clampdown on protest through government legislation and a graduate unemployment rate currently running at something like double the national average. However sharply some of them feel the absurdity of sociology, however keenly they show active sympathy with the struggles in US prisons, Ireland or UCS, their own troubles claim pride of place with the vast majority of students.
It is no coincidence that Time Out – a semi-underground magazine sold widely among students – ran a main feature on the Student Accommodation Crisis a few weeks ago. Mercifully, there was some recognition at the October NC of the irrelevance of much of the Student Special, but by then it was a little late to do anything about it. Meanwhile, the thousands of students without accommodation or the victorious fight against an attempt to cut out a whole degree course at Huddersfield Poly – possibly the first major student victory for a couple of years – got not even a mention in our publications. The Student Special was effectively little other than a well below average issue of SW. It could not help spearhead a breakthrough in the hundreds of colleges where we are unknown. We need publications that speak about the attacks on students particularly if they are for students and which can generalise from them to a revolutionary conclusion.
The other argument stated that we could not spare the resources to undertake the student conference’s perspective. Effectively, this boils down to the question of the pamphlet. We believe that the production and use of a short, popular pamphlet will be a real economy. It is already written, its use will bring us new members to promote expansion in our main areas of work at minimum cost and it is just as much a commercial proposition as any of the pamphlets produced by Pluto Press.
 
Time for a Change
Whatever the relative merit of these arguments last summer, the new militancy is now a fact. “Circumstances alter cases” is a principle that should be much dearer to revolutionary socialists than to the legal profession. We believe that the present circumstances are proving our case in practice. We don’t think that the wrong line on students is a symptom of “centrism” or anything like it on the part of the EC and NC. We don’t think that continuing it would do us any serious damage. We just think it would be a silly mistake. The arguments that took place over the summer made us feel that the EC were completely out of touch on this issue. Recent events confirm this beyond question. We recommend:


that the student conference calls for the production of a student pamphlet
that a student special is produced for January taking stock of the last few months of struggle and suggesting the way forward
that students are advised to orientate a part of their activity so as to make new inroads where we have not support at present
that where possible IS societies or Socialist Worker Readers Groups are set up to consistently push our politics.





 


Tony Tait (Swansea IS)
Pete Glatter (Kingston IS)



 



Recent strikes and sit-ins in polytechnics have pointed to the growth of a student movement outside the universities. And no wonder. Even forgetting about the coming growth of this sector of the binary system (the division of higher education into ‘first class’ universities and ‘second class’ polytechnics, technical colleges, colleges of education and of further education), its state at the moment is little short of chaotic. The living and working conditions of non-university students are often quite appalling.
In one London polytechnic, a quarter of all first year students have no grant. They must support themselves by doing part-time jobs as well as full-time study. There are strong indications that the proportion in the second year is even higher. This polytechnic is to have 10,000 students by 1975.
Accommodation problems are another hazard. At one polytechnic, about 40 business students were told not to come at the beginning of this year as there was nowhere for them to stay. At this institution, about half a dozen students were to be found sleeping regularly every night in the students unions office until a burglar alarm system was put in there recently. At another, where 120 students were unhoused for at least a month at the beginning of the year, they sleep in local church halls. At Enfield Technical College a scheme for student flats submitted by a local builder was turned down by the Conservative-dominated council ‘unwilling, themselves, to provide the much needed living facilities.’ [1] By contrast, every university has at least 30% campus residence, and an approved lodgings scheme.
If students manage to get over their accommodation problems then there is always the library problem. The average expenditure per full-time university student on library books is £20 per annum. For polytechnic students it is £9. In many colleges of education it is even less. [2] In universities, the number of library books per student works out at about 150. In the polytechnics it works out at about 14 – over ten times less! In one polytechnic, work began on erecting a large tower block before the authorities had settled their expansion priorities. Eventually, most of the new block was given over to various kinds of management courses, with three floors to be used as a library. There is not yet enough money available to get enough books for it; the result – row after row of empty shelves. The shortage of books is so bad that a sociology book club has been started up. Membership costs £5 in the first year, £3 in the second, and £1 in the third. Its members are therefor paying £9 for something that should have been free in the first place!
Given these kinds of conditions it is hardly surprising that the proportion of students using one polytechnic library declines from 50 per cent in the first year to 20 per cent in the second. Nor is the high drop-out rate compared with that of the universities surprising. After all, the average expenditure for a full-time university student is £1,055 a year, as against only £319 for non-university students. [3] At the same time, the trend towards more vocationally oriented courses and crudely utilitarian ‘education’ continues. One outcome of the changing demand is a 4.6 per cent unemployment rate among all sociology graduates. More significant is the generous dowry that goes with the ‘marriage’ of polytechnics with industry.
In May 1966, the then Labour government announced its intention of making the polytechnics into the apex of the non-university sector of higher education. The emphasis was to be on teaching as opposed to research, and on extremely close links with industry and commerce.
Every polytechnic now has an Industrial Liaison Officer (ILO), one of whose functions is to arrange placements for students in the third year of four-year degree courses. This means that the student takes a one-year job on the ILO’s advice in a concern of either local or national importance. The student gets a maintenance grant from his local council, so the employer gets a year’s skilled labour for nothing. The ILO’s also run what amounts to a free assessment system of students as potential employees for interested firms. It is estimated that the ILO in Kingston Polytechnic has helped local firms realise ‘benefits’ to the tune of £50,000. This is by no means the only example of the direct subordination of education to industry. Since 1966, the Department of Trade and Industry has set up seventeen Advisory Centres in various institution of higher education. These provide courses and advisory and demonstration services for industry on all aspects of low-cost automation. The response of one polytechnic authority to the opening of such a centre helps one to appreciate the true meaning of sycophancy.
‘A list is now being compiled of senior executives from the larger firms in the area which will form the basis for invitations to the opening ceremony. This is seen to be an opportunity to bring influential industrialists into the polytechnic. If you wish any of your contacts to be included in the list of guests for the opening ceremony, please contact Dr Lawley.’ [4]
Some firms especially the larger ones, will go so far as to sponsor students – with more money than they could hope to get from their local councils – if it is ‘the only way to guarantee that a college gets the minimum number of students required to launch a course which the firm sees as necessary.’ [5]
Bad conditions for the students, excellent ones for industry. This is the atmosphere in which ‘the polytechnics have the task of making the application of knowledge respectable.’ [6] This is what the so-called ‘philosophy of relevance’ really means. As one educationalist has written, in a tone filled with joyous anticipation, ‘even arts courses can be beamed towards employment.’ [7] Educational priorities are rapidly becoming indistinguishable from those of industrial competition.
The majority of students are against the binary system, even according to National Union of Students officials, and are certainly against the way it is run at the moment. But this carries very little weight among ‘progressive’ educationalists. For these, universities should be concerned with ‘pure’ knowledge and research, intellectual speculation and the production of progressively smaller elites of ‘apprentice scholars.’ Polytechnics and the like, however, must busy themselves with solving the social and economic problems of British capitalism through the training of ‘apprentice industrialists.’ [8] This is justified ideologically in with the educational philosophy of an earlier, crisis-ridden age. The ideal of vocational education becomes that ‘work should be transformed with intellectual and moral vision and thereby turned into a joy, triumphing over weariness and its pain.’ [9] The object for change becomes, not the nature of work itself, but the attitude of the individual towards it. Opposition is condemned as the product of ‘unpractical revolutionary ideas, controlled by no sympathetic apprehension of the real workings of trade conditions.’ [10]
The recent sit-in at North Western Polytechnic in London must be set against this background. The appointment of Professor Miller as Director has a significance far beyond the fact of his past at University College, Rhodesia. Student Union leaflets make this quite clear. The main issues are


the way in which Miller was appointed (i.e. no account being taken of student opposition) and
the fact that Miller supports the continuation of the elitist binary system, is extremely ignorant (he didn’t even know that CNAA stood for Council for National Academic Awards), and has been quoted as saying that the present student representation figure of 40 per cent ‘is far too high.’


Miller’s appointment, if effective, would be another step on the road to degrading even further this kind of second-class education. As one leaflet at the polytechnic puts it: ‘It is not only to keep Miller out but for the future of polytechnics throughout the country, for democratic participation of students and staff against incompetence and the autocratic board of governors.’
The Miller issue is enormously important for this whole sector of higher education. First of all because of the effect that expansion is already having. Overcrowding is accompanied by impersonality. Courses become more narrowly vocational. Broader subjects like sociology or liberal studies are already beginning to come up for the chop. The vocations themselves are becoming far less attractive. And often less easily obtainable. The status of skilled and white-collar employment goes down as it expands. Many students are heading for jobs which are moving towards, or already being absorbed into, the conditions of working-class life. That life is not improving. The qualifications for it are simply going up.
Secondly, there is the scale and effects of future expansion. As the Robbins Report pointed out, ‘progress – and particularly the maintenance of a competitive position – depends to a much greater extent than ever before on the skills demanding special training.’ [11] The need to remain internationally competitive has imposed special tasks on education and training. In 1970, for instance,there were twenty-eight Industrial Training Boards devising and approving training schemes for industries covering fifteen million workers’ they had already spent £120 million by the year ending in March 1968.
For second-class education, this would not mean expansion so much as explosion. The polytechnics already account for one-half of all full-time students. The relative number of university students had already declined from 69 per cent in 1957/8 to 53 per cent in 1967/8. In that year, under 40 per cent of all students were at university. Over the next ten years, the most dramatic increase in student populations will be in polytechnics, technical colleges, and colleges of further education. [12]
The costs of expansion on this scale will not easily be borne by a country already suffering more than most from inflation, however necessary they may be in the long-term interests of competition. Both major parties are committed to holding down public expenditure, and there is less leeway for financial policies in this sector now than in the early sixties. According to one educationalist, if no detailed ten-year plan for education is drawn up, or if the economy continues to stagnate, British capitalism will simply not be able to afford such costs. [13] At the moment, we have both stagnation and no plan. Not only that, but viable ideas on how to expand and economise at the same time are pretty thin on the ground. Such as they are, they all rest on the perspective of an effective attack on the standards and conditions of students in the fastest-growing sector – that outside the universities.
Cutting labour-costs is the first priority. At the moment, the polytechnics can boast a slightly higher staff/student ratio than the universities. They also have to pay their younger staff more on average, so as to keep them. Suggested lines of attack here include allowing the ratio to decline, raising the number of face-to-face teaching hours, and – perhaps more as sugar on the pill than anything else – encouraging the use of films and tapes. The Open University is a test-bed for this, as it may also be for new kinds of correspondence courses. Secondary economies on capital costs may include the extension of the academic year and shorter degree courses. The cost of residence (mainly at universities and colleges of education) could also be cut by ‘encouraging’ students to live at home during their time of study. [14]
Attacks like this are and will be an important focus of student politics. They constitute an attempt to subordinate directly more and more of the student’s life to purely capitalist ends. But the fact that such attacks have to be made indicates that education is one more area in which capitalism cannot solve its own problems. A narrow job-orientation makes it impossible ‘to hand over, progressively the control of the learning sequence to the. learner himself.’ [15] This is also symptomatic of the permanence of the general attack on students. Non-university students share far more day-to-day common problems than those inside the universities. And the attack on them is the most serious by far. These are conditions rather different to those in which previous sporadic struggles have taken place. The offensive is a permanent one. The only alternative to a permanent fight back now is real and lasting defeats.
 
Notes
1. Enfield Technical College, S.U. Handbook 1970/1, p.36.
2. NUS, Polytechnic Libraries Campaign. For each polytechnic of 2,000 or more students, the Library Association recommends an annual expenditure on books and periodicals of £60,000. The actual average is £25,782. The average university keeps 555,194 volumes in stock. For the polytechnics the figure is 42,287.
3. The Binary System, NUS 1970.
4. Kingston Polytechnic, Diary, No.6/71.
5. R. Sheldon (Ford Motor Co.), Industry Tests the Product, Times Educational Supplement, Extra, 4.12.70, p.36.
6. G. Brosan et al., Problems and Policies in Higher Education, p.72.
7. R. Rickett, Future Pattern of Degree Work, T.E.S. Extra, p.3l7
8. G. Brosan, Relevant, Proactive, Involved, ibid., p.34.
9. A.N. Whitehead, The Aims of Education and Other Essays, London 1929, pp.67-8.
10. Ibid., p.68.
11. The Robbins Report, 1963.
12. G. Brosan et al., op cit.
13. Ibid., p.35.
14. Ibid.
15. R. Borger and A. Seaborne, The Psychology of Learning, p.230.
 



In my review of Anna Politkovskaya’s A Small Corner of Hell (April SR), I put the total number of war deaths in Chechnya at between 53,000 and 120,000 by the end of 2003 according to the latest credible estimate I could find.
However, I overlooked an even more credible estimate in A Century of State Murder? Death and Policy in Twentieth-Century Russia by Mike Haynes and Rumy Husan. This is a fascinating and invaluable book not just about Russia but also about the more general uses and abuses of ‘facts and figures’. They put the overall figure at 190,000, 160,000 of them civilians – over 15 percent of the total civilian population.
This means that by now something like one in six of the civilian population of Chechnya has been killed since the first war was launched by the Russian government just over ten years ago.
Pete Glatter, London
 



The death of Haydar Aliyev, the 80 year old president of Azerbaijan, was less than headline news in the west. Once a key figure in the ‘evil empire’ of the Soviet Union, Aliyev ended up as one of the US’s favourite Muslim rulers.
The first 30 years of his career in the dreaded Soviet secret police included the worst periods of Stalinist terror, when there were nearly a million political executions and up to 10 million political prisoners. By 1967 Aliyev was the chief of the Azerbaijani secret police. From 1969 he ran the country on behalf of his Russian masters. However, like other agents of Soviet rule in republics outside Russia, he also built up a network of local bureaucrats who were beholden to him for their jobs, perks and privileges.
In 1982 Aliyev rose to the summit of Soviet power, the Moscow Politburo. He also retained his grip on Azerbaijan. But he was ignominiously driven from high office five years later by Mikhail Gorbachev, the new Soviet leader, who wanted to distinguish himself from the discredited older generation of officials.
Aliyev retreated to his power base of Nakhchivan. He waited while Gorbachev made increasingly disastrous efforts to revive the Soviet economy and bring the non-Russian republics to heel. These efforts included a massacre by Soviet troops in Baku, the Azerbaijani capital.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union an independent Azerbaijani government led by Abulfaz Elchibey, a former anti-Soviet dissident, lost a disastrous war against Armenia. This provoked a military revolt. The US suspended government aid. One of Elchibey’s last acts was to invite his old foe to Baku to shore up the government. Aliyev quickly organised the first of many rigged votes to ease himself into power. His political enemies began to fill the prisons, and opposition was heavily restricted.
Within a year big oil companies like BP were doing deals with Aliyev to exploit the rediscovered wealth of the Caspian Sea. The 1,760-kilometre pipeline out to the deep-water port of Ceyhan on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast, for instance, is being built at a cost of $3.6 billion. Haydar Aliyev’s playboy son Ilham moved into the top management of the state oil company Socar.
Impoverishment and the lack of rights sparked a series of revolts. Nevertheless, Azerbaijan was accepted into the Council of Europe. The US resumed aid, especially for military and security purposes, in recognition of Aliyev’s support for the attack on Afghanistan. When Haydar Aliyev developed terminal cancer he arranged for the presidency to pass to Ilham in another series of rigged votes. The presidential succession was supported by both Russia and the US.
Haydar Aliyev was one of the world’s top agents of state terror and repression for 60 years. He died peacefully in a clinic in Cleveland, Ohio. The real war against terror continues.
 



A Small Corner of Hell
Anna Politkovskaya
University of Chicago Press £17.50
If you want to know what life is like at the receiving end of Russian imperialism, I don’t think you could do much better than this grim little book. Anna Politkovskaya is a Russian journalist who has broken with her own imperial establishment to report on its atrocities in Chechnya – not just once or twice, but over and over again. She has cowered under Russian air attack together with Chechen refugees and been tortured by Russian officers as a pro-Chechen ‘militant bitch’. Her extraordinary courage in one of the most dangerous places on earth makes her account all the more believable.
The various armed forces of the massive Russian Federation have been smashing up the tiny republic of Chechnya for roughly six out of the last ten years. These forces number somewhere around 100,000. They are ranged against maybe 1,500 Chechen fighters. According to the most recent credible estimate I can find, somewhere between 50,000 and 100,000 Chechen civilians had been killed by the beginning of last year (plus 13,000 to 20,000 combatants). By November 2003 there were, according to the UN, 210,000 refugees in Chechnya and in the neighbouring republic of Ingushetia, and an unknown number in other parts of Russia. These are huge proportions of the Chechen population even if you accept the official Russian claim that it is over a million. They give some idea of the scale of the ongoing catastrophe. But you need the testimony of a Politkovskaya to know what it feels like.
Through her you smell the fear and feel the reality of mutilation and death by bullet, bomb, landmine and torture. You witness the heroism of starving old women giving up their scraps of food to the young. You witness also the demoralisation of the starving half-crazed women tearing at each other’s rations, tuberculosis victims spitting at the uninfected to jump a place in the food queue. You understand the brutalisation of the Russian military, whose major crimes include at least four big massacres since 1999. You admire all the more the troops who refuse to crack, like the ones who saved 89 inmates of an old people’s home under intense fire from their own side.
Chechnya has been subjected to a harsh regime of institutionalised corruption in which those who systematically thieve its oil wealth are protected by Russian uniforms and guns. Yet western leaders have kept remarkably quiet about it. Keeping quiet about Chechnya is part of the price for Russian compliance in the west’s own dirty wars. If the mainstream western media suddenly regain the power of speech about Chechnya (as they have recently about the threat to democracy in Russia proper), it won’t be on account of humanitarian scruples. It will be because Putin and Co aren’t complying enough. Russian imperialism may be down but it’s far from out. The US is the world’s only superpower, but it isn’t right next door in the way Russia is for a great swathe of countries from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean.
There are striking parallels in this book with the activities of western imperialism from Vietnam to Iraq. A lot of the differences are basically due to Russia being poorer than Britain or the US. Sadly, Politkovskaya’s understanding of the Putin leadership seems to be restricted to its Soviet origin. She never mentions the western aggressiveness to which it is responding. Consequently, she never mentions the international anti-war movement which incorporates the only real alternative to the relentless pressure of imperial competition, east and west. Her book is an important contribution to that movement nevertheless.
 



A Russian Diary
Anna Politkovskaya
Harvill Secker, £17.99
Anna Politkovskaya was a journalist who never stopped investigating the abuses of power no matter what the odds. But last October she was shot dead in the lift of her block of flats in Moscow.
There was some publicity in the West for her courageous stand against the Putin leadership, but she was in a media tomb well before the headlines were swamped by the poisoning of former KGB agent Alexander Litvinenko, who seems never to have taken a stand against one authority except for payment by another.
Media Workers Against the War and the National Union of Journalists organised an audacious picket of the Russian Embassy in London. Socialist Worker described Politkovskaya as “Russia’s Robert Fisk” and denounced Putin as her murderer, in true Politkovskaya style – clear, militant, outspoken.
Why keep her memory alive? She had her failings, above all, perhaps, her inability to fully grasp how ideas change in struggle. But her greatest legacy is her relentless anti-imperialism. She accused her most powerful fellow-compatriots of an unending atrocity in Chechnya. Against the Chechens, certainly, but also against the poor Russian soldiers, treated like “dust beneath their officers’ boots”.
There are many other treasures in this diary – about class, resistance and the failure of the pro-Western right, which she supported.
Buy it. Get it in to your library. Read her burning words: “We no longer want to be slaves, even if that is what best suits the West.”
Don’t worry that one of the two references to Litvinenko turns out to be a blank page. If it had been important, she would have written about it.
 



The recent death of Boris Yeltsin, the former president of Russia, has prompted a lot of media bullshit about how he practically single-handedly created a democratic Russia out the ruins of the Soviet Union.
But it was ordinary Russians, who resisted the authorities from the moment the Soviet Union first began to wobble.
In the spring of 1991, a miners’ strike was at the heart of an anti-Soviet mass movement. Yeltsin, shortly to be elected the first president of Russia, was widely identified with it. It was at this moment that the Russian ruling class chose him, abandoning Mikhail Gorbachev, the reforming Soviet leader, who hurriedly did a deal with Yeltsin.
The deal involved Yeltsin using his authority to end the strikes, introduce a harsh work regime and declare unauthorised action against the authorities “intolerable”.
Yeltsin went on to preside over marketisation and privatisation measures which destroyed 50 percent of the Russian economy. This took much of the steam out of the strike movement. Nevertheless, strikes and even hunger strikes for months of unpaid back wages continued.
A movement against the first Chechen war, which Yeltsin began at the end of 1994, forced him to make peace in 1996 or risk losing the forthcoming presidential election.
In 1998 a “railway war”, in which miners blocked train tracks, brought the movement of goods in Russia to a halt. An ailing Yeltsin approved panic concessions, though these were nullified by the rouble crash a few months later. He also started former spy Vladimir Putin on his road to the Kremlin.
The Russian ruling class was so frightened that it was prepared to offer the KGB a partial restoration to power for the first time in over a decade. Years later, Yeltsin himself was unable to refer to the “railway war” without a shudder.
Even under Putin, pensioners and workers in booming industries have successfully fought for their share of rising profits.
Pete Glatter, South London
 



A few years ago post Communist Russia was commonly dismissed as a basket case, argues Pete Glatter, but today fear of a resurgent Russia is driving a new agenda.
Just how democratic is post-Communist Russia? Why does Russia feel the need to dominate many of its neighbours? And how is Russia positioned in relation to the main imperialist powers? There are all questions that have a habit of recurring. The poisoning in London of the former KGB spy Alexander Litvinenko, the assassination of investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya, the threats to cut off gas supplies to Georgia and its decision to halt oil exports to Belarus – cutting off supplies to much of Europe – earlier this month, have all put the Russian questions back on the agenda.
Nevertheless, the attitude of London and Washington towards Russian president Vladimir Putin has been supportive and virtually uncritical for many years. In 1999 Putin, who had just been appointed Russian prime minister, used a foray across the border by fighters for Chechen independence and a series of extremely suspect “terrorist” attacks to relaunch a brutal war in Chechnya.
Putin’s new image as defender of the nation was one of the things which won him the presidency a few months later. He began to declare that the Russian troops in Chechnya were Europe’s first line of defence against militant Islam.
Many of the democratic rights that the Russian people had gained with the disintegration of the Soviet Union were to be sacrificed as part of a plan to renovate the rickety Russian power structure. The West, and Tony Blair in particular, supported Putin’s election campaign and discouraged questioning about what was really happening in Chechnya.
Capitalism is an immensely contradictory system. On the one hand, it depends on a high level of cooperation, even between competing firms and states. On the other, the fundamental drive to compete and dominate keeps reasserting itself. So it is that today Western leaders are nowhere near as keen on Putin as they were six years ago. They don’t mind hushing up the dirty war in Chechnya. They have had no insuperable problems about accepting huge amounts of money from Russian companies queuing up to sell their shares on the London Stock Exchange. What does concern the Western establishments is the repair job that Putin is doing on the Russian power structure, because that could make Russia a dangerous focus of competition.
This explains why the poisoning of Litvinenko was used to push a new hard line on Putin to a mass audience. The West’s list of accusations against Putin is long and growing. So far the charge sheet reads like this:
Since becoming president in 2000, Putin has re-established the primacy of the state over the private sector in business and industry, braking the power of the oligarchs who got super-rich during the 1990s thanks to the then president, Boris Yeltsin. He has centralised the state bureaucracy and placed much of the media under government control.
 
Expansionist policy
Putin’s administration has encouraged the growth of an anti-Western Russian nationalism and has begun to pursue an aggressive, expansionist policy on the international stage. Russia cutting off the natural gas supply to Ukraine is evidence of this new policy. The conclusion is that Putin has become a threat to freedom and democracy and that his leadership marks a step back towards Soviet totalitarianism.
The West’s objections to Putin sound quite reasonable until you remember that much of the charges levelled at Putin could be applied to many other Western allies around the world. But as an explanation for the direction of Russian capitalism, it is shot through with holes.
Firstly, it makes big assumptions about how successful Putin has been in his endeavours. Secondly, the suppression of the pro-Western oligarchs, who represent a minority of Russia’s capitalist class, has actually done Russian capitalism as a whole a favour by ensuring that there is something of a level playing field for the ruling class as a whole. Thirdly, the charge sheet is wrong to see a fundamental difference in making obscene amounts of money as a state capitalist rather than as a private one.
Both types of capitalists accept the rule of the free market and are in favour of the unlimited opportunities to exploit both workers and the environment. Lastly, the charge sheet is unable to provide a convincing reason for why these changes have taken place. Any serious investigation would find that the motivation has a lot to do with the West itself.
Yeltsin’s Russia, in which Putin took all but the last step towards power, was a byword for infighting among the elites in and around the ruling class. This was due primarily to the unexpected loss of the Soviet Communist Party, the hierarchy at the heart of the governmental machinery.
Putin rose to power at a time when there was a growing consensus at the top of Russian society about the need to restore a stable hierarchy. In this sense, Putin is much more of a consensus politician than is normally recognised in the West. But consensus does not automatically lead to action.
Western commentators have pointed to the rush of confidence the Russian leadership got from the soaring price of oil and other natural resource exports. But Putin had begun to centralise before the boom had really settled in. Other explanations tend to fall back on notions about “Russian political culture” or “the Soviet legacy”, especially Putin’s connections with the KGB, the old Soviet security service.
All these approaches ignore the international picture, as the crucial stimulus came not from within Russia but from outside. Since the late 1990s the West has increasingly resorted to the military option when seeking to assert its authority. First it attacked Serbia, then Afghanistan, then Iraq. Russia had economic and strategic interests in all three, and the last two are uncomfortably close to its own borders. The present targeting of Iran, just across the Caspian Sea from Russia, has highlighted a conflict of interest between it and the West.
At the time of the wars on Serbia and Afghanistan the Russian ruling class was far too weak to mount any kind of military challenge to incursions into its traditional spheres of influence. It had to try and put its own house in order before it could do that. Now Russia is attempting to claw back some of the influence it lost in what used to be the Soviet Union.
Capitalism means competition, and competition imposes a certain symmetry on those who take part in it. Increased aggression on behalf of the West must lead to increasingly aggressive responses. Putin is the mirror image of Bush, adapted to fit Russian conditions – the conditions of a much weaker imperial power.
The soaring price of oil and of other natural resource exports has brought money flooding into Russia as it once flooded out. The Russian economy has boomed since 1999. At the same time the US became hopelessly bogged down in Iraq. The Kremlin’s dream of a “multipolar world”, in which the US superpower was in no condition to deal with challenges from other quarters, seemed to be turning into reality. From the first day of 2006 the Russian leadership began to assert itself internationally in a way not seen since the disintegration of the Soviet Union 15 years earlier.
It forced former Soviet republics like Ukraine and Belarus to pay huge increases for its natural gas by cutting off or threatening to cut off supplies – using its clout to tilt the pro-Western Ukrainian government back in its favour and to force pro-Western Georgia to its knees. Further afield, Russia has warmed up its relations with China and, despite reigniting an old territorial dispute, may be moving towards a new understanding with Japan.
Back in Russia itself Gazprom, the natural gas monopoly, has gained control of the giant Sakhalin-2 liquified gas project in the Russian Far East at the expense of Shell, and BP’s position in the Anglo-Russian joint oil venture, BP-TNK, has come under threat. The year ended in a landmark deal with the US paving the way for Russia’s entry to the World Trade Organisation – but this is not a signal that the West has gone soft on Putin.
Western capitalism’s aim is not to alienate Russia but, by the judicious application of carrots and sticks, to make it a more integral, less critical member of the team. Despite the boom, its economic performance ranks no higher than that of Mexico, Romania and Jamaica. Russia remains weak and therefore susceptible. Its economic base remains largely restricted to natural resource production, and it shows little sign of the economic diversification that would mean real development.
At the same time, the case of Russia shows how much more unstable, unpredictable and crisis-prone the world has become. Bush and Blair certainly did not intend that their attack on Iraq should, via its effect on oil prices, benefit Putin and present them with yet another problem.
On the other hand, Putin could not have foreseen that the Russian oil boom would produce militant demands by Russian workers for a greater share in the proceeds of that boom. Grassroots opposition to the powers that be is one of the least-known yet most enduring features of modern Russia. But it is by far the most important, both for the Russians and for all the rest of us.
 



Contemporary Russia
Edwin Bacon with Matthew Wyman
Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, £16.99
Destination in Doubt: Russia since 1989
Stephen Lovell
Zed Books, 2006, £12.99
Murder in Samarkand: A British Ambassador’s Controversial Defiance of Tyranny in the War on Terror
Craig Murray
Mainstream, 2006, £7.99
Whether all the authors realise it or not, these books are about the extra dimension added to the global imperialist struggle by the long-term consequences of the break-up of the Soviet Union. Stephen Lovell’s contribution to the attractively titled ‘history of the present’ series starts by asking how Russia managed to survive a gruelling decade and a half of post-Communism. But he fails to come up with an answer to it for most of the book.
Part of the problem is his over-reliance on subjective evidence about attitudes. At one point he asserts that the vast majority of Russians are ‘located in the amorphous “middle” of low-paid employment’. Actually, his Russian source, based on polling results, is just as open to a class interpretation along Marxist lines. Things look up when he starts to deal with how ordinary Russians survived the disasters of the 1990s – those who did survive. I was particularly struck by the story of a group of workers at a cash-starved coffin factory who found that their salary came in the shape of a wooden box.
The best part of the book is the chapter on Russia’s war in Chechnya – the original ‘war on terror’. Whatever its faults, this chapter tells a story too often ignored in the West. But the book’s overall weakness is summed up by the its final sentence: ‘Russia may spend the next phase of its history going nowhere in particular.’ Not only lame, but way off beam, especially given the repeated actions of the Russian state against foreign interests inside and outside the country around the time this book appeared.
Bacon and Wyman have produced a basic academic handbook, a bit like a Rough Guide with the practical bits removed, packed with information, as much of it as possible presented in handy, bite-sized chunks – a cliche, I know, but one that really works here. A number of telling points emerge that are contrary to much of the accepted wisdom. One of these is about the so-called ‘oligarchs’, often presented here in the West as major victims of an anti-capitalist regime. In fact it is only those among them who become distinctly oppositional and pro-Western who ‘attract the negative attentions of the Russian state’. This point is reinforced by Forbes’ list of the world’s top 100 millionaires, in which Russia comes third with 11 to Germany’s 14 and the USA’s 38. However, such points only come to light as part of an ‘on the one hand, on the other hand’ survey of different approaches, with the more conservative ones well in the foreground.
A serious underestimation of Russian imperialism is at least implicit and, as in the case of Lovell’s book, this now looks increasingly at odds with reality. Also like Lovell, Russia’s progress from Communism is very much judged by the extent to which it has adopted Western values and ways of doing things. Overall, the ideological similarities between the two books outweigh the differences, and Bacon and Wyman’s conclusion is just as weak. To their own key question, ‘How far has Russia travelled from the Soviet Union?’ the response – that the picture is ‘mixed’ – has zero adequacy.
An increasingly important aim of Western foreign policy is to bring Russia more into line with Western thinking on issues such as Iran, energy security, etc, by the judicious application of various carrots and sticks. This leaves the media free to hype the story of the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko while burying the assassination of the journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who, in sharp contrast to Litvinenko, was a genuine and heroic opponent of Russian authoritarianism and imperialism. Politkovskaya was in a media tomb well before the Litvinenko story broke. At the same time, academics can point to the fact that the glass is still half full – that Vladimir Putin’s Russia is still a lot freer than in Soviet times.
The fact remains that tension between Russia and the West has been jacked up repeatedly over the past decade, first and foremost by the implied threats to Russia that went along with the West’s wars on Serbia, Afghanistan and Iraq. More recently Russia has made its own attempts to claw back some of the ground it lost with the break-up of its Soviet empire in 1991, and assert its domination of big foreign investors such as Shell and BP. For all its weaknesses, which the oil boom has only partially alleviated, Russia remains the second biggest nuclear power on the planet. So when the influential US Council on Foreign Relations, run jointly by prominent Republicans and Democrats, heralds a change in US policy on Russia, as it did last March, from so-called ‘partnership’ to ‘selective opposition’, the rest of us had better sit up and take notice.
This new found assertiveness is what has really disturbed the West, not the increasing authoritarianism of the Putin leadership, which is common to other states committed to one aspect or another of the ‘war on terror’. The new assertiveness is not simply a product of the Russian oil boom – which supplied a means but not a motivation – much less from some innate national propensity for aggression against non-Russians (often referred to by academics as ‘Russian political culture’ or ‘the Soviet legacy’). It is the threat from the West which has galvanised the Russian leadership following the fragmentation and infighting of the Boris Yeltsin years. The Western assault on Serbia preceded this hardening consensus among the Russian elite, which saw Putin rise to power, just as the Iraq war began long before Russia’s alarms and excursions in 2006.
If you want two crucial reasons why Putin & Co remained successful in electoral terms, one is that the US’s popularity dived to an all-time low during the invasion of Iraq, while another is that Putin’s critical attitude to the West has been consistently well received. [1] Take, for example, the clash between Putin and George Bush at a joint press conference during the G8 summit in St Petersburg in July 2006. Bush boasted of bringing ‘a free press and free religion’ to Iraq. ‘A lot of people in our country would hope that Russia would do the same thing,’ he added. Putin retorted, ‘Well, of course, we wouldn’t want the same kind of democracy as in Iraq – I’ll say that quite honestly.’ According to the Financial Times, laughter ‘drowned out the thinly smiling Mr Bush’s rejoinder: “Just wait”.’
The fact is that, since the end of the Cold War, the US has witnessed the rise of rival powers, including a reinvigorated Russia, which could potentially challenge its domination. This is leading to growing tensions and instability, which are in some ways comparable to those in the run-up to the First World War. The problem, as academics used to say about the Soviet Union, is systemic – and so is the ultimate answer.
Craig Murray has produced an extraordinary personal memoir of his time as British ambassador in Uzbekistan, one of the Soviet republics which, as he so rightly says, ‘left the USSR in order to keep the Soviet system, not to destroy it’. Murder in Samarkand powers its purposeful way through an Uzbek landscape of horrific torture, suffering and devastating poverty on one side, power, luxury and ruthless arrogance on the other. The Uzbek elite are backed up by sinister Foreign Office mandarins ready to toe the ‘war on terror’ line at any cost, certainly at the cost of increasingly acrimonious confrontations with their man in Tashkent.
Murray does not forget to mention a selection of genuine heroes, Uzbek and otherwise, most of who will probably never be recorded anywhere else. He supplies masses of inside information about everything from the sources of the ruling elite’s wealth to the process by which unreliable intelligence came to be used as evidence for the allegations that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction.
Murray also has the guts not to defend his personal behaviour. ‘Women, attraction to’ may get no less than 15 entries under his name in the index. But the longest of these also deals with the damage suffered by women who sell sex, institutionalised rape and female genital mutilation, ending with an impressive change of heart on his part. By contrast, all the revolting practices which flourished under the Uzbek regime were effectively aided and abetted by Western diplomats who accepted President Islam Karimov, the Papa Doc Duvalier of Uzbekistan, as a valuable Muslim ally in the ‘war on terror’. The Foreign Office may yet come to rue the day it decided to railroad him out of a job. One can but hope.
Murray also voices a number of illusions, especially about privatisation, and this can make him sound like the authors of the academic texts considered above. But there is an important difference. Illusions in aspects of the system are shared by millions of those who oppose the war in Iraq and whose opposition is shaking the powers that be in Washington and London. They are the illusions of people whose understanding of the world is changing and who are prepared, like Craig Murray, to do something about it.

Notes
1. Iurii Levada, Uroki “atipichnoi” situatsii: popytka sotsiologicheskogo analiza, Monitoring obshchestvennogo mneniia, number 3 (65), May-June 2003, pp10, 13, 17. Accessed 1 February 2007 via www.ecsoman.ru.
 



Introduction
The decade which followed the revolutions of 1917 witnessed the first serious attempt to decentralise power in Russian history. Stalinism scotched this initiative, both in terms of economic regionalisation and in terms of korenizatsiya (“indigenisation”). In their place, giant economic and security ministries sprang up and bestrode the land, forcing through industrialisation and the “collectivisation” of the peasantry. Regions were increased in number and reduced in size to facilitate control by the Moscow leadership which boosted what we would now call institutional racism to the point of apartheid. This paper is based on research which focused on western Siberia, hence the tendency in what follows to refer to the Russia, rather than to the Soviet Union as a whole, and to the Northern Minorities rather than to other non-Russian nationalities.
 
De-regionalisation
As a member of the government of the Soviet Republic, I could not but become convinced, day by day, week by week, month by month, that to govern a country with over 130 million inhabitants, to govern a country which encompasses one-sixth of all dry land, to govern it from Moscow on the basis of bureaucratic centralism is impossible.
– A.I. Rykov, from a speech at the 12th congress of the VKP(b) [1]
This quotation appeared at the head of an article defending decentralisation in an official Soviet journal in April 1927. A note from the editors warned readers: “In including comrade Murugov’s article, we emphasise its character as a discussion item”. Eight months later, the 15th congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) marked the definitive defeat of the United Opposition by the Stalin-Bukharin alliance. Clearly, this was a time in which openly advocating established state policy was not a straightforward matter.
Regionalisation or rayonirovaniye was an attempt to provide the new state with a rationally and systemically decentralised structure. GOELRO, the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia, was a crucial pacemaker. The GOELRO plan for the electrification of Russia, which was adopted by the Communist Party at its 9th Congress in 1920, saw the provision of energy as being bound up with economic development on a decentralised, regional basis. It involved the organisation of a small number of large economic regions, each of which would have centrally-situated sources of electric power. This idea was taken up, criticised, elaborated and modified by various interested parties, including the non-Russian republics and a number of commissariats and state committees, one of them being Gosplan (the State Planning Committee). [2]
The upshot was fourfold. Firstly, the new regions were to be both economic and administrative. This meant that they had to be based on political and cultural indicators not just on economic and administrative considerations. [3] They had to allow, among other things, for the rights and interests of non-Russian peoples. Secondly, the rayonirovaniye scheme emphasised regional specialisation in the broad sense, classifying regions as industrial (actually or potentially), agricultural, mixed or concerned mainly with forestry. Thirdly, Lenin in particular saw regionalisation as an opportunity to counteract the bureaucratisation of the state from below. [4] Fourthly, the shattered state of the country, resistance by regional leaders especially in Siberia [5], the intensifying struggle for power inside the CPSU and the crippling shortage of resources meant that progress was slow. When the old Bolshevik engineer Krzhizhanovsky first showed off the GOELRO plan in 1920 on a vast map of Russia with electric light bulbs, almost the whole of Moscow had to be cut off in order to avoid overstrain at the power station. [6] By 1927, only five new regions were up off the drawing board. Nevertheless, this was a considerable achievement in the circumstances, and the new regions incorporated vast territories – the Urals (including part of western Siberia), the north Caucasus, Siberia proper, the Far East and a new Leningrad region which stretched as far north as Murmansk. [7]
Paradoxically, the same 1927 congress which marked the triumph of Stalin and Bukharin resolved to speed up the pace of regional change. Over the following two years, another eight economic-administrative regions were formed, making the process of rayonirovaniye officially complete. [8] The key to this puzzle may lie in the purge of the Opposition which followed the congress. In Siberia, for example, “The scale of the purge carried out in Irkutsk suggests that support for the Opposition in this area was considerable: 79 party officials were sacked, 50 of them were expelled from the party (13 were subsequently reinstated after suitably renouncing their former opinions).” There were similar purges in Omsk, Novosibirsk, Tomsk and other areas. This was some kind of testimony to the strength of the Opposition. But it also “testified to the complete domination of local party organisations by the Kraikom [the Siberian regional party committee – PG] and, above it, by the Central Committee in Moscow”. Given that “the social composition of the membership of the Siberian party organisation made it generally unreceptive to the policies of the Left Opposition” [9], being composed primarily of peasants and white-collar employees, this suggests that, in other parts of the Soviet Union, more radical purges were necessary in order to secure the position of the dominant factions. Given also that Stalin, as the leader of one of those factions, lost no time in intriguing against the leaders of the other faction, and that, by late 1929, he had gained their removal from most of their official positions, then the acceleration of rayonirovaniye over the same period looks practically identical with the consolidation of his own regional hierarchy.
However, neither Stalin’s turn against Bukharin at the centre nor the launch of collectivisation presaged an impending break with the Bukharinite-inclined Siberian Kraikom and its leader Syrtsov. On the contrary, Stalin defended the Kraikom against criticism from the left and promoted Syrtsov to a high position in Moscow. Perhaps the most important for this is that Stalin was at this stage more concerned with the cohesion of his patronage network than he was with the policy orientation, inconvenient though it might be, of his major client in the affair. This throws doubt on the argument that Stalin had to concentrate as much on building a political consensus as on developing his control of the apparat. It took some time before Stalin was in a strong enough position to dispense with his protegé. Only when the officer corps, as it were, could be relied upon to run the ship according to the dictates of the captain, could Syrtsov be safely tossed overboard. The importance to Stalin of even an embryonic chain of command which reached down into crucial regions like Siberia overrode all other considerations. [10]
Although the Stalinist regime went on using the rhetoric of decentralisation, its practice went in exactly the opposite direction. In 1930, the okrug, the first sub-regional division, was abolished in order to provide a more direct link during collectivisation between the central authorities as represented by the regional leaderships and the rayon, the basic area unit in rural areas. The rayon was then subdivided. This, in turn, meant that each region had too many rayons, so the regions were increased in number and reduced in size. [11] The process of fragmentation went on throughout the 1930s and 1940s. In 1930, the Siberian region was divided into two. [12] Siberia was eventually dismembered into more than twenty territorial units. [13] In 1934, 13 new regions were created, among them the new Omsk oblast. In 1937, that figure more than doubled. Between 1941, when the Soviet Union entered the war, and 1945,12 new regions were formed, only four of them on the heels of the retreating Axis forces. [14] They included Tyumen, the largest region in the country, which was created from the northern part of Omsk. [15] This completed a 10-year process in which the Urals region, once a political and economic centre rivalling Moscow itself, a thing not to be tolerated under the Stalin regime, was replaced by 6 new regions [16] (I have refrained from giving overall figures here as they are extremely complicated and detailed due to the changes of external borders as well as of regional and local units; however, my research indicates that as far as this process of regional fragmentation is concerned the case of Siberia and the Urals is typical [17]).
The new, reduced regions were too small for planning purposes during industrialisation and collectivisation, let alone later on. Attempts to incorporate them into larger planning regions were unsatisfactory: the weakness of horizontal, regional planning and the dominance of vertical ministries for the various branches of the economy became a permanent feature of Soviet economic life – and a constant reminder of the over-centralisation of the Stalinist period. Nevertheless, this basic regional structure persisted to the end of the Soviet Union and survives in Russia to this day. [18]
 
Russianalisation
The Soviet regime made it clear to the Northern Minorities at an early stage how different it was to the old tsarist order by abolishing police supervision of native communities and the traditional yasak (the regular fur tribute). Although furs were now a major Soviet export, no attempt was made to extort them from nomadic communities or to force the pace of change. Instead, the government raised the price of furs, lowered prices of state-imported goods and released the Northern Minorities from all taxation. This approach went even further with the setting up of the Committee for Assistance to the Peoples of the Far North (usually known as the Committee of the North) in 1924. The committee set up “cultural bases”, which provided medical and veterinary facilities, shops and schools. School timetables were adapted to the minorities’ traditional way of life. It trained teachers for – and then from – the indigenous peoples. It developed a standard alphabet, based on Latin rather than Cyrillic, and published school books and newspapers in at least seven minority languages. In 1929, the central authorities even released the Northern Minorities from compulsory military service. [19]
The Committee of the North is sometimes treated as if it was some kind of kindly alien visitation which happened to be tolerated by the Soviet regime for a few years almost by accident. It is certainly true that leading members of the committee were not communists, but this was normal practice at the time. The real point is that the Committee of the North was created by and subordinate to the Central Executive Committee, the supreme governmental authority in the USSR. The Committee of the North and the policies it initiated had their vices and virtues, and they numbered among the vices and virtues of the regime of which they formed a part. Despite all the internal and external difficulties with which the Committee had to contend, its achievements were considerable, especially when compared with what came before and after. These achievements must also be credited to the Soviet regime of the time. A whole number of specialists who are entirely out of sympathy with revolutionary socialist ideas in general have paid tribute to these achievements. According to such accounts, life for most of the indigenous people of Siberia improved during the 1920s, and many of them in the early 1990s still saw this period as one of the greatest in their history, achieved in large part due to official Soviet support. [20]
For these small ethnic groups, often nomadic reindeer herders, hunters and trappers with mystic beliefs in shamanism, Stalinist transformation was rapid and horrific:
As small societies living in a fragile environment, they had evolved a lifestyle in keeping with their hostile surroundings. Yet, in only ten years, the way of life and balanced economy which they had developed over centuries was largely destroyed. [21]
The first wave of collectivisation, which went hand-in-hand with the return of Russifying measures, met with widespread armed resistance amounting to a rash of small civil wars all over the Siberian north-west. By 1931, only 12 per cent of natives had been inducted into collective farms and at the beginning of 1934 the proportion of deer herds were in collective ownership was no higher. However, the risings were crushed and large numbers of adult male Khants and Mansis were killed. The Khants were involved in a major revolt at Kazymskaya in 1933-1934, in which the air force bombed outlying villages. One of the causes of this revolt was the forcible removal of young children to Russifying boarding schools (internaty), where a number of them caught typhus. Shamans and “more prosperous” natives, who personified the traditional way of life, were particular targets and were accused of being kulaks, i.e., rich peasants (there is evidence that shamans were often among the poorest in the community but tended to cement opposition to collectivisation). Ironically, the primitive communist traditions of the hunting peoples (especially nimat, the equal sharing of the spoils of the hunt) and the communal ownership arrangements among deer-herding families became particular targets of the ’collectivisers’. Collectivisation was also synonymous with an attack on nomadism, which was widespread until the mid-1930s. By 1936, 50 per cent of deer herds were under collective ownership, and by 1943, the figure had risen to 89.2 per cent, though the herds were depleted as a result. [22]
Industrialisation, like collectivisation, persecuted and oppressed the indigenous minorities; unlike collectivisation, it also marginalised them. Giant state ministries, enterprises and agencies like Glavsevmorput (Central Agency for the Northern Passage) and Dal ’stray (Chief Administration for the Development of the Far North), which had whole Gulag systems under their jurisdiction, often behaved “like a victorious army in an occupied town”. They appropriated native land in defiance of the law. They exploited local sources of food with their own labour, cutting off supplies to the indigenous peoples and reducing their opportunities of alternative employment. An imported workforce settled native land, and there was no redress as the native courts had no jurisdiction over outsiders. The pressure of the in-migration associated with collectivisation and industrialisation increased this marginalisation. The growth of the immigrant population soared from 5-8 per cent a year between 1917 and 1926 to 15-20 per cent a year between 1926 and 1935. The indigenous proportion of the populations in the indigenous territories of western Siberia fell from 56 per cent in 1926 to 35 per cent in 1935. One of the results was a law of 1932 which created – or sanctioned – a virtual apartheid regime. Only migrants from elsewhere were allowed to join a privileged upper layer, which received automatic salary increases, a 50 per cent tax reduction and preferential treatment in housing, education, etc. There were two rates of pay for the same work, settlers being able to earn over three times more than indigenous workers, a situation which persisted after the fall of the Soviet Union. [23]
Government funds for the Northern Minorities dried up. So did the supplies for which the hunters had become accustomed to exchange their furs. This resulted in a fall in the fur collection, prompting the Ministry for Foreign Trade to return to the outlawed practice of offering alcohol for sale in the indigenous areas. Another widespread illegal practice among local administrations was the taxing of natives in the same way as the rest of the population, although this had been officially abolished. The Committee of the North, which opposed collectivisation, was first restricted and then abolished in 1935. In 1937, Cyrillic replaced Latin for the written languages of the north. The Russian language was given pride of place in all non-Russian schools. In the Second World War, the Northern Minorities were once more made subject to compulsory military service. They were further inundated by the evacuation of industry and workforces eastward across the Urals, and the official propagation of Russian nationalism as part of the war effort brought renewed discrimination and persecution. [24]
 
Conclusion
Darth Vader: ‘The imperial senate will no longer be of any concern to us. I have just received word that the Emperor has dissolved the council permanently ...’
General: ‘Impossible! How will the Emperor maintain control without the bureaucracy?’
Darth Vader: ‘The regional governors now have direct control over their territories. Fear will keep the local systems in line.’ [25]
The first and most obvious conclusion is that here is another nail in the coffin of the argument that “Lenin led to Stalin”. Regionalisation and korenizatsiya were related policies which embraced the entire Soviet Union in all its huge economic, cultural, social and ethnic variety. They stood and fell together – stood with “Lenin”, fell under the blows of Stalin.
One of the interesting things about this opposition is that it is not about idealism versus efficiency. Stalinism in these as in so many other fields was extremely inefficient. Smaller regions made central (“vertical”) planning more difficult. Combined with the branch economic ministries, such regions made horizontal, regional coordination practically impossible on any significant scale. [26] It is well known that collectivisation, far from introducing greater efficiency, dealt agriculture a blow from which it may never have recovered. [27] Even if this were not the case in general, there was certainly no real economic argument for imposing collectivisation on non-Russian peoples like the Northern Minorities. Indeed, as James Hughes puts it, the fact that not only peasants but “reindeer-herders and hunters were also subjected to this radical social engineering shows how little collectivisation had to do with agriculture as an economic activity.” [28] It had much more to with control, with “capturing” the peasantry and the countryside for the state, as Hughes goes on to argue in a later work. [29]
The same drive for central control rather than for efficiency or even consensus is evident in the division and re-division of regions and in the patron-client relationships which Stalin considered so important. However, this is not just a question of patronage. What Stalin built was a centralised chain of command in which patronage was only one element. The collapse of the Soviet Union was synonymous with the fragmentation of this chain of command. Yet the best part of a decade later, the governor of the west Siberian region of Khanty-Mansi, who had significantly contributed to that fragmentation, was arguing for a modified form of just such a chain of command (“a vertical of power”), the essence of which was that the exact place each person occupied in the hierarchy would be absolutely clear. [30] It is in these terms, I believe, that we should understand President Vladimir Putin’s declared aim of re-creating a “strongly centralised state power” in the tradition of Peter the Great and Stalin. [31] Despite a degree of media hype, it is unwise to assume that the success of the established power in such a venture is a foregone conclusion, as Darth Vader found to his cost. But the venture itself suggests that Putin not only shares certain aspirations with his notorious predecessors but may be subject to some of the same pressures as well.
For the London Socialist Historians Group seminar on Stalin, 6 December 2003.
 



The New Great Game
Lutz Kleveman
Atlantic £16.99
Lutz Kleveman’s book takes us on an epic journey through the latest imperial playground, the oil-rich Caspian Sea and its vast hinterland, which stretches westward across the Caucasus into Europe, south to the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent, and east through Central Asia to China. A journalist, Kleveman writes with enough passion and simplicity to shed light on his complicated subject and from enough personal experience to bring it vividly to life. Here you will find the power plays between the US, Russia and China, the arrogance and racism of imperial peoples, whether Americans in Central Asia or Chinese in Xinjiang (East Turkmenistan), the cruelty, greed and megalomania of pro-US dictatorships and warlords, the sacrifice of all loyalties and principles to national and sectional interests, the disappointed expectations of poor populations to whom oil brings pollution and conflict instead of prosperity and peace, and much more.
The close relationship between bombing and big business goes back long before the presidency of George W Bush. Here’s President Eisenhower in 1953, laying out part of the ground for subsidising the French in Indo-China and for the US’s war in Vietnam which was to follow:
‘Let us assume we lose Indo-China ... The tin and tungsten we so greatly value from that area would cease coming ... So when the United States votes $400 million to help that war, we are not voting a give-away programme.’
No sirree! But the stakes of the new great game are much higher, the lands and peoples involved much bigger and more numerous, the risks to the entire planet far greater.
As the world’s only superpower, the US has a strong motivation to control the price of the oil it increasingly has to import, hence also those who produce and export it. And those who transport it to the nearest deep-water port – a crucial question when it comes to Caspian oil. The US also wants unrestricted access to as many different sources of oil as possible. The more the oil-exporting countries compete among themselves, the less they are likely to unite against the US and the lower the price it will have to pay. Divide and rule – economically, politically, militarily – on a world scale.
The ‘war against terrorism’ could not have been more favourable to US oil interests. In postwar Afghanistan, for example, the lack of aid other than for military purposes was crucial in bringing about a deal between that country and the dictatorships of Turkmenistan and Pakistan, authorising a $3.2 billion pipeline from the Caspian to the Arabian Sea. However, the US drive to sideline Russia and surround China with bases is also bringing international tension to crisis point. No sooner had the US got a military base in Kyrgyzstan than the Russians had to have one too and the Chinese had to get an option on one. Even dictators who had effortlessly switched from being pro-Moscow Communists to US stooges tasted the fear which swept through Central Asia.
When the USSR collapsed, the US understandably had a lot of credibility in this part of the world. Little more than ten years later, Kleveman describes the change like this:
‘The region’s impoverished populaces, disgusted with the United States’ alliances with their corrupt and despotic rulers, increasingly embrace militant Islam and virulent anti-Americanism.’
Four brief criticisms. First, Britain, which is doing pretty well out of all this in the shape of BP, for example, gets off rather lightly. Second, by concentrating so much on oil, Kleveman tends to give the impression that the name of the game is greed rather than imperialism. Third, there’s hardly anything about resistance from below. And fourth, there are a few too many little inaccuracies of fact and of translation from the original German. These are minor criticisms which shouldn’t put anyone off buying this book.
 



On 25 October, Russian state security agents stormed a private plane and arrested at gunpoint the dapper 40 year old Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Russia’s richest man, worth £4.7 billion.


 



Mikhail Khodorovsky is used to more up-market bars



Khodorkovsky headed the recently merged Yukos-Sibneft, Russia’s biggest private company and the world’s fourth-largest oil producer with half-year profits in 2003 of £1.3 billion. His arrest marked the climax of a four-month, high-profile investigation. Three of his associates were already facing charges, one with ordering a murder, and a fourth had gone into exile.
The charges against Khodorkovsky include fraud and tax evasion totalling £600 million and carry a possible ten-year prison sentence. Since his arrest, prosecutors have frozen 40 percent of Yukos shares, and the business-friendly head of Putin’s presidential administration suddenly resigned. Khodorkovsky stepped down as chief executive but was refused bail. His estimated 22 percent share had been taken over by prior arrangement by a mystery man, possibly through the key Menatep holding company based in Gibraltar.
Khodorkovsky is one of the robber barons who have given big business in Russia a very bad name. He and his fellow ‘oligarchs’, as they are known, became notorious in the scandalous ‘loans for shares’ deal of the mid-1990s. In return for bailing out Yeltsin, they were allowed to pick up huge natural resource companies at rock-bottom prices in a series of rigged privatisation auctions. In 1995 Khodorkovsky paid $159 million for a controlling share in Yukos which was really worth $353 million at the time and $5,689 million less than two years later. These changes were accompanied by a wave of intimidation and murder. A Siberian mayor who opposed Khodorkovsky’s expansion plans in the area where 60 percent of Yukos’s oil is extracted was shot dead on the oligarch’s birthday in 1998.
Yet liberals east and west have seen Khodorkovsky’s arrest as an attack on democracy. The nub of their argument is that it marks a crucial step in a ‘creeping bureaucratic coup’.
Since becoming president in 2000, it is said, Putin has tamed the rebellious parliament, got the troublesome regional governors under control, centralised the legal system, clamped down on the independent media and practically renationalised Gazprom, the giant natural gas monopoly whose tentacles spread right across Europe. He has also seen off two of the seven oligarchs, three counting Khodorkovsky, while a fourth, Roman Abramovich of Chelsea fame, has been selling off his Russian assets. Recent research also indicates that the security apparatus, a major loser in the collapse of the Soviet Union, has staged a striking comeback under Putin, himself an unrepentant former secret policeman. Personnel from the security services accounted for nearly 60 percent of the top Russian leadership last year.
Like it or not, the liberals conclude, Khodorkovsky represented the last political force truly independent of the Kremlin.
He had been promoting liberal parties, had extended his political influence as far as the Communist Party (which joined in protests against his arrest) and made no secret of having personal political ambitions. By doing so, Khodorkovsky had broken the deal Putin had made with him and four of the other oligarchs after becoming president: they would keep out of politics and he would leave their privatised assets alone. That was why Putin had struck now – barely a month before parliamentary elections and only four months before the next presidential elections. The photograph of a glum-looking oligarch with a shaven head in a prison cell was not likely to do Putin’s popularity ratings any harm at all. But the danger was that Russia was likely to end up as a kind of neo-Communist state, rather like China only with a much less dynamic economy and a lot less foreign investment.
There are a number of problems with this argument. One of them is that the same liberals who are now throwing their hands up in horror at the arrest of one man previously supported practically every major attempt to concentrate power at the top. They backed Boris Yeltsin when he suppressed the old Russian parliament by armed force back in 1993. And Tony Blair made a special point of going to Russia to give the secret police candidate his public blessing a few days before the 2000 presidential election. ‘The Russia of Vladimir Putin’, he declared, was ‘a liberal democracy’ and ‘a strong power where law and order rule’. Blair made it clear that he was not going to allow good relations between the two countries to be spoiled by the fact that Putin had recently launched a second Chechen war. Putin’s subsequent state visit to Britain was described in the Russian business magazine Ekspert as ‘a miracle for his reputation’, because ‘it is in theory irregular for the queen to drink tea with murderers who appear before her with bloodstained hands’.
But much more important is what the argument leaves out. Since Putin became prime minister in 1999, the west has been on an imperial offensive: attacks on the former Yugoslavia, Afghanistan and Iraq have followed in quick succession. US troops are dotted all round Russia’s borders and the White House is doing its best to ensure that the wealth of the Caspian Sea does not flow through Russian pipelines. Previously, the bosses of the former Soviet superpower had been weak and divided. But it would hardly be surprising if a significant proportion of the elites had now decided that the time had come to pull together. That proportion does not necessarily include all the oligarchs, who may in any case not be as important as the corporate bureaucracies they bestride. How successful the attempt to beef up the Russian state is likely to be is another matter. The point remains that the origin of any threat to Russian democracy lies not in Moscow but in Washington and London.
 



Élites after State Socialism: Theories and AnalysisEdited
by John Higley and György LengyelLanham: Rowman &
Littlefield, 2000
There is an extraordinary contrast between the confident,
optimistic tone at the beginning of this book and the confusion and
uncertainty at the end. The editors’ introduction presents a
comprehensive pattern of élites and regimes and sums up the entire
political development of Eastern Europe and Russia from the late
1980s to the late-1990s. A large part of the conclusion, it is true,
follows this up by arguing that élite theory has eclipsed Marxism as
a credible explanation of political change (p. 238). Actually, this
boils down to little more than saying that the term ‘élite’
has become fashionable for the second time in a century, but the
voluntary confessions which the authors themselves then make are much
more damaging to their cause. The widespread use of the word ‘élite’,
they admit, has not been the result of any revival or development of
ideas about élites. On the contrary, there is ‘something
like a theory void’. In other words, this is a theory which
lacks any widely-accepted system of basic terms and concepts even
among its own adherents. It is therefore extremely difficult to test
and not much use as a criteria by which to select data.
The essays in this anthology do, however, share certain basic
attitudes: élitism, for example. On the very first page, the editors
put forward as the premise of the entire volume the view that the
prospects for stability and democracy are crucially dependent on the
‘extent to which élites trust and cooperate with one another’
(p.1). This is echoed in the chapter on Slovakia, while the chapter
on Poland declares: ‘After state socialism in East Central
Europe, politics have become what the majority of politicians, or at
least the dominant politicians, do’ (p.87). The contributors do
not develop thought-out arguments to substantiate such points or
support them with evidence, they are simply asserted. Another common
attitude favours description rather than analysis. For instance, in
the Introduction, the editors mention that in their model,
reproduction (the occupation of élite positions in the new regime by
the same type of people as in the old) ‘is associated with
fragmented élites’ (p.11). However, they do not attempt an
explanation as to why this should be so. In his essay on Serbia,
which, while muddled, is a degree more thoughtful than the others,
Mladen Lazić characterises élite theory as ‘trivial,
descriptive, and non-analytical at the abstract level, though it has
often spawned compelling empirical research’ (p.126). I thought
this really hit the nail on the head when I first read it; however,
upon further consideration, I found it over-generous. In my
experience of the literature on Russia, it is more often the case
that interesting research on élites dabs itself here and there with a
touch of something fashionable from the world of ideas: it might be a
touch of élite theory, or a hint of democratisation theory, or a
soupçon of globalisation theory; it might not have much
to do with the rest of the outfit. [1]
Then there is the light-minded attitude to issues of evidence and
data. The essay on the Czech Republic claims that ‘an almost
complete circulation of the political élite’ has taken place.
However, the reader is referred to other publications for details of
the research on which this claim is based. The authors of the essay
confess in an aside that ‘methodological problems of sample
selection and representativeness were substantial’. But there
is no hint here of what these problems were. The last research
exercise cited in the chapter appears to have been conducted in 1994,
six years before this anthology was published (pp.28-9, 36). The
chapter on Poland is rather more forthcoming, so we know that it is
based on interviews in 1996 with 215 parliamentary deputies and with
61 runners-up. As the authors make clear, their research was about
‘political élite perceptions of how politics were being played
and what the élite’s own roles were in Poland during the
mid-1990s’: just the stated perceptions of politicians, nothing
else. This is not uninteresting, but is clearly of limited
significance and not a very firm basis for a confident prediction
that there is little danger of ‘explosive political conflict
... because conflicting élite perceptions ... are substantially
undercut by the common conviction ... about the overriding importance
of continuing market reform and keeping democracy stable’
(pp.88-9, 101). The essay on East Germany, which argues that there
has been an extensive circulation of the political élite, is based on
a 1995 survey – again published elsewhere (pp.13-15,120, fn.
12). The nature of the élite samples in the essay on Serbia is not
made clear. Nevertheless, they are interpreted to support the
argument that the country has an entirely new class structure
(pp.130, 133-5). The essay on business élites in four East European
countries in 1993, seven years before this anthology was published,
is very sketchy about methods, samples and some of its results
(pp.220, 222).
It is important to understand that such attitudes are not confined
to this particular work. They are integral to élite theory and go
right back to the founding fathers. The terms ‘élite theory’
and ‘élitist theory’ have been used interchangeably, and
no wonder: [2] élitism sought to justify a prejudice as an idea and
was fundamental to the intellectual reaction against Marxism. The
originators of élite theory were predisposed to overestimate the
innate abilities of élites who succeeded in remaining – or who
came out – on top. Élites appeared in the work of Robert
Michels, for example, ‘as the infallible architects and supreme
beneficiaries of their own victories’. [3]
In the particular case of Eastern Europe, élite analyses, as
Michael Burawoy has pointed out, ‘exclude subordinate classes
which in effect become the bewildered -silent and silenced –
spectators of transformations that engulf them’. [4] These are
not real subordinate classes, of course. Burawoy is just describing
the way the lower orders appear to the élite mind. The role of the
masses and their relations with their masters and mistresses is a
central issue to which we will return. For the moment, two aspects of
it as regards élite theory are worth mentioning. One is the part mass
action played in bringing about the collapse of Communism in Eastern
Europe. Uprisings and workers’ movements were, for forty years,
the main and most successful forms of opposition to local élites and
their Soviet backers. Burawoy argues that their significance was not
confined to the Soviet period. As it came to an end, ‘the
compromises struck between dominant and subordinate classes set the
prior conditions for alliances among the dominant classes’. In
other words, the class struggle in Eastern Europe had a lot to do
with the terms on which the transition from Communist rule took place
and on the nature and extent of pacts among the élites. Since then,
class divisions have deepened and the struggles they engender have
continued into the new age. Indeed, in large parts of the former
Soviet Union, the passing of the old order marked the beginning of
open class struggle for the first time in over sixty years. [5] The
second point is that élite theory frees its adherents from having to
pay any attention to the actions of the vast bulk of the population.
This certainly makes the job of the researcher a lot simpler. My own
experience of élite research suggests that it is also very convenient
for the élites themselves: the last thing any important Russians I
spoke to wanted to admit was that anything any ordinary people did
had influenced them in any way whatsoever. The omnipotence of the
powerful and the impotence of the powerless are not tools of
analysis: they are complementary aspects of élitist fantasy.
Similar points can be made about the weakness of classical élite
theory in terms of analysis and evidence. Vilfredo Pareto, for
example, was not much concerned with the factual basis of his ideas
about élite circulation. His interpretation of history - harsh,
vigorous élites alternating with mild, degenerating élites –
derived from racist theory, and he limited his serious research to
only one actual case: ancient Rome. [6]
But it is not just a question of the theoretical leftovers from
some reactionary intellectuals of a bygone age. The contemporary
study of post-Communist élites is heavily influenced by US literature
of the 1980s about political evolution away from authoritarian
political regimes in South America and southern Europe. This
literature of ‘transition’, or ‘transitology’,
depicts various scenarios in which arrangements for change or
‘pacting’ between élites (and counter-élites) take pride
of place. Once such arrangements have been made, a liberalising
regime can, if it keeps a cool head and a firm grip, expect an
enthusiastic boost from certain social groups as they feel the chains
of authoritarianism slacken. Transitions from Authoritarian Rule,
one of the basic texts of transition theory, looks with particular
favour on the role of artists and intellectuals, ‘privileged
sectors’, and ‘middle sectors’. You may like to
know, by the way, that it describes the accumulated anger of the
working class and its capacity for independent action as being likely
to make it ‘the greatest challenge to the transitional regime’.
[7]
Although regime change is its central issue, this key text has
great difficulty in defining what a regime actually is. [8]
Everything tends to be seen in terms of relationships between élites,
rather than in terms of structures of power, whether these are formal
or informal, or in terms of relationships between those who have
power and those who do not. What might define such relationships is
completely out of the picture. Instead, the authors make a virtue of
necessity by touting the notion of the uncertainty of transitional
outcomes. Looking at this idea in terms of workers’ experience
of rationalisation and redundancy in Eastern Europe, Burawoy
remarked: ‘Neoclassical sociologists may celebrate
indeterminacy and uncertain futures, but for most this simply means
insecurity’. In this conception, even the élites are agents of
obscure origin in an uncertain universe: the political structures and
socio-economic relationships through which they operate shift hazily
in and out of focus in a thoroughly postmodern manner. The notion of
uncertainty seems to apply most aptly to the theory itself, as a
mid-1990s debate in a major US journal illustrates. [9]
What, for example, is the ‘certain democracy’ these
writers are implicitly contrasting transitional regimes with? Given
their élitist predilections, it is likely to be some variety of the
‘democratic élitism’ so favoured by New Labour, in which
so-called democracy ‘is more important as a method of
generating effective and responsible government than as a means of
providing significant power for the majority’. [10] The fiasco
of the last US presidential election springs immediately to mind. A
Russian joke of the time showed the narrowness of the East-West
divide: ‘we know the result of our elections before the ballot
starts – you don’t know it even after the votes are
counted’. There is a connection here between Western élitism
and the westernism of East European intellectuals like Lazić
which comes out in odd remarks like this:
to anyone who has lived in a socialist country, the need
for expertise in a political élite is self-evident; the individuals
who successively ran state agencies in the fields of culture,
manufacturing, defence, and elsewhere, obviously and woefully lacked
the necessary expertise. (p.135)
Nothing like Railtrack, then, or Enron’s superb efficiency
in disrupting the electricity supply to large parts of California.
And, remember, these are among the highest levels of expertise (and
democracy) the West has to offer.
The élitism of élite theory, its neglect of relations between the
powerful and the powerless, the strength of its prejudices, the depth
of its commitment to the status quo, its failure to develop
explanations, and its weakness with empirical verification deeply
mark this anthology. One result is confusion in the ranks; as this
anthology’s conclusion could hardly avoid acknowledging. Not,
at any rate, when the essay on the Czech Republic, the very first
case study in the book, opens with a series of highly sceptical
pronouncements about the idea that élites have played a central let
alone exclusive role in regime change (p.26). Confusion and
scepticism are symptomatic of the inadequacy of the élite school of
thought. Most of the book subscribes unreservedly to what Colin
Sparks and Anna Reading describe in their shrewdly acute survey of
theories of change in Eastern Europe as the ‘total
transformation’ thesis: ‘The dominant view in the West is
that the revolutions involved profound changes at all levels of
society from the spiritual to the economic’. [11] Some of the
essays do contain elements of an alternative, but these are not
developed. Yet these dissenting voices are worth listening to. The
authors of the four-nation business élite study put their emphasis on
continuity – not just with the Communist period but even with
the one preceding it (pp.221-3).
A related pattern comes to light in a number of the other essays.
The pattern is one in which there is a generally more significant
degree of continuity in economic élites than in political élites. The
claimed ‘almost complete circulation of the political élite’
in the Czech Republic is balanced by a much more sober assessment on
the economic side:
It is obvious, in other words, that economic élite
circulation has not been as comprehensive as political élite
circulation. The economic élite’s composition has changed more
slowly and has resulted partly from the normal life cycle
(accelerated somewhat by political considerations), partly from
ongoing structural change (mainly the increased size of the tertiary
sector), and partly from changes in the occupational order itself
(for example, the relative and absolute increases in the number of
people working in information services with business, as opposed to
technical training) (p.33).
Despite claiming that Serbia acquired a ‘new class
structure’ during the 1990s (well before the overthrow of
Milosevic), the data Lazić
presents on Serbia suggests, according to his own evaluation, that
about 60 per cent of the new entrepreneurial class of 1993 ‘gained
their positions directly or indirectly through paternal or spousal
linkages from the old ruling class’ (p.133).
This pattern of differential continuity is not accounted for by
schemes of change in which élites inevitably play the crucial role.
There is a general assumption in élite theory that power is primarily
about political position. It is implied that if old élites want to
hang on to power then political office will be the primary focus of
their resistance to change. At the same time, there is plenty of
evidence that Communist-era élites were far more interested in
grabbing assets and property than they were in maintaining the old
political status quo. [12] Such issues go to the heart of the nature
of change in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union (FSU). For,
as Sparks and Reading point out, ‘total transformation’
necessarily implies ‘radical discontinuities of structures and
personnel in all aspects of life, particularly in the most important
economic, social and political organisations’. What Sparks and
Reading found in the media in Eastern Europe was that the old
institutional structures and personnel remained largely intact,
despite the introduction of a market-oriented system comparable to
that in the West. ‘The bulk of the senior staff remained
comfortably in post’ and ‘retained control of the
institutions’. They concluded that change was limited to
political life in the narrow sense and that the social structure
displayed a marked continuity: ‘Those views that stress
discontinuity, and in particular the official Western version as
promulgated by Fukuyama and others writers, bear no relationship
whatsoever to what actually occurred’. The only exceptions were
East Germany and, to a lesser extent, Czechoslovakia, where popular
mobilisations broke through top-down control over transition and
drove the Communists from power. [13]
The argument that political change in Eastern Europe and the FSU,
important though it was, did not affect basic socio-economic power
relations originated in the early 1990s, notably with Alex
Callinicos. Marxists like Callinicos are often accused of being too
rigid in their ideas – ironically, in this case, as one of the
key features of his conception is its flexibility. A ‘substantial
continuity in the core apparatuses of state power and in the
personnel of the ruling class itself’ [14] is clearly central
to this approach. But it does not exclude all kinds of changes in the
political regime. On the contrary, it is precisely the combination of
continuity and change which is characteristic of the experience all
over the former Soviet bloc:
As she contemplated today’s recycled communists,
who miraculously have discovered the virtues of pluralism, one Polish
lady gave me the following definition of her erstwhile homeland’s
governments throughout this century. ‘Same shit, different
flies!’ [15]
The extent to which things altered depended largely on local
circumstances, such as the extent to which people in the mass tried
to go further than purely political change. A tad less monolithic
than the ‘total transformation’ thesis, for which
significant elements of continuity can mean theoretical overload and
a flashing self-destruct button. An example of this is the work of
David Lane, who is represented in this anthology only by a limited
study of the Russian oil élite, Russia being otherwise largely
excluded from the scope of the book. Lane is, in fact, a key member
of the Western intellectual establishment, a leading sociologist both
of the Soviet Union and of post-Soviet Russia. He is also one of the
few specialists to have argued, together with Cameron Ross, that the
new Russian political élite has hardly anything in common with the
old Soviet élite (as usual, a slightly higher level of continuity was
conceded in respect of the economic élite). [16] In order to produce
this result, they were compelled to insist that only people who were
in an élite position both before and after the collapse of the Soviet
Union counted as evidence of continuity. By applying such
breathtakingly narrow criteria to the interpretation of their
research, Lane and Ross were able to boast that the biggest single
grouping in the Yeltsin political élite, accounting for 45.7 per cent
of the total, had no service in the government or Communist Party of
the Soviet Union. But, even on their own figures, this leaves a
majority of 54.3 per cent who had between one and forty years service
of this kind. [17]
Lane and Ross are a good example of what can happen when a total
transformation thesis is bulldozed through the evidence. Other
Russian specialists have emphasised continuity, notably Olga
Kryshtanovskaya, who produced the classic general study of élites in
post-Soviet Russia, and James Hughes, who laid much of the groundwork
for an understanding of Russia’s important regional élites. The
problem here, as with O’Donnell, Schmitter and the other
transitologists, was that they tended to overestimate the importance
of direct relations between the élites and underestimate the role of
the political regime. The result was that Kryshtanovskaya, in
collaboration with Stephen White, could not decide whether the new
Russian élite was bifurcated (into political and economic élites) or
‘trifurcated’ (once they added the security services).
There followed what was in some ways a mercifully brief contest
between Kryshtanovskaya’s ‘three-layered pie’ and
the ‘marbled cake effect’ put forward by Hughes, who was
trying to picture the highly integrated élites he had found in
Siberia. [18]
The truth is that there is a high level of continuity and
integration within élite groupings in Russia, while their
relations with each other are competitive and hostile, features which
are quite new. The ruling class is more or less the same as in Soviet
times. So how is it that relations between different parts of that
class (and, by extension, between its top managers and officials) are
so different? An important part of the answer lies in the impact on
the ruling class of the unforeseen and unexpected way the political
regime changed. This was a class whose internal relations had been
structured into a hierarchy by Stalinist institutions, above all the
Communist Party, since its inception. The unexpected collapse of the
party in the course of marketisation and related political reforms
predisposed the ruling class to disunity. The unforeseen collapse of
half the economy provided a keen motivation for rivalry –
competition over the few key assets which remained: raw materials,
especially oil and gas, the processing of raw materials such as
metals, and arms, the one significant branch of manufacturing which
survived. The ruling class remains but its cohesion has been damaged
by changes in the political regime, largely as a result of its own
miscalculations. This is, of course, a very crude summary. [19] But
it again emphasises the flexibility of the relationship between
political and social power outlined by Callinicos. Actually, it is
not just a question of Callinicos, or even of Marx. The sad truth is
that you can find a more subtle understanding of the relationship
between regime and social structure in Aristotle than in the rigid
formulations of élite theory. [20]
Shorn of its intellectual pretensions, the basic message of élite
theory is that the best you can hope for is what the élites give you.
If you want something better, then you need better élites – not
better in terms of some impossible, utopian ideal, but more like
élites in nice places like the USA or the better parts of Islington
(p.239). Marxist thought leads in exactly the opposite direction:
from the great and the good to the despised and underestimated. Once
one starts looking, the potential of anti-élite struggles soon
becomes apparent, even in Russia, where movements from below hardly
existed for sixty years, where the mobilisation against the old
regime was relatively modest and where the difficulties of daily life
are hardly to be exaggerated. [21]
To start with, tell-tale phrases like ‘the danger of a rise
in social tension’, crop up even in the writings of the least
radical Russian specialists. Here, for example, is a description of
the dilemma faced by regional élites in oil- and gas-rich western
Siberia in the mid-1990s: ‘Obviously, the territorial
authorities are not ready to undertake additional expenditure, but,
on the other hand, they cannot not do so on account of the danger of
a rise in social tension in the territory’. [22] What was being
said here? The central government was trying to keep as much revenue
as possible flowing in to the centre. To a great extent, it did so by
transferring obligations like welfare benefits to lower level
authorities without a corresponding provision of funds. This pushed
regional budgets into the red even in this comparatively prosperous
region. But the cause of the dilemma was not pressure from the centre
on its own. It was the fact that there was a simultaneous,
countervailing pressure from the local population, which included, of
course, the workers who kept the crucial oil and gas industries
running.
If ‘the danger of a rise in social tension’ could have
such an effect on élites, then what happens when there is an actual
rise in social tension? In what became known the ‘railway war’
of 1998, miners who had not been paid for many months set up railway
blockades all over Russia and were joined by other public sector
workers with similar grievances. Political and economic élites at all
levels were reported to be reacting rather sharply as soon as the
action began to bite. Enterprise directors sent picked workers to
plead with the blockades for raw materials and fuel. First deputy
prime ministers were packed off to major trouble spots with crisis
funds. Central and regional élites blamed each other for money which
had ‘disappeared’ on its way to the coalfields. The
extensive media coverage of the conflict, the heated denunciations of
the miners by ministers and prominent journalists, not to speak of
the parallels drawn with the British miners’ strike of 1984-5,
indicated how serious an issue it was. There were even signs that
some of the blockaders were beginning to identify themselves with
‘enemies of the state’ such as Chechen fighters, and an
attempt by leading Communist MPs to foment a wave of anti-semitic
attacks after the blockades had been lifted fell flat.
Those who are in thrall to élite theory dismiss such struggles as
being the result of manipulation by one élite against another.
Throughout the autumn and winter of 2000, thousands of parents and
children in the Urals city of Ekaterinburg stopped general Latyshev,
President Putin’s new regional representative, from occupying
his designated residence – a building traditionally used by
4,000 children for a huge range of out-of-school activities. In the
end, Latyshev had to go elsewhere. A leading information service (the
Russian Regional Report) concluded that the whole thing was
just about the local governor, Eduard Rossel, giving his new superior
‘a public relations black eye’. Of course, ordinary
people are prone to manipulation by élites. But this does not mean
that such struggles are not in their own interests. One man taking a
building away from 4,000 children was not in the interest of the
people of Ekaterinburg in 2000, just as being six months behind on
pay was not in the interest of the rail warriors in 1998, and cuts in
welfare benefits were not in the interests of claimants in 1995.
One of the best pieces of evidence against the élitist view comes
right from the top. The latest volume of Boris Yeltsin’s
memoirs records the shudders with which he and his cronies recall the
railway war. Some of them wanted to take a hard line but the strength
to do so was lacking. The mood in the corridors of power bordered on
panic, and the head of the federal security service (the re-branded
KGB) had to be replaced by the more reliable Vladimir Putin, a
crucial step on his road to the presidency. But Putin did not make
much difference at the time. One deputy prime minister, Yeltsin
recalls, ‘raced from one coal district to another, signing
agreements almost without looking at them – anything to come to
terms’. The regime muddled through, largely because the miners
and their supporters were politically unclear about how to take
advantage of the government’s weakness. The rouble crash in the
summer of 1998 added to their difficulties and hardships. Yet the
memory remained to haunt the most powerful, most élite people in the
country. Anatolii Chubais, the architect of privatisation and
currently the head of the electricity monopoly, is one of those
people. Two years later in the summer of 2000, a worried Chubais
warned Yeltsin about the danger of replacing the then prime minister
with Putin – the fourth such change in little more than two
years. What worried Chubais was not personal ability or the detail of
élite arrangements, it was that ordinary people might not stand for
it. ‘Remember the railway wars?’, he said, ‘This is
something you want to face only once.’ [23]
One of the appeals of élitism is that it invites complicity. I
remember some time in the late 1970s seeing a couple of National
Front members trying to persuade some young men from West Indian
backgrounds that they were not against all black people, just Asians.
This kind of thing was so common that a militant bus workers’
paper I was involved in printed an anti-Nazi poem called something
like ‘It’s not you – it’s the other bloke
over there’. Nazism is an extreme example, admittedly. There
are less extreme, more sophisticated variants. At least one of them
has a direct bearing on the subject of this review. Slavoj Žižek’s
answer to the question ‘Where do the Balkans begin?’ is
simple: ‘the Balkans are always somewhere else, a little bit
more towards the southeast ...’ But his exploration of this
simple answer in terms of specific national perceptions in Europe
leaves none of these identities unquestioned:
For the Serbs, they begin down there, in Kosovo or
in Bosnia, and they defend the Christian civilization against this
Europe’s Other; for the Croats, they begin in orthodox,
despotic and Byzantine Serbia, against which Croatia safeguards
Western democratic values; for Slovenes they begin in Croatia, and we
are the last bulwark of the peaceful Mitteleuropa; for many
Italians and Austrians they begin in Slovenia, the Western outpost of
the Slavic hordes; for many Germans, Austria itself, because of its
historical links, is already tainted with Balkan corruption and
inefficiency; for many North Germans, Bavaria, with its Catholic
provincial flair, is not free of a Balkan contamination; many
arrogant Frenchmen associate Germany itself with an Eastern Balkan
brutality entirely foreign to French finesse; and this brings
us to the last link in this chain: to some conservative British
opponents of the European Union, for whom – implicitly, at
least – the whole of continental Europe functions today as a
new version of the Balkan Turkish Empire, with Brussels as the new
Istanbul, a voracious despotic centre which threatens British freedom
and sovereignty ... [24]
The élitist attraction of the westernising intellectual tradition
in Eastern Europe is just as false as the less subtle blandishments
of Nazism. You always run the risk of becoming someone else’s
Balkans, someone else’s alien, someone else’s
‘unproductive capitalist’, someone else’s ‘other
bloke over there’.
Which brings me, finally, to Machiavelli’s smile. You can
see it in the portrait on the front cover of the Penguin edition of
The Prince. Actually, it is more like a faint smirk, and the
lips are tightly pressed together. I have often wondered in recent
years whether Putin’s team has not been studying Machiavelli,
especially his warning that ‘there is nothing more difficult to
handle, more doubtful of success, and more dangerous to carry through
than initiating changes in a state’s constitution’.
Certainly, they have avoided making any formal changes in the
constitution at all, despite introducing some important alterations
in Russian federal arrangements and in the composition of the upper
house of parliament. I imagine, too, that few Russians could read
this phrase without thinking of Gorbachev’s ill-judged
tinkering with a Soviet structure in which deep cracks had already
appeared. Machiavelli’s warning comes in a passage extensively
quoted by Isaac Deutscher at the beginning of his classic
three-volume biography of Trotsky: The Prophet Armed, The
Prophet Unarmed, and The Prophet Outcast. [25 ]The gist of
the passage is that unarmed prophets who rely on popular support are
doomed since ‘the populace is by nature fickle’. Only
armed prophets have the means ‘to urgently arrange matters so
that when they no longer believe they can be made to believe by
force’. [26] I sense the same faint smirk, the same knowing,
superior tone in these words as in the lesser writings of élite
studies today.
This tone is singularly absent from Machiavelli’s dedicatory
letter to his real prince, ‘the Magnificent Lorenzo de Medici’.
On the contrary, Lorenzo was blessed with Machiavelli’s most
elegant grovelling. Despite many differences of detail, it is
curiously reminiscent of the style in which modern intellectuals
apply for funding. At the letter’s climactic conclusion,
Machiavelli pictures Lorenzo, on the high peak of his achievement,
letting his glance drop to its foot, where ‘undeservedly, I
have to endure the great and unremitting malice of fortune’.
[27] So, the faint smirk. And the lips pressed tightly together. If,
like Machiavelli, one is a believer in élites as well as a student of
them, then it makes sense to depict them as if they inhabited a lofty
region too remote from the mob to be sullied by it. If not, then the
sullying bears the promise of liberation.
 



THE BEAR’S Hug (June SWR) – David Viinikka’s detailed historical justification of Baltic demands for independence – puts the role of the Western leaders in its true light. Faced with a major issue of human rights they unhesitatingly plumped for ‘rulers’ rights’ instead.
‘We’re not going to cancel the summit just because Lithuanian housewives can’t heat their coffee on Saturday morning.’
This remark by an aide to President Bush, quoted in Newsweek, can perhaps help us imagine the atmosphere in which intense pressure from the West preceded the first concessions on independence by the Lithuanian government. An article in the Financial Times declared that ‘the Soviet Union versus Lithuania is not just a football match in which you support either one side or the other’ as this might ‘bring down the whole stadium.’
The article described those who supported Lithuanian demands as ‘armchair warriors’ and ‘simple minded.’
But perhaps this is not such a bad point. Who would want independence at the cost of pushing the entire USSR with its 300 million people over the edge into complete chaos?
I think one answer to this is that the leaders of the USSR, like their Western counterparts, do not inhabit quite the same ‘stadium’ as the average citizen.
They do not suffer from the chaos caused by shortages of food, consumer goods and housing.
‘Chaos’ to them is simply the end of their dominion over one sixth of the earth’s surface.
A more important answer is that there seems to be a connection between the different types of opposition to the central Soviet bureaucracy.
Of these the most important are undoubtedly the stirrings among the Russian working class, the only force, as in Tsarist times, in a position to break the system at its heart.
The Guardian reports workers in the Siberian oilfields as saying,
‘If the centre uses our product to put pressure on Lithuania, what stops us from doing the same to the centre!’
What a frightful thing that might be for Margaret Thatcher, her popularity already submerged to Gorbachev-like depths. It must have been bad enough to see Union Jacks with holes in the middle on the national demonstration against the poll tax.



 


Pete Glatter
South London



 



DAVE CROUCH’S article on Russia’s dirty war in Chechnya (Socialist Worker, 11 August) rightly mentions the West’s support for Putin. Let’s not forget that last year Blair specially visited Russia to demonstrate the West’s support for Putin just two weeks before the presidential election. A leading Russian daily (Nezavisimaia Gazeta) was amazed at the way Western correspondents suddenly shut up about Chechnya.
Let’s not forget Putin’s return visit to London either. Putin came to London because the butcher of Chechnya was not welcome in any other major capital in Europe, according to the leading Russian business magazine Ekspert. The magazine featured this prominent quote from KGB defector Oleg Gordievsky:
“Theoretically, it is not the queen’s habit to drink tea with murderers who turn up with their hands stained with blood. This invitation is a real miracle for Putin’s reputation.”
Blair abandoned Chechnya to its terrible fate. And he sold out every Russian who is fighting for real democracy and human rights.
PETE GLATTER, London
 



Socialist Review is awful. That’s not because all the articles in it are awful. It’s not because the people who produce it don’t work hard enough.
Socialist Review is awful because it is aimed at the wrong people. It is aimed at intellectuals and semi-intellectuals. What about all the working-class people who are just becoming interested in socialist ideas? They are the most exciting people in the world and there are more of them about now than for many a long year.
There is not a hint in Socialist Review of the thousands of political discussions that go on among ordinary people every day. Everything from profit and unemployment to sexual relationships. Many revolutionaries in the past have written about these things in a way that appeals to working-class people. They had that much respect for workers. It is this respect that is so sadly lacking in Socialist Review.
Finally, I think that it’s very important for an organisation like the Socialist Workers Party to have a monthly magazine that clearly belongs to it and argues its politics. Debates with other socialists certainly (as long as they represent a presence in the working class at least as important as ours). But let’s stop fooling around pretending that the members of the editorial board just happen all to be in the SWP by chance.



 


Pete Glatter
North London



 



Mike Haynes’s thoughtful article on the Putin leadership (May SR) was a welcome change from the superficial analysis of the mass media.
One minute they give the impression that Putin’s the new Stalin, the next he’s a lame duck, then he’s Stalin again. Thanks to this kind of coverage on both sides, most of us still have no idea how hated Gorbachev was in Russia while many Russians still find it difficult to understand why Thatcher was so unpopular and had to go.
One of the most important recent events in Russia’s ‘near abroad’ was the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, which was presented by the western media as a simple triumph of free-market capitalism. In fact, as Mike explained, this was not simply a question of Putin losing points to Bush in the international game. And if such instability develops further in Uzbekistan, a key US base in Central Asia, we could see a rather different game altogether.
Pete Glatter, London
 



I’d like to add a few points to the article by Mike Gonzalez on Frida Kahlo (June SR).
You might have got the impression from some of the media coverage that she was an obsessive painter of self-portraits who was absorbed in herself. This exhibition makes it clear that she was not.
She was the daughter of a mestiza (mixed race) Mexican mother and an immigrant German father. She lived intensely but was constantly and painfully conscious of approaching death after a horrific accident at the age of 18. She fought for her own independence and integrity but found it almost impossible not to be emotionally dependent on Diego Rivera.
Her consciousness of these contradictions and ambivalences pervades the exhibition. She proudly depicts her Indian heritage. But there is a painting of her wearing a mask of La Malinche, the Indian mistress of the Spanish conqueror of the Aztecs. She ridicules the US and contrasts it with the cultural richness of Mexico. But she also savages the betrayal of the Mexican Revolution by its own politicians. She portrays herself in a head-dress from a matriarchal region of southern Mexico. But on her forehead is an image of Rivera, like an indelible tattoo.
This is an exhibition that has been put together with love for its subject and care for its visitors.
Pete Glatter, London
 



What’s happening in Uzbekistan is exciting for the struggle for socialism.
Uzbekistan is the scene of the fourth revolt against authority in countries that used to be part of the USSR. The best known of these upheavals were in Georgia and especially Ukraine. It was possible to present the Georgian movement as achieving a pro-market victory for the West. The government was identified with the old Communist regime and the Russian leader Vladimir Putin.
Uzbekistan is different. The regime of Islam Karimov is notorious for hardly having changed since Soviet times. But it took a decisive move away from Russia and now hosts a US base near Afghanistan. The US now appears to be embarrassed about this association. The Uzbekistan revolt cannot be seen as being pro-Western. Any revolt against Karimov must be seen as a revolt against his US backers.
No future movement in countries like Ukraine and Georgia can be painted as being pro-Western, as these regimes are in the Western sphere of influence. There will be people open to ideas which fit their situation better than the Bush and Blair school of elite democracy – socialist ideas.
Pete Glatter, South West London
 



4 (Chetyre)
director Ilya Khrzhanovsky
This film won two awards at the Rotterdam Film Festival and has sparked controversy in Russia. ‘Out of decency and respect for their country, no English or American producer would release such a film’, said Rossiiskaya Gazeta, the official government newspaper. Khrzhanovsky, the film’s 25 year old director, has alleged that everyone who worked on the film has either been physically attacked or had their property vandalised.
Early in the film three people meet by chance in a bar. They talk about their work in a detached, knowledgeable, matter of fact way, as people do. Oleg confesses that he’s in the presidential administration. Marina asks about the president’s drinking habits, which turn out to be nowhere near as interesting as those of his wife. Marina, who is in advertising, is promoting a Japanese gadget which calms people down when they’re suffering from stress and makes them more productive. Volodya, a geneticist, is working on a programme which has been mass-producing clones for some time.
Although not really, because we find out that Volodya is actually a piano tuner. But then, unbeknown to him and to each other, Oleg is a meat merchant and Marina is a prostitute. This kind of scene is often more suited to the stage. But not here, where the unobtrusive intimacy of the camera, the deadpan wit of the dialogue (by Vladmir Sorokin, a radical writer) and the quiet conviction of the acting all go to construct a mountain of fascinating improbabilities.
I was fascinated and I was looking forward to going deeper into the unexpected. But the film didn’t develop quite as I was hoping. Its second hour is dominated by Marina’s visit to the village funeral of one of her sisters. The village is a zone of poverty, degradation and inescapable togetherness. It is inhabited almost exclusively by a group of old crones. Up to now they have scraped a living by producing ghoulish dolls. Faced with the prospect of economic annihilation, the villagers embark on a career of orgiastic consumption. One drunken wake follows another. These are the scenes that Rossiiskaya Gazeta took such exception to, accusing Khrzhanovsky of giving Russia a bad image abroad in order to gain plaudits, awards and funding for future projects. The fact that the Russian ministry of culture had part-funded the film provoked special fury. But Khrzhanovsky has said that ‘4 is about how reality carves out a human’s individuality, turning a unique person into a piece of living meat.’
As a Russian reviewer has pointed out, this portrayal of degradation is only a problem for those who want to cover up the fact that ‘life for many in the depths of Russia is brutal and repulsive’. But there is a real problem with this part of the film. It is slow, repetitive, pretentious and self-indulgent. Khrzhanovsky has argued that the characters start with lies ‘but then life begins to confirm their lies and becomes incomprehensible, just as in reality’. This means that the film ends up by merely striking an attitude – epitomised for me by the repeated and, I suspect, meaningless references to the number four.
 



Pete Glatter looks at the conclusion to the great uprising in Russia 100 years ago
By December 1905, Russia was gearing itself up for a full-scale counter-revolution.
For 51 days, the Soviet (council) of Workers’ Deputies in the then Russian capital St Petersburg had been an alternative power to the tsar, Russia’s absolute monarch.
The soviet had led the biggest general strike to that point in history. It had prevented a racist massacre. Its November strike had put a temporary stop to repression in the armed forces, among the peasantry and in Russian-ruled Poland. But now the Petersburg workers were exhausted. The militant Putilov plant had only worked 43 days in the whole year. A wearing lock-out ended their struggle.
The soviet leaders were arrested on 3 December. Military units began to criss-cross the country, torturing and executing militants without trial.But the Moscow workers were comparatively fresh.
Moscow was a city of low paid textile workers, who had generally been much less militant than the skilled metal workers who dominated St Petersburg. But now there was an upswing of struggle among the textile workers. To use a military analogy, the reserves were coming into battle after the front line had begun to fall back.
Revolt among the peasants and in the armed forces was also rising to a climax. If the authorities could be defeated in Moscow, then there was every chance that the movement in St Petersburg would revive. Where these two great cities led, the Russian people would follow.
The revolutionary Bolshevik party, which led the Moscow soviet, was right to go for an uprising. Their socialist allies were right to go with them.
The question was whether the uprising would take place in time. The Bolsheviks themselves were slow to react to a mutiny in the city garrison. They allowed it to fizzle out before the main uprising began. Even so, the Moscow soviet took control of most of the city on the very first day. But the kind of practical preparations for an uprising, which Lenin, the exiled Bolshevik leader, had been pushing for all year, had not been made.
The Bolsheviks championed the idea of a mass uprising to overthrow Tsarism. But that was in theory. The local leaders had not yet caught up with the reality. Crucial days were lost while they campaigned for the uprising instead of getting one under way. The railway line from St Petersburg was left open. As soon as the authorities there felt secure, they were able to reinforce Moscow from their massive garrison.
The Moscow masses were much more decisive than their leaders. They tried to win over the troops. In one incident, two working girls with a red flag ran out of a crowd crying, “Kill us. We will not surrender the flag alive.” Disconcerted, the Cossack troops galloped away amid cheering.
According to Lenin, the fact that the struggle developed from a strike to an uprising “over the heads of the organisations” was “the greatest historic gain the Russian revolution achieved in December 1905. “Like all preceding gains it was purchased at the price of enormous sacrifices.”
It was not that organisations were not needed. It was that the pressure of mass action could overcome their conservatism.
But the failure to take the offensive doomed the uprising. Hundreds of armed fighters, supported by the people, carried on a stubborn resistance. But they were no match for the overwhelming forces ranged against them. Cannon reduced the entire district of Presnya to rubble.
In the bitterness of defeat, some socialists argued that “we should never have taken up arms”. But the Bolsheviks looked forward to correcting their mistakes.
The Russian Revolution of 1917 began exactly where the 1905 revolution ended. In 1905, it took eight months of mass struggle before the first soviet appeared. The first soviet of 1917 was formed after four days. The unfinished last act of 1905, the overthrow of the monarchy, was accomplished in 1917 at the end of the first week.
Eight months later, the soviets took power, led by the Bolsheviks. They and many of their supporters had learned the lessons of 1905.

Pete Glatter is the editor of the current special issue of the journal Revolutionary History on the 1905 revolution, which is based on Russian accounts never before translated into English. Go to www.revolutionary-history.co.uk. It is available from Bookmarks, the socialist bookshop, for £12.95. Phone 020 7637 1848 or go to www.bookmarks.uk.com.
 



We are living in a time of mass movements which originate outside the dead zone of official politics. The Russian revolution of 1905 was like that. In fact, it was the first such movement. The first time ordinary people were involved in stopping a war. The first general strike in history. The first workers’ councils or Soviets, rivalling the power of the established authorities. In short, it was the first modern revolution. If we can learn anything from history, we can learn something from 1905.
This centenary issue of Revolutionary History is based on a unique range of Russian sources translated here for the first time. The 1905 revolution comes to life through its authentic voices: working men and women, sailors, the non-Russian peoples of the empire, and socialists in the three main left-wing parties. Crucial debates in the St. Petersburg Soviet are taken directly from the pages of the first Izvestiya, its illegally-produced bulletin. There are also first-time translations of writings by Rosa Luxemburg at the time and a special study of the extraordinarily revealing strike statistics.
Perhaps the unique thing about 1905 is the extraordinary clarity with which it shows how working-class consciousness can become radicalised.
This work focuses on three simultaneous and closely-linked processes of change.
The first was the way the centralized tsarist state raised the stakes of the struggle at key points, facing the workers with the choice of either responding or knuckling under. These were conscious choices made by millions of workers in the light of their experience of struggle and the resulting level of confidence and courage. So every step of the struggle involved a change in mass consciousness.
The second was the differentiation of the mass workers’ movement, independently of any political party, between militant and moderate poles.
The third was the development of the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, originally factions in the same social-democratic party, into distinct parties which corresponded politically to these two contradictory tendencies inside the mass movement. Historians have sometimes seen parts of this process of change. However, it is usually at the cost of the dynamic relationships between them, hence of the process as a whole.
This is the first major new work in English on the 1905 revolution for 17 years. Overshadowed by the 1917 revolution for many years, 1905 is at last restored to its true importance as the formative experience of a radical age.
 



The revolt in Russia 100 years ago shows how fast people’s ideas can change
What is it about a government that provokes a conservatively minded people to wholesale revolt?
Some 100 years ago, this question was settled for Lukeriya Bogdanova, a textile worker in the then Russian capital St Petersburg, by two events.
The first was a massacre. On Bloody Sunday, 9 January 1905, troops at several points in the city fired repeatedly into processions of workers hoping to present a reform petition to the Russian ruler Tsar Nicholas II at the Winter Palace.
Lukeriya had helped persuade the marchers to bring their children with them. She hid under a bridge with some other women workers until 3 a.m. Then she hurried home to reassure her family. She later recalled, “I was very agitated when I got back, but was off to work before seven.”
The second event was the cover-up. When she arrived at the mill, the workers, already “in a very stormy mood”, were asking for time off to look for their relatives.
“When some of them found the bodies of their relatives, they were told to come for them next day,” she relates. “But next day the dead weren’t there any more.” Because of this historians are uncertain about the final toll of victims. Perhaps the best estimate is 1,216 dead and over 5,000 wounded.
“After Bloody Sunday,” Lukeriya says pithily, “I stopped believing in god and the tsar.” She got involved in the socialist underground, producing leaflets and intervening in strikes. Her husband was what she called “very strict” and often beat her for this. “But,” she said, “of course, I didn’t take any notice of him, and I continued with the work”.
This could have been bravado after the fact. Except that Lukeriya, like most Russian women, had endured an extremely hard life.
In her factory, foremen habitually threw spanners at the women, gave them a maximum of 15 minutes to breast-feed in a dirty corridor, and insulted them when they went into labour.
Not everyone moved as far or as fast as Lukeriya Bogdanova. But the majority of workers surged in the same direction in wave after wave of mass strikes and risings throughout the year. With them came many peasants, at that time the majority of the population, and soldiers and sailors.
There was a characteristic pattern. The government would take a tough stand and then make a token concession.
After the first wave of unrest, it announced a toothless parliament in which towns and cities were hardly represented. After the second wave, it announced a revised version in which the vote of a landowner equalled the votes of 15 peasants and 45 workers.
This was what riled people enough to fight for real – if often temporary – concessions. They felt they were objects of contempt for an elite which was out of touch with them and had no real intention of changing.
Does that sound familiar? There are a lot of obvious differences between the political elite of imperial Russia and the political class in Britain today. But it’s interesting to note that the popular perception of them has something in common.
Oh, by the way, as shown in last week’s column, there was an unpopular war going on then too ...

Pete Glatter is the editor of the current special issue of the journal Revolutionary History on the 1905 revolution, which is based on Russian accounts never before translated into English. It is available from Bookmarks, the socialist bookshop, for £12.95. Phone 020 7637 1848 or go to www.bookmarks.uk.com.
Go to the Revolutionary History website www.revolutionary-history.co.uk.
 



The Russian-Japanese war had a big impact on the 1905 Russian Revolution writes Pete Glatter
One hundred years ago this autumn, Russia and Japan signed a peace treaty which brought 18 months of war to an end. For the Russians, the war had been an awful catalogue of incompetence and careless waste of life.
The Russian-Japanese war was the first imperialist war to be stopped by a popular anti-war movement. Imperial Russia and the rising power of imperial Japan were rivals for the domination of the Far East.
The rivalry was particularly intense over the issue of timber concessions in Korea, in which the Russian royal family and its entourage had personal interests. It was there, and in Manchuria, that the war was fought, not on the soil of Japan or Russia.
However, those countries that backed the war were just as important as those who fought it. Germany egged on Russia. Britain armed, trained and part-financed Japanese forces. The US was the main source of finance.
The first Japanese attack took place after diplomatic relations had been broken off but before the formal declaration of war. To judge from the British Library’s special collection of press cuttings on the war, the Western reaction to this was far from negative. But Japan was too successful for the US and Britain, who feared it as a new rival for power in the Pacific.
By the summer of 1905, Japan was so dependent on its financial backers that it could not carry on the war for a single day without them. Britain and the US threatened to cut off the flow of funds unless Japan accepted peace on terms that they demanded. As a result, Russia got off unexpectedly lightly.
One of the positive results of the war was the blow it struck against racism in Russia. The Japanese were habitually referred to by Russian generals and churchmen as “monkeys”. Yet there was a striking contrast between the valour of the Japanese officers and that of the Russians. According to a Swedish military attache, Russian officers fled headlong to safety after one defeat “and then immediately proceeded to get drunk”.
This was a time when the Russian authorities were countering revolution at home by whipping up racism and instigating pogroms against Jews. If the Japanese were the enemy abroad, then the Jews were just as clearly identified as the enemy at home. Yet this was also a time of unprecedented solidarity with the Jews by the ordinary people of Russia, who organised and armed themselves against the racist attacks.
Voskhod, a liberal Jewish paper, commented in June 1905, “Never before, perhaps, has the Christian population in the Pale [an area in the Russian empire where many Jews lived] felt so much solidarity with the Jews.”
By May 1905 it was clear that the Russians no longer had any chance of winning the war against Japan. But the government had no intention of accepting defeat.
It was ready, according to a leaked statement, to go on sacrificing lives in a hopeless cause “for decades”.
But it was reckoning without the mass anti-war movement. The revolution had begun following a massacre of workers who demanded, among other things, an end to the war “in accordance with the will of the people”.
Working women taunted the soldiers sent to pacify them, saying that they were braver at fighting unarmed Russian workers than the Japanese. Soldiers began to shoot officers who tried to drive them into battle at gunpoint.
A British newspaper reported in February that strikes on the Siberian railway were part of a “Stop the War” movement which threatened “to paralyse the army in Manchuria by interrupting supplies”.
Mutinies in the armed forces soared by at least 20 times after the famous mutiny on the Battleship Potemkin in July.
Much of this story echoes today — war profiteering in government circles, one law for “our” side and another for the enemy, the cynical expenditure of life for power politics, the championing of diversity and anti-racism by the anti-war movement. We can draw strength from the fact that they succeeded in stopping their war, helping us to go on with stopping the war in Iraq.

Pete Glatter is the guest editor of the Revolutionary History journal’s special issue on The Russian Revolution of 1905: Change Through Struggle. Go to www.revolutionary-history.co.uk.
 







This October is the hundredth anniversary of one of the high points of the Russian Revolution of 1905 – the strike wave that saw the formation of the world’s first soviet (workers’ council) in St Petersburg. In our New Year issue Mark Thomas analysed the impact of the revolution on the development of Marxist ideas. Here Pete Glatter looks at the transformations that occurred in working class consciousness. [1]





The heart of the Russian Revolution of 1905 was the change in mass consciousness, what Trotsky called ‘that leaping movement of ideas and passions’ which arose from one set of struggles and set the scene for the next. [2] This process of change was concentrated in the working class.
Such changes are by their nature complicated and contradictory. Perhaps the unique thing about 1905 is that it shows in an extraordinarily clear way exactly how the workers’ consciousness changed step by step throughout 1905. The historian M.N. Pokrovsky summed it up like this:
In January 1905, the workers thought that they could talk to the tsar in a nice, polite way and they were cruelly disillusioned. In October, they reached the idea that you had to show your fist to the tsar – only show it – and you would get something from him. It was an idea of the following stage that you had to use arms against the tsar and it was clear only to a minority of the working class. [3]
Two examples illustrate the extent of this change: strikes and the membership of the two social democratic (i.e., Marxist) parties, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks.
The biggest year for strikes before 1905 was 1903. In that year 5.1 percent of workers went on strike. In 1905 the corresponding figure was 163.8 percent! The explanation for this figure was that many workers struck more than once. In all, 60 percent of the workers went on strike – nearly 12 times as many as the previous record. This enormous movement did not sink back to pre-revolutionary levels until two years later. [4]
A standard estimate of total social democratic membership before 1905 was that it ‘could not have been more than a few thousand’. It could well have been considerably less. The bulk of the recruitment took place after 1905 itself, as the experience and lessons of the revolution sank in. By 1907 the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks were each about 40,000 strong. [5] These figures might have been even higher, had this not also been the year which marked the final triumph of the counterrevolution.
Historians sometimes see parts of this process of change. However, it is usually at the cost of the dynamic relationships between them, hence of the process as a whole. [6] This was made up of three important elements. The first was the way the centralised tsarist state raised the stakes of the struggle at key points, facing the workers with the choice of either responding or knuckling under. These were conscious choices made by millions of workers in the light of their experience of struggle and their resulting level of confidence and courage. So every step of the struggle involved a change in mass consciousness. The second was the differentiation of the mass workers’ movement, independently of any political party, between militant and moderate poles. The third was the development of the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, originally factions in the same social democratic party, into distinct parties which corresponded politically to these two maain contradictory tendencies inside the mass movement.
Bloody Sunday and after [7]
On Bloody Sunday, 9 January 1905, troops massacred processions of workers at several points in St Petersburg, the capital of the Russian empire. The workers were trying to present a petition to the absolute ruler of Russia, Tsar Nicolas II (also known as the emperor and the autocrat). This petition expressed the shifting consciousness of the city’s workers. On the one hand, it appealed to the tsar in grovelling, semi-religious terms. On the other, its immediate demands included full civil and democratic rights, free public education, the separation of the Orthodox Church from the state, the transfer of the land from the landowners to the peasants (who were the majority of the population), an end to the war with Japan, elected workers’ committees in the factories with the right to stop sackings, an eight-hour day and a general pay rise. On the one hand, the workers came with their families, with church banners and icons, and singing hymns. On the other, the city was in the grip of a general strike. [8]
The massacre came as a tremendous shock. A callous official cover-up after Bloody Sunday, and the authorities’ slapdash attempts at conciliation, impelled the workers to action. It was not, by and large, political action. The workers had wanted the tsar to make it possible for them to fight for a better life. The response had been an attempt to terrorise them into submission. The workers refused to submit, but they did not rise up against the tsar. It was as if they were thinking, ‘Bloody Sunday showed that we’re not going to get any help from above, so we’ll have to fight on our own for a better life, starting with pay and conditions.’ The result was a strike storm. In January alone there were more strikes than in the whole of the previous ten years. These were, by and large, ‘economic’ strikes, strikes about pay and conditions, often with long lists of grievances which had festered for years. Employers, overwhelmed by the flood, caved in one after another. This switch from political to economic struggle was not a retreat. It was, as Rosa Luxemburg put it, ‘a change of front’. [9] Some strikes had political demands as well, especially about ending the war and calling a Constituent Assembly (an assembly elected to draw up a constitution for a parliamentary-style democracy). These were not necessarily immediate demands but nor were they empty sloganising. They were declarations of open opposition to absolute rule.
All the strikes, no matter how economic their demands were, represented a tremendous break with the autocracy, which guaranteed the absolute power of everyone in any position of authority over their subordinates, from the tsar himself right down to the last foreman. Tsarism itself had raised the stakes of the struggle. Bloody Sunday had faced the workers with a choice. Give in and live, however miserably. Fight back and risk another Bloody Sunday. The huge strike waves which rolled across Russia until well into the summer therefore represented the first qualitative change in the consciousness of the working class in 1905. This change came out of the experience of Bloody Sunday. It also came out of the experience of the struggle against the employers before Bloody Sunday, which had led to the general strike in St Petersburg.
A whole series of individuals and groups came to the forefront of this general movement. In terms of strikes, the better-off, more skilled metal workers were more militant – politically and economically – than the low-paid, more numerous textile workers, many of them women. Particular workplaces stood out, like the Putilov works, which had been one of the most backward metal plants in St Petersburg until the strike before Bloody Sunday. The plant now became so strike-prone that it only worked 43 days during the whole of 1905. [10] People were transformed. Lukeriya Bogdanova, a textile worker at the Maxwell mill, a hard school where the foremen habitually threw spanners at the women, had encouraged other workers to take their children with them on Bloody Sunday. After 9 January she stopped believing in god and the tsar and got involved in the socialist underground, producing leaflets and intervening in strikes. Her husband was what she called ‘very strict’ and often beat her for this – ‘But, of course, I didn’t take any notice of him, and I continued with the work.’ [11]
As organisations, both the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks had failed to intervene in the mass movement, headed by the fleetingly charismatic priest Father Gapon, which led to Bloody Sunday. However, individual social democratic workers succeeded in getting a hearing despite opposition from their own organisations and initial hostility from Gapon and his lieutenants. [12] Despite their sluggishness, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks gained credibility from the collapse of Gapon’s organisation and its reformist aspirations, as they had warned against them from the start.
The Mensheviks were stronger than the Bolsheviks in St Petersburg and prided themselves on their intervention in the Shidlovsky Commission in February 1905. The commission, which included elected workers’ representatives, was one of the attempts by the authorities to pacify the St Petersburg workers under the guise of investigating their grievances. However, this success revealed a key feature of Menshevism in 1905: it oriented on the more hesitant, more conservative, less confident workers. At a time when the strike movement was reaching unheard-of proportions, S. Somov, a Menshevik organiser, described the commission as the ‘central moment of struggle in this period’. The important thing in his eyes was that the ‘backward workers‘¦never tired of discussing which demands they should put to the commission and what sort of petitions they should submit to it’. At the same time, he admitted that the metal workers ‘saw the commission from the start as a clumsy trick to divert the workers’ attention from the most important issues on to petty workplace matters’. The Bolsheviks reluctantly took part in the elections to the commission. In the event, participation was a success. The result of the elections was a clear majority for the social democrats and a series of demands by the elected representatives. When the tsar responded by disbanding the commission, 50,000 to 60,000 workers struck in protest. The Bolshevik attitude may have been wrong, and it was not an isolated mistake, as we shall see. But it was not necessarily a sign that the party had nothing in common with the working class. [13]
The way Menshevism related to the mass movement of 1905 fitted the two key ideas it brought with it out of the underground. The first had been its opposition to Lenin’s insistence on a centralised party of activists. The second was the belief that, Russia being a backward country, the capitalist class, the bourgeoisie, must lead the revolution to overthrow the semi-feudal autocracy and establish a bourgeois democratic republic before the workers’ struggle could really get going. By contrast, the Bolsheviks came to argue that the Russian bourgeoisie and its liberal political representatives were too dependent on tsarism and too apprehensive about the workers to play a consistent revolutionary role. Tsarism could only be broken by the workers acting in concert with the peasants, who formed the majority of the population. This social alliance or ‘democratic dictatorship’ was to be embodied in a provisional revolutionary government which should establish a democratic republic, give the land to the peasants and introduce an eight-hour working day. [14]
The nature of bourgeois liberalism as the second key point at issue between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks fed into the existing difference on party organisation. If the workers were going to stay on the margins of the struggle for power, then the party organisation could be relatively loose and the distinction between members and sympathisers could remain suitably vague. But if the workers were going to play a leading role in this struggle, their party would have to be a centralised combat organisation which could organise the overthrow of the existing power.
After Bloody Sunday, Lenin repeatedly argued that the main lesson that the radicalised workers were drawing from the massacre was the need for an armed uprising. It was therefore no longer simply an abstract political idea but an urgent practical necessity. He attacked the Mensheviks for ‘dragging the party back, away from the pressing tasks of the revolutionary vanguard to the contemplation of the proletariat’s “posterior”.’ [15] For Lenin, the coming of the mass movement changed the whole way things should be done. Workers, especially young workers, were moving towards socialism through their own experience. The tight, closed organisation of the underground days had to be thrown open to mass recruitment so that the party could really become part of the working class, so that it could unite the workers who were taking the lead in the struggle. But among the Bolsheviks themselves, Lenin ran into inertia, conservatism and a sectarian distrust of the mass movement over and over again.
In the underground the party organisation had been central. This had even affected those open struggles which did break out. The difference between the 1901 strike at the Obukhov, a key plant in St Petersburg, which had to be prepared in secret until the very last moment, and the general strike in the city at the beginning of 1905, which involved one mass meeting after another, was a difference between two political worlds. [16] Now the mass movement was central and the party had to become part of it if it was going to have any chance of leading it. The party changed under pressure from Lenin and from the mass movement. But resistance was perhaps at its strongest during the early months of 1905. [17]
 
The Order of the Worker’s Boot
There were three particularly large conflicts in the spring and summer of 1905. The first was a mass strike in the textile town of Ivanovo-Voznesensk – ‘the Russian Manchester’ – in May and June. The second was a strike wave in the Ukrainian port of Odessa in June which erupted into something like a minor civil war just as the mutinous battleship Potemkin anchored offshore. The third was a mass strike of oil workers in Baku, now the capital of Azerbaijan, which erupted into such fierce fighting that the installations of two oilfields were destroyed by fire. [18] What stood out in all three cases was the ability of the state to organise and concentrate its forces in large but relatively isolated centres of unrest. Such forces consisted not only of troops and armed police but also of ‘Black Hundreds’ – the popular name for monarchist, racist organisations patronised by high officials including Tsar Nicholas II himself. [19] In terms of the big picture, these three conflicts were setbacks rather than decisive defeats. Even so, the level of strikes fell by about 75 percent between July and September.
Once again tsarism had raised the stakes of the struggle. Once again the workers did not react at once. But by mid-September price increases were swallowing up the pay rises won earlier in the year. The typesetters at Sytin’s printing works in Moscow went on strike. One of their demands was pay for punctuation marks. ‘This small event’, Trotsky wrote, ‘set off nothing more nor less than the all-Russian political strike – the strike which started over punctuation marks and ended by felling absolutism.’ [20] The Sytin stoppage set off a rash of strikes both in Moscow and elsewhere, including St Petersburg. But towards the end of the first week in October, everything seemed to be dying down. However, by then the ferment had spread to the railways.
Moscow was the railway hub of the empire. Once the workshops there began to come out, tsarism began to seize up. It was no longer simply a question of piecemeal demands about wages and conditions. This was a trial of strength. A conference of railway employees, which was meeting in St Petersburg to discuss pensions, demanded the eight-hour day, civil liberties, an amnesty for political prisoners and a constituent assembly. Now the die was cast. It was a political as well as an economic issue. It was a struggle to force the state to give some of its power to the people. The railways carried the strike throughout the empire. In every city a general strike spread out from the railhead. The economic life of the empire ground to a halt. The professional and educated classes joined the workers; schools and universities shut down. The strike went round the country and then knocked at the gates of St Petersburg. [21] On 17 October the tsar, in a state of acute demoralisation, issued a Constitutional Manifesto announcing the introduction of civil rights. Trotsky concluded: ‘The sacred crown of the tsar’s absolutism bears forever the trace of the proletarian’s boot.’ [22]
There are signs that the gap between the rank and file militants of the 1905 Revolution and the moderates during the spring and summer may have been growing. One of the Potemkin mutineers was quite disillusioned when he realised that ‘the formidable Potemkin was not moved by a uniform revolutionary spirit as in my elation I had been ready to think yesterday, but by a highly complex collective psychology.’ He divided the crew into three parts: one section ‘was ready for any amount of self-sacrifice, another section thought only about how to escape with its life, while some were ready to come out in opposition to the [politically] conscious section at the first opportunity’. The strain was particularly intense on the brink of the October general strike. The strike was led by better-paid workers who had a history of winning important disputes – print workers, metal workers, bakery workers, and so on. The St Petersburg print workers not only went on strike but immediately set about turning the strike into an uprising by organising armed detachments and calling on other workers to do likewise. At the same time, the majority of the textile plants in the city were still at work. [23]
The October strike was a vindication of Leninist politics. In August the tsar had issued a plan for a toothless parliament known as the Bulygin Duma. Voting was to have been highly restricted and workers were completely excluded. Nevertheless, the bourgeois liberals generally agreed to take part. The Bolsheviks denounced them for betraying the revolution and called for an ‘active boycott’, which meant using the elections to intensify agitation and preparation for an armed uprising. The Mensheviks wobbled around between the Bolsheviks and the liberals. In St Petersburg an important group of left Mensheviks influenced by Trotsky adopted the same line as the Bolsheviks. In the event, the Bulygin Duma was swept away by the October strike. [24] This was an ‘active boycott’ on an undreamt-of scale. It was not that the Bolsheviks – or any other organised political force – actually initiated the strike. That was not the point. The important thing was that the Bolshevik position corresponded to the actual state of the mass movement. It was an essential starting point.
This does not mean that all the Bolsheviks, including Bolshevik workers, now understood how to relate to workers who were changing through open struggle. There was a period of the Ivanovo-Voznesensk strike, for example, when the Bolsheviks seem to have either not raised any politics at all in the mass meetings or to have thrown out abstract political slogans like ‘Down with the autocracy!’ and brought the house down – against them. [25] It was a learning process, and the Bolsheviks were far from being alone in it. In June 1905 the Society for Active Struggle Against the Revolution, headed by a well-known Black Hundred personality called Dezobri, called a widely-advertised public meeting in the St Petersburg city hall to discuss workers’ issues. Despite a unanimous boycott by all the left wing parties, over 1,000 workers turned up. But the moment Dezobri opened the meeting the workers forced an election for an independent chairman, expelled Dezobri and his associates, and spent the rest of the meeting quite legally discussing the struggle against the autocracy. [26]
 
The Struggle for Power
The October strike was a generalised, class-wide, direct industrial action for political change. It marked the second great step forward in the workers’ mass consciousness. It also brought into being a united front against tsarism between the mass of the workers and the militants who, like the St Petersburg print workers, wanted to turn the strike into an armed uprising. In St Petersburg this united front acquired an organisational form in the Soviet (Council) of Workers’ Deputies, a leadership elected from and recallable by mass workplace meetings which was later copied all over Russia. Trotsky, who led it, described it as ‘a workers’ government in embryo’: ‘The soviet represented power insofar as power was assured by the working class districts; it struggled for power insofar as power still remained in the hands of the military-political monarchy.’ [27] Tsarism retreated in the face of the general strike in order to prepare the advance of a general counterrevolution. This set the context of the soviet’s activity.
The Soviet was set up as the result of an initiative by the left Mensheviks, ie by the political tendency in St Petersburg which was at that time closest in spirit to Lenin’s ideas. In this sense, it was the culmination of a series of joint political activities stemming from the revolutionary mass movement and encouraged by Lenin himself. [28] The soviet was also the highest form of organised grassroots leadership such as the committees which led the mass strike in Ivanovo-Voznesensk and the mutiny on the Potemkin. This was democracy as ordinary people actually experienced it. It was understandable that they should identify it with parliamentary government, which Russia had yet to experience. But in its rank and file working class roots and its tendency to intrude on and dictate to the established power, it was strikingly socialist.
The soviet led four mass struggles. The first was the October strike. The second was resistance to the pogroms – police-inspired massacres, mainly of Jews – which began as soon as the October strike ended. The third was the struggle for the eight-hour day. The fourth was the November strike against repression and martial law. [29]
Three of these four struggles were not initiated by the soviet. But it generalised them. Railway engineers, print workers and metal workers brought the October strike to St Petersburg. The soviet transformed it into a general strike, sending out pickets with ‘a complete range of methods, from verbal appeals to forcible coercion, to involve non-strikers in the strike’. [30] As soon as the October strike ended, the pogroms began. At least 3,500 to 4,000 people were killed. [31] As soon as the Black Hundreds tried to whip up a pogrom in St Petersburg, many metallurgical plants voted to suppress it, began turning out steel side arms and displayed them at a session of the soviet. ‘That demonstration alone’, Trotsky wrote, ‘was bound to paralyse all initiative among the rank and file pogromists.’ [32] The struggle for the eight-hour working day, the key economic demand of the workers in 1905, was initiated by a number of plants which voted overwhelmingly to stop work after eight hours. Their deputies then brought the issue to the soviet, which called on other workers to follow their example. In other words, the militant workplaces led by example and appealed to the soviet to generalise the struggle. This gave consciousness and organisation to what had previously been much more of a chance, haphazard relationship.
Only in the case of the November strike did the more militant workers wait for the soviet before taking action. This was because the issue came up a couple of days into the eight-hour struggle and demanded a complete change of front. The government had declared martial law in Russian-ruled Poland and in several areas of Ukraine and Russia affected by peasant unrest. It was also preparing to impose death sentences in field court-martials on several hundred sailors after a mutiny in Kronstadt, the island fortress which commanded the approach to St Petersburg from the sea. Strike resolutions from workplace mass meetings poured into the soviet, which voted to call a strike after a heated discussion.
Apart from the struggle for the eight-hour day, none of these mass mobilisations by the soviet was about a purely working class issue. The soviet was a class organisation which united all workers, irrespective of industry or belief. [33] But it also took the lead of the entire struggle against tsarism. This fact brought significant numbers of non-workers to the soviet’s side. The most dramatic example was the November strike, which was supported by professional and educated people such as pharmacists, dental students and high school students. The strike won the transfer of the Kronstadt sailors to a normal military court on a reduced charge and the lifting of martial law. As a result, the soviet began to exercise what a colonel in the guards called ‘a regrettable moral influence on our soldiers’. [34] Deputations of soldiers and sailors began to appear at the soviet. On the third day of the strike the representative of a local peasant union addressed the soviet in warmly fraternal terms at the request of his members. [35]
However, a united front like the soviet is always a two-way street. The majority of the soviet deputies kept the October strike going for as long as they could after the Constitutional Manifesto. ‘We knew that everything, every word written in it was a lie’, recalled Dmitry Sverchkov, one of the Soviet’s leading figures. [36] But most of the strikers thought otherwise, for the rest of the country began returning to work and St Petersburg was not immune to the trend. The jubilant crowds were in no mood for Trotsky’s grim warnings:
I shouted to them not to trust an incomplete victory, that the enemy was stubborn, that there were traps ahead; I tore the Tsar’s manifesto to pieces and scattered them to the winds. But such political warnings only scratch the surface of the mass consciousness. The masses need the schooling of big events. [37]
Many employers had initially supported political struggle by the workers, from which they stood to benefit in terms of parliamentary representation. But faced with the eight-hour struggle and the November strike on the one hand and a gathering counterrevolution on the other, they leapt into the government camp with a massive lockout. The state plants were the first to close, followed by 72 metal and textile plants. More than 100,000 workers were thrown out of work, a huge proportion of the city’s workforce. [38] Taken on top of the loss of earnings through strikes throughout the year in key plants like the Putilov, this was a crushing blow. The soviet reluctantly called off the November strike without having achieved its full aims (the complete abandonment of martial law and all court-martials). Five days later it abandoned the eight-hour day struggle as well.
The soviet struggled on for another three weeks, but it had been fatally weakened. According to Trotsky, this was as much to do with illusions among the militants themselves as with difficult circumstances or backsliding among the moderates. He recalled how they had armed against the pogrom ‘more in good humour than seriously’, and how most of them ‘did not seem to realise that it was a life-or-death struggle’. When the soviet was arrested on 3 December, the deputies smashed their revolvers to prevent them falling into the hands of the encircling troops. ‘In the clashing and creaking of twisting metal,’ Trotsky wrote, ‘one heard the gnashing teeth of a proletariat who for the first time fully realised that a more formidable and more ruthless effort was necessary to overthrow and crush the enemy.’ [39] Tsarism had raised the stakes for the third time. The St Petersburg workers had tried to mount a successful response on their own and now they were off the battlefield. Defeat and demoralisation resurrected the Black Hundreds. A revolutionary militant in the Putilov suffered multiple stab wounds at their hands and it became dangerous for others to be in the plant without protection. [40]
This does not mean to say that the struggle was not spreading. It was, but there were two major problems, both of which had to do with the time factor. One was the lag between action and organisation. A Polish socialist told the soviet that the Polish workers had no sooner ended their own exhausting three-week strike against martial law than when they had found out that the November strike had begun:
If we had only known a few hours earlier that you were standing by your Polish brothers, we would have strained every nerve and continued the strike. But we didn’t know and it was so unpleasant that at the time when you went on strike, our cities were going back to work one after another. We must definitely avoid that in the future. [41]
The second problem was to do with the lag between the more militant workers and those who were just coming into the struggle. It was no accident that Trotsky remembered the defiant woman weaver from the Maxwell textile factory who spoke up in the crucial session of the soviet for continuing the eight-hour struggle against the opposition of Putilov metal workers, who were for throwing in the towel. St Petersburg was dominated by the metallurgical industry. At its height, 351 of the soviet’s 562 deputies were from the metal industry, as against 57 from textiles. [42] In Moscow, where textile workers formed the majority of the workforce [43], the level of struggle had been much lower than in St Petersburg, certainly until the beginning of the October strike. The 1905 strike rate in St Petersburg was more than three times higher than in Moscow. Yet it was in Moscow that the main uprising against tsarism took place.
In the following year there was a higher level of strikes among textile workers than among metal workers. To use a military analogy, the reserves were still coming into battle after the front line had begun to fall back. Here was the dynamic power of the revolution, constantly inspiring fresh forces into battle, but also a fatal weakness, in terms of the lack of coordination between the two groupings. Nevertheless, it shows that there was a basis in the mass movement for the Moscow uprising which went far beyond the Bolsheviks, who played the leading role in it. It is also important to keep in mind that there was no Chinese Wall between the workers and other classes of the population. The rising militancy of the textile workers was related to the insurgent movements in the peasantry and in the armed forces. [44]
In contrast to the left Mensheviks, the Bolshevik leadership in St Petersburg was distinctly unenthusiastic about the soviet. It even submitted an ultimatum: either the soviet had to accept the social democratic programme or the Bolsheviks would walk out. This ultra-left ‘ultimatism’ was to remain a serious problem in the Bolshevik Party until 1909, when Lenin succeeded in getting the leader of the tendency expelled. [45] Even so, there are signs that the party was much less doctrinaire and much more a part of the mass movement in the city than it had been at the beginning of 1905. First of all, when the soviet’s executive committee stopped the discussion on the ultimatum, the Bolshevik workers stayed where they were. Secondly, of the three key leaders of the soviet, Trotsky had already left the Mensheviks and attended the Bolshevik meeting which decided on the ultimatum (which he opposed), Pyotr Zlydniev, a leading worker at the Obukhov plant, was a left Menshevik, and Dmitry Sverchkov was either a left Menshevik or a Bolshevik who was against the ultimatist line. According to Sverchkov, Bogdan Knuniyants, the Bolshevik Party representative, also ‘played a big role in the soviet’ despite his initial suspicion of it. Thirdly, as soon as Lenin got back to the city in the second week of November, he came down hard on the Bolshevik leaders. From then on, according to the Bolshevik Gorev, who was an eyewitness, they ‘no longer thought about ultimatums but only about how to win an influential role in the soviet’. [46]
The Bolsheviks made a lot of mistakes in the Moscow uprising, most of which we know about primarily because of their own self-criticisms. They were too slow, too hesitant and too cautious. One of the crucial failures was the lack of a swift and decisive response to a mutiny in the Moscow garrison:
There is no shadow of a doubt that the uprising would have had a chance of success if it had begun a week earlier and had coincided with the growing movement in the Moscow garrison. Nor is there any shadow of a doubt that a victorious uprising in Moscow would have been the signal for an uprising in the Central Industrial Region, above all in Petersburg. [47]
In the absence of such a revival of the movement in St Petersburg, the railway line between the two cities continued to function. This released sufficient forces from the massive garrison in St Petersburg to overwhelm the Moscow uprising.
Such mistakes do not negate the value and importance of this crucial attempt to bring the revolution to its conclusion by overthrowing the tsarist regime. First of all, it very nearly succeeded. At the outset the Moscow Soviet controlled practically the entire city. The governor-general’s ‘authority extended only to the centre of the city where he sat tight with his “reliable” troops – about 1,500 cavalry and infantry in all, according to his own estimate’. [48] Secondly, it was a vital attempt to turn the political tide. Following the St Petersburg employers, the liberals turned against the whole idea of revolution, especially once their representation in the new Duma was guaranteed. The Mensheviks followed the liberals, leaving the left Mensheviks increasingly isolated. If the workers’ unreliable liberal allies were retiring to a safe distance, other, more humble, forces were coming closer, as we have seen. It took an initiative from the Bolsheviks, flawed though it was, to release the creative energy of the masses. But it was this creative energy which Lenin identified as the most important feature of the uprising:
In the December days, the Moscow proletariat taught us magnificent lessons in ideologically ‘winning over’ the troops, as, for example, on 8 December in Strastnaya Square, when the crowd surrounded the Cossacks, mingled and fraternised with them, and persuaded them to turn back. Or on 10 December, in Presnya District, when two working girls, carrying a red flag in a crowd of 10,000 people, rushed out to meet the Cossacks crying: ‘Kill us! We will not surrender the flag alive!’ And the Cossacks were disconcerted and galloped away, amidst the shouts from the crowd: ‘Hurrah for the Cossacks!’ These examples of courage and heroism should be impressed forever on the mind of the proletariat. [49]
Of all the achievements of the uprising, this was one that Lenin picked out as the most important:
From a strike and demonstrations to isolated barricades. From isolated barricades to the mass erection of barricades and street fighting against the troops. Over the heads of the organisations, the mass proletarian struggle developed from a strike to an uprising. This is the greatest historic gain the Russian Revolution achieved in December 1905; and like all preceding gains it was purchased at the price of enormous sacrifices. [50]
These words may sound strange coming from Lenin, who is usually portrayed as the father of totalitarianism. But it was in 1905 that Lenin and the Bolsheviks really discovered the mass workers’ movement. This was the hidden heart of Bolshevism. The Bolshevik Party never represented the working class as a whole, as the soviets did. It tried to be the party of the most militant workers, uniting them politically, coordinating their activity and enabling them to relate to other workers as a clearly defined group, not as disparate individuals. When sectarianism and organisational inertia inside the party got in the way of its relationship with the mass movement, then the pressure of the mass movement was used by Lenin and others to break through. It was never a perfect party but it was, to borrow a term from psychology, a ‘good enough’ party. It was activist, it gave a lead, it made mistakes and it took responsibility for them. It learned and changed. Such changes could not be made without internal conflict – but it was conflict which ultimately related to the mass movement, not just to isolated groups of inward-turned revolutionaries.
In the years after 1905, it often seemed that only the ruins of the revolution were left. The counterrevolution engendered bitterness and recrimination. ‘Thank you,’ a Moscow woman worker told Lenin’s sister Anna, ‘thank you, you Petersburgers, for your support. You sent us the Semyonov regiment.’ [51] Right wing socialists like Mensheviks became the political expression of such negativity. The Menshevik Larin put it on record that ‘the Mensheviks made a mistake in October-December by behaving like Bolsheviks’. [52] Defeat revived all their old prejudices against fighting for power and reinforced their faith in the mission of the bourgeoisie. They saw the December uprisings as a product of despair, and their defeat as a foregone conclusion from the start. The verdict that ‘it was wrong to take up arms’ summed up their lack of spirit.
 
Not Just an Anniversary
There are many obvious differences between 1905 and 2005. But there is one connection. We are also living in a time of mass movements which originate outside the dead zone of official politics. The Russian Revolution of 1905 was the first such movement: the first time ordinary people were involved in stopping a war; the first general strike in history; the first workers’ councils or soviets, rivalling the power of the established authorities. In short, it was the first modern revolution. It was not a blueprint. When the Bolsheviks successfully applied the lessons of 1905 in the revolution of 1917, they did not simply repeat the same experience with a few corrections. The 1905 Revolution did not give them all the answers. But it taught them about the logic of mass movements and about how they could relate to it. 1905 can help to do the same for us.
 

