

“WE WISH to declare, without losing an hour, that we are read ready to fill the role belonging to us – that is, to form and direct a government of the People’s Front.” With these words, Leon Blum, the leader of the French Socialist party, announced the intentions of his party on the morrow of the victory of the People’s Front In the French elections. Blum continues: “The French people have signified their will with vehement emphasis. They will allow for no argument, no trickery, and will tolerate no resistance.” And the Socialist Call of May 9th declares; “France’s first Socialist premier will take his portfolio at a time when his (!) country is sorely troubled at home and abroad.”
The importance of the above declarations exists in the following: 1. The People’s Front, dominated by a desire to maintain a bloc with petty bourgeois capitalism in the form of the Radical Socialist party, will, under socialist leadership, attempt to organize the government which will not be proletariat in program, but in essence capitalist. In other words, we will observe once more, socialists in the role of governmental leaders of a capitalist economic social order. 2. The recognition that troubles lie ahead for the new government, without a precise statement of where the trouble lies and what form the impending struggles will take. And, 3. Blum’s determination that the new government will tolerate no resistance.” What kind of resistance and against whom? For the moment, Blum leaves that unsaid. We propose to answer it for him and point out what must be done in France today.
The very existence of the People’s Front, the character of the elections, are a result of the growing conflict with fascism and the menace of a seizure of state power by it. These struggles between the party of capitalist democracy and the working class parties on the one hand and the parties of reactionary finance capital on the other, reflect the deepening economic crisis of French capitalism and the intensification of the class struggle.  The present skirmishes on the parliamentary field must ultimately find a solution through the victorious revolutionary action of the masses, or else succumb to the violent reaction of a fascist coup.
It is claimed for the People’s Front victory, that it has delivered a fatal blow to the fascist advance, and because of this singular fact, justified its existence. The joy in the ranks of the working class is quite apparent and it is genuine. On the basis of the educative material contained in the Stalinist press and our own, they have become convinced that this election marks the beginning of the end of fascism in France. The danger of complacency and satisfaction in the struggle against the Croix de Feu, of an unquestioned faith in the theory and practice of People’s Front, compels us to issue the warning: the victory of the left in France will result inevitably in the preparation of an armed coup by the fascists seeking to exterminate the working class. The ultimate physical conflict with the fascists is inescapable. The working class must prepare to cope with this inevitability by arming its own ranks and by seeking to solves the economic crisis of capitalism through the struggle for socialism.
It is a paramount lesson of the struggles in Italy, Germany and Austria, that fascism is an extra-legal force of reaction which relies in the final analysis upon its gangs of armed thugs. The parliamentary struggle against fascism is precisely the field of combat which decides nothing of fundamental importance. Parliamentary victories cannot and will not insure a victory over fascism, because it is an extra-legal force.  Past experience demonstrates that a parliamentary loss or defeat of fascism not only does not effect their determination to seize power by an armed coup. but actually serves it as a barometer in matching its forces with those of the proletariat, and permits it to decide the most opportune moment to insure victory.
Two years of physical conflict with the resultant extermination of the working class organizations finally assured Mussolini’s victory. Between Hitler’s appointment to the Chancellorship by that “lesser evil,” the Junker Hindenburg, and the assumption to power by the Nazies, was a period of violent destruction of the immense German proletarian organizations.   In Austria, the fascists planned beforehand their physical and armed assault against Social Democracy and defeated a surprised worker’s militia. In Italy, with power in its grasp, the proletarian forces lost out by vacillation, indecision, and fear. Germany marks one of the darkest periods in proletarian history. Here the parties of the working class. Communist and Socialist, deliberately refused to understand that the struggle against the Hitlerites meant the arming of the working class and the opening of a determined united offensive against fascism. In Austria, the Social Democratic party contented itself with issuing highly inflammatory propaganda, without simultaneously organizing the social democratic masses behind these revolutionary threats. The conclusion finally drawn was, that if the parties of the working class had matched up to the situation, there would be no fascism in existence today.
In France, while the concrete situation contains elements absent in previous historical experiences, the actual situation is. similar in all its broad and general aspects.  The insolvable capitalist crisis has given rise to the French fascist movement which will seek, as was sought elsewhere, to demolish the working class organizations, destroy their resistance to the capitalist offensive and attempt to solve the economic crisis by The organization of the dictatorship of finance capitalism.
What will happen in the coming period?  Let us attempt a forecast. Reacting to the experiences of Germany, the French working class demanded unity in the struggle against fascism. The fear of fascism gave rise to that anomaly, the People’s Front, as a substitute for revolutionary action. Composing the People’s Front are the Radical Socialists, that party of the French middle class, interested in the maintenance of democratic capitalism, the Socialist party and the Communist party. The purpose of the bloc is the maintenance of bourgeois democracy. For that reason, the People’s Front serves the interest of the Radical Socialist party and not that of the proletariat. Without that aim, it would have” been impossible to form the bloc with the Radical Socialists, who are neither, radicals nor socialists. The French Socialist party, standing upon the program of a democratic solution to the French crisis, and giving lip service to the eventual establishment of socialism, when and if the majority of the French nation will vote it in, was no obstacle to a union with the petty-bourgeois forces of French capitalism. To those who still conceive of the Communist party as a revolutionary party by past association, it must be said that this is no longer so and has not been the fact for some years.  The French Communist party has become, as even so astute an observer as Edgar Ansel Mowrer points out, a “patriotic and conservative” force in French politics. Why then, should the Radical Socialists object to a bloc with the C. P., to whom the tri-color vies with the red flag, the Marseillaise assumes the importance of the International, and the maintenance of a strong military force for French imperialism becomes paramount ?  The answer lies in the very existence of the People’s Front.
The Front has received a tremendous support from the mass of proletarians and a majority of the French middle class. There is testimony in this fact that the majority of the French nation is anti-fascist. The election victory however, is only a political one.  More decisive that that is the necessity of an economic solution to the French crisis, which gave “birth to the present political relationships.  If that economic solution is not forthcoming the French masses are doomed. From a Marxist point of view there is only one solution to the capitalist crisis in a period of the universal decay of this social order, namely, in socialism. Therefore, in essence, the struggle against fascism must resolve itself in a battle for socialism.
There is no indication whatsoever, that the People’s Front understands this or mean? to pursue a proletarian class policy. Quite the contrary, the People’s Front is concentrating its endeavors upon a continued maintenance of the capitalist social order. The theory being: France is not yet ripe for socialism, the middle classes are against socialism and we cannot have socialism without the support of the middle classes.
If the French Socialist party, in bloc with or supported by the communists and radicals socialists, form the government, the responsibility for alleviating the economic crisis and improving the conditions of the impoverished proletarians and crisis-ridden middle class will fall upon its shoulders. The patent inability to solve the economic crisis of capitalism except through a further reduction in the standards of the middle class and the proletarian masses, points to the danger.  The whole situation will play directly into the hands of the fascists. Finance capital is making and will continue to make more difficult an already impossible task. The surgeon of French capitalism will be the People’s Front and it will attempt to cure a decaying organism.
The logical development out of this situation will be the growth of despair among the proletariat and the swing away of the middle class from the People’s Front to fascism. That process, started already prior to and in the elections, will become more pronounced in the coming period.   The fascist offensive, resting at this time on an armed force of nearly 700,000, will begin to gain momentum and the armed conflict, so studiously avoided by the working class parties, will confront them like a nightmare.
The middle class, it is true, is not a proletarian force. It has always been identified with capitalism. But it is not a basic class.  Its well-being rests upon the foundation of a healthy capitalism – a condition now permanently absent. It is driven helter-skelter and crushed between the working class ranks into which it is driven and the ranks of the bourgeoisie which, it does not deign to leave. It is a class that has to be won to the support of the working class.  The existence of the People’s Front is proof of at least this understanding on the part of the social democracy and the Stalinist?. But the working- class parties have to accept the understanding that the middle class has no independence and can play no independent role in the class struggle. It cannot direct, the struggle.
The middle class can be won to the side of the working-class only if the latter and its parties pursue a decisive course and demonstrate to the former that they really mean business. Vacillations, fear,, blunders and finally, the inability to solve the economic situation will drive the middle class from the proletariat. The working class parties in France have at least this much in their favor at this moment: the middle class party has allied itself with them in a bloc.
The alliance can be maintained only if the proletarian forces march forward with decisiveness to realize the need of the hour: a solution to the economic crisis by a policy that will lead to the victory of socialism.   The Bolsheviks of Russia proved the above by successfully conducting the revolutionary struggle against. Czarism. Had not the middle classes supported them, they could never have seized and maintained power. It is because they demonstrated that they meant business, that the middle class came to their support.
In France, there is time now to prepare.  If there is recognition of difficulties ahead, it is necessary to state that the difficulties come from the fascists. If Blum wants to resist the reaction, he must first recognize that he will have to resist an armed force of fascist thugs.  Once recognizing this unavoidable fact, it is necessary to draw the conclusion: the only resistance against the reaction is through the arming of the working class and through the establishment of the workers militia. This must be accompanied by such economic and political measures as will lead to the eventual establishment of socialism. That means the erection of Soviets, the expropriation of the bourgeoisie.  The organization of a workers’ militia, and the adoption of measures leading toward socialism must be conducted simultaneously and coordinated into one vast offensive against fascism with the aim of annihilating this horde of reaction.
Waiting, playing the parliamentary game, trusting and relying upon the bourgeois army and police, operating under the legal “nuts of the bourgeois state organized for the political direction 01 me capitalist economic order, vacillating, failing to pursue a Proletarian class policy there you have the greatest assurance for the victory of fascism. Adopt the opposite course and you open up new vistas for the international working class. The crying need of the hour in France is the independent revolutionary assault of the proletarian movement – for socialism.
 



With each passing day it becomes increasingly necessary to consider the situation in the Progressive Miners of America with the aim of ascertaining its tasks in the light of recent developments. The PMA is at the crossroads. The policies it adopts will decide its future. In any discussion of this union, it must always be borne in mind, that the organization was founded on the basis of a militant struggle against the Lewis machine in the United Mine Workers of America.
At the outset, its struggles for existence revolved around two fronts: against the coal operators (primarily the Peabody Coal Company) and the officialdom, of the UMWA (having at its disposal money, materials, etc.), both working with the support of the State of Illinois, its courts, police, the controlled press, etc. With such an array of reaction surrounding it, the course chartered out in advance for the new union was (and it remains so now) a precarious one.
Under such conditions two paths are open for the new union. Either it succumbs to the pressure of reaction or it maintains that militant class struggle character which brought it into existence, and endeavors to spread the union beyond the borders of the State of Illinois in order to make it a truly national union of the coal miners. There is no middle road for the union to travel. The militants in the union must understand that their successful struggle against Lewis in Illinois was built upon the foundations laid years before in the fight made by the Progressives in 1924, by the Save-the-Union movement in 1928 and similar struggles over a period of a decade. The victorious struggle of the Progressive Miners Union came as the mighty wave of these many fights.
 
The “Red” Scare
After a series of unsuccessful efforts by Lewis and the Peabody Coal Company to destroy the new union, they resorted to a familiar weapon used by all reactionaries and flunkies in the labor movement. The “red scare” was employed. It was directed against Gerry Allard, the editor of the Progressive Miner. By this means they hoped to drive the officialdom of the PMA into reactionary channels. This offensive launched by the reactionaries met a healthy rebuff in the rank and file of the PMA. The leadership of the PMA, sad to say, reacted in a most shameful and pitiful manner. It apologized and did precisely what the reactionaries desired. It too declared itself in deadly opposition to Communism in general and to Communists in the new union. It announced that the union was “pure” of radicalism. Instead of meeting this challenge in a straightforward militant manner it engaged in a “red-hunting campaign.” And in their own way, they now proceed to cleanse the union and direct blows against the most militant section of the PMA, that section without which the new union would have been an impossibility.
One thing is certain, the drive against militants in the new union will spell its inevitable death, and at present constitutes an ill-omen of what will take place in the union, if the leadership will persist in its present course – remaining smug and self-satisfied with early gains; a union in Illinois and a few contracts. In a discussion of the union it is necessary to return to some fundamental questions of tactics and strategy that are indispensable to the miners’ organization.
The greatest possible error that the militants can commit is to consider that the struggle against the Lewis machine in the UMWA was an isolated struggle for democracy and the rights of the rank and file miner in the union as such. It is impossible to make such an abstraction of the struggle for democracy in any workers’ organization. The inner life of any organization is a reflection of its policies. In a like manner the inner life of the UMWA was a result of the policies of betrayal committed by its leadership. It cannot be said that Lewis and his murderous regime is more brutal and vicious than other reactionaries in the labor movement. All of them act alike, when confronted with a desperate and militant rank and file. It is in defense of their policies that the Lewis machine resorted to the vilest methods in destroying the will and desires of the coal miners. In the same manner the basis for the struggle of the miners against their leadership, arose primarily in reaction, not to the throttling of democracy, but to the traitorous policies of the ruling clique.
 
Why the Fight Against Lewis?
The Lewis machine dedicated itself to the task of helping the coal operators at the expense of the coal miners. Instead of acting as the labor leader of workers and serving their interests, they acted as labor lieutenants in the service of the capitalists – in this case the coal operators. The decline of the once powerful United Mine Workers is a tale of successive betrayals of the miners. Strikes were sold out. Wage agreements were made that aided only the operators and reduced the already low standards of the miners to an even lower scale. Conditions in the mines became steadily worse. With the coal industry, already over-developed and constantly menaced by the development of electric and water-fuel-power, drifting to the south and the unorganized fields, the Lewis regime did not raise a finger in the direction of the organization of the unorganized miners. The unorganized fields steadily increased production until they were mining the great bulk of the coal produced in the United States. Yet the leadership did not budge. Wherever such possibilities of organization existed, as in West Virginia, Lewis betrayed the miners.
With such a background of constantly worsening conditions for miners, is it any wonder that within the rank and file a wave of resentment developed into a stormy revolt? In order to enforce its policy of betrayal, the Lewis machine resorted to every means at its disposal to check the revolt of the miners and thereby, to successfully carry through his policy. To accomplish It, he had to steal elections; expel militants by the hundreds ; kill, maim, torture; and destroy every vestige of democracy in the union. The union was no longer an organization of the coal miners. It was a place of loot for the agents of the coal operators in the union who, in carrying through this great betrayal of the miners also proceeded to rifle its treasuries.
What should have been the course of the UMWA? Assuming it to be a genuine organization of workers, it should have proceeded on a bold scale to unionize the unorganized fields, extend the struggle against wage cuts and for wage increases, for a general improvement of the working conditions of the miners. Needless to say, it did exactly the opposite. As has already been cited above, in order to enforce his external policies, Lewis resorted to a destruction of the inner life of the union. It is to be observed thus, that the struggle for democracy in the Lewis union, was dependent upon raising at the same time the question of policies.
Every movement of revolt in the UMWA, whether or not it momentarily raised the question of democracy as a forefront issue, nevertheless had to first of all present to the miners a program in contradistinction to the prevailing program of the Lewis union. Of what value is a program for democratization of union, which is not accompanied at the same time with program of vital, militant struggle to save the union (through its extension) ; against wage cuts (for increases) ; for retaining the improved conditions in the mines (and their extension)? Obviously it can not be of much value.
 
The Howat Movement
The outstanding experience of th Howat movement which rode the wave of one mighty revolt, and gained power in Illinois, was that in spite of its cry for democracy, and the need for turning the union into the hands of the rank and file, it failed miserably, brought about no changes in the life of the. union, acted as a perfect agent for Lewis, because its policies were identical to those of the Lewis machine. Unless any movement can tear itself from the policies of betrayal to the adoption of the course indicated, all its pretenses of democracy, of a “rank and file” union, will fall to pieces.
The democracy of the union will be achieved only on the basis that the union is militant, and aggressive in the interests of the rank and file miners, not in words, but in deeds. This applies with particular emphasis to the PMA, as it does generally to all unions. Conversely, a lack of inner-democracy, a rule of bureaucrats, is an indication of the need of this same bureaucracy to enforce a policy of betrayal which finds resentment apace in the rank and file.
In 1932, the struggles of the Illinois miners resulted in the organization of the Progressive Miners of America. The apparently immediate reason for this development lay in the struggle of the miners for democracy, for a rank and file union. Behind this struggle for democracy (which at that moment rose to its highest pitch through the big steal of the miners ballots on the wage cut) lay the real issue. It was a light against the policies of betrayal of the Lewis machine, which endeavored to force a wage-cut upon the coal miners.
At its inception, the PMA not only promised democracy in the union, the rights of the rank and file, the rights of minority opinion, inviting also those expelled by Lewis for their militancy, but at the same time sounded a militant tone in its program of struggle for the interests of the miners as against those of the operators. Precisely in the latter sense did the union give much hope for its future. The union pledged itself to spread nationally, to wage just a struggle in the interests of the miners as Lewis had refused and prevented. Any other course would have established no distinction between the two unions. The distinction did exist, however, in that the new union promised to fulfill the desires of the miners and to wage struggle in their behalf.
 
“Stabilization” of the P.M.A.
Since that time much water has flowed under the bridge. The new union stabilized itself momentarily through the gain of local contracts throughout the state. It was able to make these gains only through a heroic struggle in which the union gave up many martyrs. Without this struggle the present solidification of the union would have been impossible. During the period of conflict, when the union was earning the name of the Progressive Miners of America, all forces stood united at least on one question – the maintenance and stabilization of the organization. Everyone recognized that this was impossible without waging a fierce struggle for recognition and against the Lewis Union, which has within its ranks, a minority of the miners, and the greatest number of these kept in the UMWA through coercion. It was this stage in the development of the union that pointed to its great future.
Recent months witness a recession in this policy of the P.M.A. The campaign of red baiting testified that something else is brewing. This can be described as a settling process. The early cry of building a national union has now become less sharp and the leadership wants to be respectable as well as respected. It is interested in the “legal” aspects of their existence. It wants peace in the Illinois coal fields and for this it even enters into false negotiations with the Lewis union. It promised two statements to Lewis: one calling for a referendum of the coal miners to ascertain their support of the two unions, the result of this vote deciding which union shall remain in Illinois (this correct proposal was naturally unacceptable to the Lewis machine) ; the other: that the unions function where they are a majority (a division of territory) declaring that they recognize the UMWA is an organization existing in the interests of the miners, i.e., a miners’ organization.
 
A Glaring Error
This latter statement reveals glaring errors which can react only against the P.M.A. In those areas where the UMWA is in the majority, it is so because the miners are compelled to remain in the union by force. In recognizing that the UMWA is a union existing in the interests of the coal miners, an actual betrayal of the interests of the P.M.A. is committed. For what reason, then, one may ask, should the P.M.A. exist? Its wage-scale is the same. If the Lewis union is an organization existing in the interests of the coal diggers, then why the organization of a new union? This second statement was a surrender to the Lewis interests, even though it was presented as a concession, a compromise. Such a compromise can only cut the heart out of the new movement. Alongside with this gradually milder tone of the union, Its attempts to be a “respectable” organization, to negotiate with Lewis, to put matters in the hands of the “impartial” Governor Horner, comes this red baiting campaign and the attempts to expel a number of Left wing elements from the P.M.A. One of the chief accomplishments of the P.M.A. was its invitation to all expelled UMWA militants, to join the P.M.A. But when after a few months of existence, it in turn, begins an expulsion campaign against these very persons, something is wrong in the union.
There exists a great contradiction in the P.M.A. The contradiction exists between the rank and file and the leadership. The rank and file is militant. It is serious. It has not carried on its valiant struggle for nothing. It sought to build an organization that would recoil at the mere mention of Lewisism. The leadership, however, which rose during the early struggles, is trying to check this militancy, to become respectable, to insure the existence of the union for at least two years through the contracts signed and is closely treading on false grounds. The leadership is adopting a course that is bringing it closer to class-collaboration. The miners on the contrary, want to continue the splendid struggle they began.
There is a great dissatisfaction in the ranks of the union against this policy of the leadership, which can have only one effect: that of weakening the new union and leading it to collapse. The weathervane is the drive made against the militants in the union and the raising of the red scare. We pointed out above that for Lewis the destruction of the democracy in the union led to the institution of his policy of class collaboration with the employers, to the detriment of the coal miners. These acts of the leadership of the P.M.A. do not stand on a much higher plane. It will become clearer day by day, that their weakening of the democratic rights of the members of the P.M.A. is only a reflection of the introduction and strengthening of such policies, as are coincident with the policies of Lewisism.
The strength of the new union lies precisely in that all Left wing and militant elements in the union are permitted to exist and function actively. If this right, gained by a heroic struggle against Lewis, is to be snatched from them in the new union, then it is only a question of time, when this organization will follow the path of the old. There is no pre-ordained guarantee for the new union. Its existence will depend entirely on how it appplies its policies by which it came into existence, on how it extends and enlarges them. By beginning a campaign against those very elements that distinguished themselves in the first days of the new organization, the leadership is preparing its doom. It must by no means embark upon the course of expulsions. It must maintain the character of its early militancy. It must truly attempt to become a national union, to strugle for wage increase, for improved working conditions, to fight for the unionization of the unorganized miners. If the union leadership were following this line, there would be no need for it to resort to those dangerous and false steps that characterize its recent activities. But it is precisely because it does not meet its test, because it has fallen down on all its early promises, because it is preparing to revise its whole line of action, that they must needs resort to a diminution of the democratic rights in the union, through the threat of expulsion against Left wingers in the union.
The miners must understand these developments. The greatest need in the union is the organization of its Left wing, not only as the safety valve against the methods of Lewis in the P.M.A., but to foster and fight for those policies of struggle, by which the union may live and gain greater life. That, at present, is the most important task of the Left wing elements in the P.M.A. Without an organization of its forces, it will be blown to smithereens, and they will see the organization that they brought into existence, dwindle to nothing through the false policies of its leadership and through the heavy assault of all the forces of reaction in the Illinois coal fields who look with glee upon this campaign against the militants in the union.
 



(Continued from previous issue)
We must ask, naturally, if the initiators of the congress feared presenting a Communist position of the question of war, prior to the congress, and even if it is true that pressure was put on them and that a majority of delegates were Communists, were they not afraid then of driving away the pacifists? What was the attitude of the Pacifists and Socialists? Both saw that the Communists were the overwhelming majority of the congress. The pacifists expressed themselves as follows: We want a practical program of work when we get back to the campus. We are not concerned with your resolutions since you will adopt them, anyway, notwithstanding what we say. Go ahead, we will wait for a practical resolution. The Socialists were similarly unconcerned. It is clear again, that you cannot play around with the question of program. The policy of playing hide and seek with pacifists and liberals and socialists is a fatal one and even more fatal is the one to attempt to unite on the basis of a liquidation of principle which the Communists came very near doing, completely. As such they maintained a minimum political correctness as expressed in the main resolution.
The congress was thrown into a crisis when a member of the YCL introduced a motion to condemn the betrayal of the 2nd International during the war. The Socialist delegation quite sharply objected and stated that they would leave the congress if this resolution carried. They were not opposed to condemning those leaders of the 2nd International who betrayed the working class during the war, but insisted that all those who betrayed the proletariat during the war be similarly condemned, and they specifically named Foster and Cachin. This motion was changed to conform to the proposal and attitude of the Socialists and carried. Upon the passage of another motion calling for support of the Amsterdam Congress in the form of the American Committee against War, the Socialists ceased to participate in the congress because, said they, the passage of this motion signified accepting the attacks against the 2nd International contained in the decisions of Amsterdam, which they as Socialists could not accept. The discussion was extremely heated and indicated a split situation.
The split situation became evident upon the election of an executive committee to carry through the decisions of the Congress. The Socialists declined to accept because of the passage of the above-mentioned resolution. The Pacifists would not accept unless the Socialists did. Pleas for unity came from all sides of the hall and upon those pleas a YCL member introduced a motion to rescind the motion upon which the socialists broke from the conference. In spite of the Opposition of Henderson and a large section of the delegates, this motion carried and the Socialists remained and were accepted on the Committee.
An amusing incident took place which indicated just how the Socialists and pacifists were actually fooled by the character of the congress. The pacifists declared that all tendencies must be represented on the Committee. If only NSL members were on the Committee with pacifists, that would mean that the committee would be primarily Communist with no other representation. They demanded that on this committee there must be socialists in addition to pacifists in order to make a united front committee that would consist of all three tendencies. In spite of the efforts of the leaders of the NSL, the Party and YCL, all through the pre-congress period, to hide and cover up their Communist color, the NSL in the congress was synonymous to Communism in the eyes of the pacifists and socialists, and they conducted themselves accordingly. When acceptances were taken up for the executive committee each delegate was to answer in addition to his school organization, his political affiliation. The YCL members of the NSL in accepting on the committee replied: member of the NSL; the socialists answered: League for Industrial Democracy and Socialist. The pacifist answer should be clear. Our comrade Geltman in reply declared himself member of the NSL, and Communist. When this roll was taken again the YCL members continued to hide their identity which was clear to all. On this round comrade Geltman announced that he was a Left Oppositionist much to the dismay of the YCL.
Thus the congress ended. What did it actually accomplish? It gathered together a number of students from various parts of the country to decide upon holding meetings on the campus to declare against war and militarism, to fight against the ROTC, to propagate and agitate against war. It is now almost a month since the congress ended. For all practical purposes the congress might not have existed. The ripples caused by it, have like those of Amsterdam, settled into a dead calm. The criticisms that we made prior to the congress, and at the congress through the speeches of our comrades remain correct and real to this day. The weakness[es] of the congress are to be sought in its political character. It was separated, in spite of everything from the working class. It was not based upon reality. There were no worker delegates to give character to the congress. The attempt to transform the political nature of the congress toward its close only brought confusion among the delegates. Those Communist delegates who argued so vehemently against the position of the Opposition had later to defend the main political contentions of the Opposition against the attacks of the pacifists and socialists. The congress itself vindicated every criticism that the Opposition made. It was false to hold such a conference before a working class movement on a united front basis existed, to fight on concrete issues. If such a proletarian organization had been in existence, it might have been possible to organize a student movement that would attach itself to such a workers’ movement. As it is the congress remains suspended in mid-air trying to find a place for itself. That the congress changed many of its plans is true. But the original sin remains.
The responsibility for the whole affair falls upon the shoulders of the Party and the YCL. To be more precise upon the Communist International under the aegis of Stalinist revision of Communist policies. The Party was represented officially by Browder in the form of a speech. The YCL was absent, just as it was absent at the New York conference last summer. The criminal attempt made to hide the face of Communism resulted in confusion and error. The future of the committee elected by the congress is dubious. What shall be its mission? How will it carry through the struggle against war? Under the circumstances it can do nothing but dissolve of itself.
 



(Continued from previous issue)
We must ask, naturally, if the initiators of the congress feared presenting a Communist position of the question of war, prior to the congress, and even if it is true that pressure was put on them and that a majority of delegates were Communists, were they not afraid then of driving away the pacifists? What was the attitude of the Pacifists and Socialists? Both saw that the Communists were the overwhelming majority of the congress. The pacifists expressed themselves as follows: We want a practical program of work when we get back to the campus. We are not concerned with your resolutions since you will adopt them, anyway, notwithstanding what we say. Go ahead, we will wait for a practical resolution. The Socialists were similarly unconcerned. It is clear again, that you cannot play around with the question of program. The policy of playing hide and seek with pacifists and liberals and socialists is a fatal one and even more fatal is the one to attempt to unite on the basis of a liquidation of principle which the Communists came very near doing, completely. As such they maintained a minimum political correctness as expressed in the main resolution.
The congress was thrown into a crisis when a member of the YCL introduced a motion to condemn the betrayal of the 2nd International during the war. The Socialist delegation quite sharply objected and stated that they would leave the congress if this resolution carried. They were not opposed to condemning those leaders of the 2nd International who betrayed the working class during the war, but insisted that all those who betrayed the proletariat during the war be similarly condemned, and they specifically named Foster and Cachin. This motion was changed to conform to the proposal and attitude of the Socialists and carried. Upon the passage of another motion calling for support of the Amsterdam Congress in the form of the American Committee against War, the Socialists ceased to participate in the congress because, said they, the passage of this motion signified accepting the attacks against the 2nd International contained in the decisions of Amsterdam, which they as Socialists could not accept. The discussion was extremely heated and indicated a split situation.
The split situation became evident upon the election of an executive committee to carry through the decisions of the Congress. The Socialists declined to accept because of the passage of the above-mentioned resolution. The Pacifists would not accept unless the Socialists did. Pleas for unity came from all sides of the hall and upon those pleas a YCL member introduced a motion to rescind the motion upon which the socialists broke from the conference. In spite of the Opposition of Henderson and a large section of the delegates, this motion carried and the Socialists remained and were accepted on the Committee.
An amusing incident took place which indicated just how the Socialists and pacifists were actually fooled by the character of the congress. The pacifists declared that all tendencies must be represented on the Committee. If only NSL members were on the Committee with pacifists, that would mean that the committee would be primarily Communist with no other representation. They demanded that on this committee there must be socialists in addition to pacifists in order to make a united front committee that would consist of all three tendencies. In spite of the efforts of the leaders of the NSL, the Party and YCL, all through the pre-congress period, to hide and cover up their Communist color, the NSL in the congress was synonymous to Communism in the eyes of the pacifists and socialists, and they conducted themselves accordingly. When acceptances were taken up for the executive committee each delegate was to answer in addition to his school organization, his political affiliation. The YCL members of the NSL in accepting on the committee replied: member of the NSL; the socialists answered: League for Industrial Democracy and Socialist. The pacifist answer should be clear. Our comrade Geltman in reply declared himself member of the NSL, and Communist. When this roll was taken again the YCL members continued to hide their identity which was clear to all. On this round comrade Geltman announced that he was a Left Oppositionist much to the dismay of the YCL.
Thus the congress ended. What did it actually accomplish? It gathered together a number of students from various parts of the country to decide upon holding meetings on the campus to declare against war and militarism, to fight against the ROTC, to propagate and agitate against war. It is now almost a month since the congress ended. For all practical purposes the congress might not have existed. The ripples caused by it, have like those of Amsterdam, settled into a dead calm. The criticisms that we made prior to the congress, and at the congress through the speeches of our comrades remain correct and real to this day. The weakness[es] of the congress are to be sought in its political character. It was separated, in spite of everything from the working class. It was not based upon reality. There were no worker delegates to give character to the congress. The attempt to transform the political nature of the congress toward its close only brought confusion among the delegates. Those Communist delegates who argued so vehemently against the position of the Opposition had later to defend the main political contentions of the Opposition against the attacks of the pacifists and socialists. The congress itself vindicated every criticism that the Opposition made. It was false to hold such a conference before a working class movement on a united front basis existed, to fight on concrete issues. If such a proletarian organization had been in existence, it might have been possible to organize a student movement that would attach itself to such a workers’ movement. As it is the congress remains suspended in mid-air trying to find a place for itself. That the congress changed many of its plans is true. But the original sin remains.
The responsibility for the whole affair falls upon the shoulders of the Party and the YCL. To be more precise upon the Communist International under the aegis of Stalinist revision of Communist policies. The Party was represented officially by Browder in the form of a speech. The YCL was absent, just as it was absent at the New York conference last summer. The criminal attempt made to hide the face of Communism resulted in confusion and error. The future of the committee elected by the congress is dubious. What shall be its mission? How will it carry through the struggle against war? Under the circumstances it can do nothing but dissolve of itself.
(To be continued)
 



Chicago, Ill. – One thousand and forty-eight delegates, representative of all sections of the labor and working class political movements, met in response to the call issued by the Tom Mooney Molders Defense Committee, at the Free Tom Mooney Congress in Masonic Auditorium in Chicago on April 30, May 1 and 2. The congress marked the first attempt, belated though it was, to organize a nation-wide united front movement in behalf of Tom Mooney. As the first working class gathering of such a character it was accomplished with some success. But more than this is the fact that it indicated the potentialities for mobilising the masses of workers in struggle, through the wide, bold and constant utilization of the united front tactic.
The efforts to organize the congress met with resistance on the part of the leaderships of the American Federation of Labor, the socialist party and the independent unions under the influence of the Socialists. In spite of the sabotage of the reformists the congress nevertheless did make considerable progress in comparison with the past period. The incomplete report of the credentials Committee revealed the following representation:



Representation at the Congress




 


Organizations


Delegates




Local and Central Bodies of the A.F. of L.


114


147




Independent Unions


  28


  53




T.U.U L.


  75


117




Communist Party


  29


  43




I.W.W.


    2


    2




Proletarian Party


    3


    3




Socialist Party


    4


    5




C.P.L.A.


    1


    1




Communist League of America (Left Opp.)


    4


    8




Communist Party (Opp.)


    3


    6




Labor Party


    1


    2




Local and National Defense Org. (I.L.D., G.D.C., etc.)


173


196




Fraternal Organizations


104


153




Unemployed Organizations


  83


132




Women’s Organizations (YCL, YPSL, SYC’s)


    37


  47




Veterans Organizations


    6


  10




Farmers Organizations


    3


    4




Negro Organizations


    1


    7




Shop Committees


    2


    2




Miscellaneous


  11


  13



It is to be observed that this is the first time in the history of the American labor movement that a united front gathering on a national scale has ever been held. This fact was generally recognized and accepted in the congress. And it is in consideration of the fact that the congress marked the beginning and not the culmination of the movement that considerable hope must be expressed for the future of this movement, if the tactic applied (in spite of serious errors committed) is extended on even a broader scale.
The congress was opened at three o’clock on the afternoon of April 30th, by John Werlick, chairman of the Chicago Committee. He introduced Louis Scott, the personal representative of Tom Mooney and organizer of the Congress, to make the first report on the pre-congress preparations. Scott reviewed the unsuccessful efforts made to enlist the services of the socialist party and the American Federation of Labor to take part in the movement; the early support received from the ACW, ILGWU, and the W.C., and their later withdrawal because of the participation of the Communists.
He was followed by A J. Muste, representing the Conference of Progressive Labor Action, who reported on behalf of the Arrangements Committee. Muste proposed the election of a presiding committee to be in charge of the congress work. Among those proposed and elected to the Committee were: J.B. Mathews of the socialist party; Roger Baldwin for the Civil Liberties Union; John Werlick, B. Kllisberg, Alex Frazer of the P. M. A.; Wm. Leader of the Hosiery Union of Philadelphia; Chas. Bloom of the Molders Union of St. Louis; Selina Burrell, Women’s Auxiliary of the P.M.A.; J. Farley, George Smirkin of the YPSL; Moore, NAACP; Ralph Chaplin, I.W.W.; Al Renner of the Proletarian Party; Louis Scott, Wm. Patterson, Secretary of the ILD, A.J. Muste; Jack Johnstone, C.A. Hathaway, Robert Minor, I. Amter and R.M. Lovett. Chas. Bloom, H. Newton and George Smirkin were elected secretaries of the Congress.
The chairman of the first session was Alex Frazer. Benjamin Ellisberg reported for the California delegates on the work of the Mooney committee in that section of the country. He was then followed by Robert Minor who made a report on the Mooney case, its history and present status. The report, as a review of the whole case, was done well. It lacked, however, a concrete characterization of the present stage of the struggle and a report of what should be done. The discussion that followed the report also assumed a more or less agitational character without correctness.
 
Cannon Takes the Floor
It was only when comrade Cannon got the floor, that a different note was sounded. In the short period of five minutes allotted to the discussion, he stressed above all the question of policy and program of activity. Presenting the position of the Left Opp., Comrade Cannon declared: The Opposition does not consider the present congress as the culmination of the movement to free Tom Mooney, but rather as the beginning of the struggle, the basis upon which to broaden the entire movement. He proposed to begin a new series of local and district united front conferences mobilizing ever-broader sections of the working class, drawing in new forces into the united front, and preparing for a national and international Mooney Day. All this work, Cannon stated, must lead to the organization of another national congress with a goal of at least 10,000 delegates. “The policy for all this work,” said Cannon, “which shall govern the activity of the leading committee on a national scale and all the local organizations is the policy of the united front of workers’ organizations.” He closed with the declaration that the Left Opposition would present motions on program and policy and along this line to the resolution committee. It was only following the speech of comrade Cannon that efforts were made by other speakers to touch upon the subject of policy and program.
With the first session drawing to a close, Muste in reporting for the presiding committee made the preposterous proposal to conclude the congress on the afternoon of the second day in order to bring the congress to a fitting climax with the Mooney Mass Meeting scheduled for six o’clock in the evening, at the Chicago Stadium. This proposal took the congress by surprise. The congress had no sooner settled down when this proposal for adjournment was made. Herbert Zam, the delegate of the Communist Party (Opposition) rose immediately on the floor to object to the proposal of the presiding committee. He was followed by a representative of the Proletarian party. An obvious confusion existed among all delegates, who found it difficult to understand the nature of this proposal. In speaking of this proposal, comrade Glotzer stated for the Left Opposition, that the most important task of the congress, policy and program was still to be reported upon and discussed, he pointed out that until then the congress had merely reviewed the Mooney case; but it had not even elected a resolutions committee (scheduled for the next day) nor begun the decisive work for which the congress was called Considerations of a financial character or the desire to bring the congress to a fitting climax could never outweigh the importance of the deliberations of the congress itself. Throughout the hall delegates rose in objection to the proposal of the committee. A motion was made to table the proposal until the following day. In observation of the mood of the delegates, the presiding committee accepted this substitute.
 
Election of Resolutions Committee
The second day of the congress opened with Wm. Leader in the chair. Discussion continued on the report of comrade Minor, while awaiting the proposal of the presiding committee for the Resolutions Committee. This committee was the most important of the congress. It had to take up the question of policy and program and report back to the congress floor. The committee was composed of delegates the Proletarian party, A.F. of L. locals, the socialist party, the YPSL, the YCL, the TUUL, the Communist party, other Mooney local conferences, and the Left Opposition (comrade Cannon). The selection of comrade Cannon was more the result of pressure by certain delegations, rather than by the presiding committee in which the party had the majority. The proposal to add Zam to this committee, to represent the Right Opposition was defeated by the overwhelming Party vote. At the conclusion of this point, the resolutions committee went into session and the discussion of Minor’s report continued.
Before the closing of the second day of the congress, it was decided to continue the congress on the third day as originally scheduled. The proposal was made the night before for adjournment, stood out even more ridiculous, on the second day, when it became clear that even after the second day, the congress had not yet concerned itself with the question of policy and program, or with a report of the resolutions committee.
In behalf of the presiding Committee, Bill Gebert proposed to adjourn the congress in time to permit the delegates to attend the May Day demonstrations held by both the socialist party and the May Day United Front Committee (Left wing.) This proposal was unanimously accepted by the congress. All delegates were to be present at the Mooney Mass meeting in the evening.
 
The Third Day of the Congress
The congress reconvened on May 2nd, at the Masonic Auditorium, with Joe Weber, of the TUUL, acting as chairman. The resolutions committee which could not conclude its work remained in session while the congress continued the original discussion on the report of Minor. During this discussion comrade Albert Goldman, the Chicago Attorney for the International Labor Defense took the floor. He made two criticisms of the congress which were by and large correct. Goldman stated that in calling this congress the policy of the Molders Committee should, have been directed to the organization of a joint arrangements committee representative of the socialist party, the A.F. of L., the Communist party, the TUUL, etc. Such a committee should have then called the conference into existence. While this policy was finally adopted, Goldman declared that it was adopted somewhat too late to be of real effectiveness.
His second criticism was on the manner in which the congress was conducted; referring to the abnormally long discussion of a purely agitational character and the failure of the congress to spend the major part of its time on the question of policy and program.
Scott rose to answer Goldman, but his reply did not meet the criticisms made. During the course of his answer Scott made clear to the delegates that he was not a member of the Communist Party nor the International Labor Defense. Among the following speakers were Gebert and Zam. In the course of his speech Gebert again raised the question of the united front from below. In this he only re-echoed the remarks of Amter, who had stressed sharply this same policy before. Zam declared his opposition to linking the general struggle for workers’ rights, or the Scottsboro case, with the fight for the release of Tom Mooney. Speaking in the name of the Communist party (Opposition) he informed the congress that it was their position that the congress and its policy confine itself exclusively with the issue of Tom Mooney, without raising the other questions of workers’ rights.
 
The Reports of the Resolutions Committee
Discussion on the report of Minor closed with the arrival of the resolutions committee, which remained in session during the first part of the last day of the congress. C.A. Hathaway reported for the resolutions committee. On a number of minor resolutions there was agreement, but in discussions of the main resolution different points of view were presented. He said that resolutions presented by the Lovestone-ites and the Left Opposition were tabled. Differences existed on the main resolution over one particular point upon which there will be a minority report by comrade Cannon. The I.W.W. presented separate resolutions favoring a boycott of California products and the calling of a general strike in the event that Mooney is not freed or continues to remain in prison. The resolutions committee while not opposing these resolutions in principle proposed their non-adoption by the congress, because of their inapplicability at the present stage of development of the workers’ movement in this country.
Returning to the resolution, Hathaway declared that a sharp difference existed between the majority of the Resolution which says in effect: that during the existence of the united front, there shall be no attacks by the participating organizations upon each other, so long as each loyally carried out the decisions of the congress. Hathaway attempted to convey the idea that this does not mean to liquidate the independence of the organizations involved, or abolish the freedom of criticism – though in reality it is precisely a weapon which the misleaders of labor are looking for. This was a concession to the leaders of the A.F. of L. and the socialist party to get them into the united front, Hathaway said. It was designed to prevent them from saying that they could not participate in the united front because they refused to be attacked by the Communists. It is to show the workers that everything possible is done to pave the way for the participation of their organizations.
In making the minority report, comrade Cannon called attention to the fact that the resolution of the Opposition was not tabled, but all of its points were incorporated in the main resolution reported on by Hathaway. When this was done it was not necessary to fight for the separate adoption of the proposals of the Left Opposition. “We are interested in the adoption of a correct policy,” comrade Cannon said, “and if you will table all our proposals as you have this one, we shall not object.”
Speaking for the Left Opposition, Cannon declared that aside from one clause, he supported the resolution which was in general correct. The amendment made by Cannon read as follows: “Each organization entering the united front obligates itself to discipline in action but retains its full independence and its right to criticism.” This clause would permit of no misunderstandings by anyone participating in the united front. It is the only correct basis upon which the united front can be organized. To do otherwise is to tie the hands of the revolutionary elements, which could react favorably only to the reformists.
Toward the close of his minority report, comrade Cannon read from the Daily Worker of April 30, the declaration of the Communist International, revising again its position on the united front and calling for the resumption of the tactic of the “united front from below.” As a parting question Cannon asked whether this meant that the Party would now change its position again and revert to its old policy. This change of line by the C.I. caught the Party unawares and in replying to a similar question put by comrade Gerry Allard, Hathaway replied that, this did not mean a revision of the line, but applied only to the May Day demonstrations.
The conference adjourned to move to the People’s Auditorium for the final session of the congress. Discussion followed upon reconvening. Roger Baldwin before leaving the congress made a statement in complete support of the majority of the resolutions committee. A similar declaration was made by Sol Lurks, recently expelled from the YPSL, because of his struggle in support of the Mooney Congress and the united front. Larks is one of the leaders of the Left wing in the YPSL and the socialist party. He supported the position of the majority on the non-aggression clause because in his opinion it would make possible further proposals for united front action to the socialists. Williamson speaking for the Party, made a vicious attack upon Goldman, Zam and Cannon. Coming when it did, the speech mocked the whole effort of the party to force through the non-aggression pact.
 
Glotzer Replies to the Critics of the Minority Report
Comrade Glotzer was given the floor in defense of the minority report. He declared that the main tactic of this congress should be the extension of the united front policy. The correct utilization of the united front tactic would make possible the increase of pressure upon the reformists. Only by such pressure will it be possible to force the leaders of the A.F. of L. and tho socialist party into united front action. To expect this in any other way, for example, by a non-aggression pact, was a mere illusion. Paul Mattick, representative for United Workers Party, spoke again against the non-aggression pact and called for rank and file control of the united front. He declared himself against the resolutions on boycott and united front. He was followed by Hansen, a member of the IWW, representing the Kentucky Miners, who spoke in favor of the resolutions on boycott and general strike.
A motion was introduced to close the discussion. In view of the fact that many speakers had not yet had the opportunity to present their positions on the floor, protests came from all parts of the hall. Zam particularly protested this action. He pointed out that he made an amendment to the resolution; that the amendment had not been presented to tho congress and that no one had had an opportunity to speak for it on the floor. A period of bedlam seized hold of the conference. During the confusion the motion carried and Hathaway proceeded to sum up his report and the discussion. During his summary speech, Zam again demanded to be given the floor to present his amendment and defend his position. At this point, Hathaway made the motion to give Zam five minutes to present his motion and to speak in defense of it. The motion carried.
The essence of the amendment by Zam, was designed to confine the Congress to the one issue of Tom Mooney and to leave the general question of the struggle for workers’ rights out of the main resolution. In continuing his summary Hathaway attempted to cover the struggle of the Left Opposition for correct policy by asserting that the Left Opposition was only interested in presenting its political program at the congress. This remark made little or no impression – it was an attempt to declare the position of the party against the Left Opposition.
 
Voting on the Resolutions
An endeavor was made to vote on the main resolution first thus making it unnecessary to vote on the various amendments proposed. Such a motion was carried. Here, comrade Cannon took tho floor to object to the procedure and proposed voting first of all upon the various amendments and then in the main resolution. In making his statement comrade Cannon declared that the delegation of the Left Opposition in voting for its own amendment (see above) would at the same time vote for the general resolution, excluding that section containing the non-aggression clause. This proposal was carried and the voting proceeded on the different amendments.
The amendment proposed by the Left Opposition received 63 votes. This was the largest minority vote in the congress. It showed too, that next to the party, the Left Opposition was the strongest political factor in the congress. The boycott resolution of the I.W.W. received 27 votes, and their general strike resolution 57 votes. The amendment proposed by Zam got 51 votes. Thus, the overwhelming majority of delegates voted in favor of the general resolution.
The final report of the congress was the election of a permanent committee. The Presiding Committee proposed a committee of 43. The name of the committee was adopted as the: National Mooney Council of Action. Additional nominations were made to this Committee. Among those nominated was Zam. When the motion was made to elect the original 43, comrade Cannon in the name of the Left Opposition proposed voting individually on the additional nominations, because the the Left Opposition was in favor of a representative of the Communist Party (Opposition) since they represented a definite current in the working class movement, had their own press and organization. In addition, it was made clear that neither the party nor the Left Opposition could represent their point of view.
This proposal was defeated and the project of the presiding committee carried by an overwhelming vote. The motion that of the permanent committee, those residing in New York City, shall compose the working committee, and that New York should be the central headquarters also carried. In addition, the presiding committee proposed that the secretary of the committee should be C.A. Hathaway. The last proposal carried without any objections. Among those on the National Mooney Council of Action are: A. Rentier, Proletarian party; George Smirkin, YPSL; J.P. Cannon, Communist League of America (Left Opposition); Van Gilder, socialist party; R.M. Lovett, LID; Selena Burrell, Women’s Auxiliary of the P.M.A.; Pat Ansboury, Progressive Miners of America; L. Scott, Moulders Defense Committee, Chas. Bloom, A.F. of L.; Emil Arnold, A.F. of L.; M. Olay, Anarchist; Robert Minor, C.P.; Wm. Patterson, I.L.D.; C.A. Hathaway, C.P.; A.J. Muste, CPLA; I. Amter, Unemployed Councils; J.B. Mathews, Socialist Party; Joe Weber, TUUL; and Alec Frazer of the Progressive Miners of America.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



I.
The international revolutionary movement is once again approaching a period of clarification and reorganization. This time it occurs as a result of a major defeat of the working class (Germany), proving that an outstanding victory of the proletariat is not the only axis around which such revaluations and reorganizations take place.
Lenin, without descending into mechanics, described the epoch of imperialist capitalism as the era of “wars and revolutions”, all the time pointing out that this stage developed not in one straight line, but embodied all the ebbs and flows inherent in any form of decay. Translated into the terms of revolutionary politics, this designation signified that on a world scale the objective factors necessary as a precondition of the proletarian revolution were present. The analysis did not exclude, but insisted, that the specific conditions of a given country had always to be considered, in order to effect such policies as would lead to the triumph of the proletariat.
 
The Subjective Factor
In such an epoch the primary forces required to bring about the overthrow of capitalism, is the subjective factor, the organized movement of the working class. It is a period in which the main strategic aim of the proletariat (the conquest of power) becomes a reality, the outcome depending on how well the workers movement carries out its tasks. If from the international point of view, the proletarian revolution is on the order of the day, it is of paramount importance for the proletariat to so organize its tactics, that they will lead directly to victory. The subordination of the main strategic aim of the proletariat to the tactical phases of the class struggle would mean the surrender of the revolution and the decline of the workers movement into opportunism and reform. Because the struggle will resolve itself finally on the basis of the strength or weaknesses of the revolutionary party of the working class, it is incumbent upon every revolutionary worker to constantly examine and re-examine his party in order to observe how well it meets the demands of the objective situation and to determine precisely whether of not it furthers the interests of the proletarian revolution. In such a manner errors may be corrected, adjustments made and the party strengthened. If no possibilities exist for strengthening or correcting the organization, then it will prove to be necessary to reorganize the ranks of the workers movement upon a sound basis so that it can proceed to carry through the aim of class conscious and revolutionary workers; the overthrow of capitalism. In such matters, fetishism of an organization will not enhance our aims. Our opinions and policies can only be determined by objective analysis.
 
Downfall of the Second International
The 2nd International ceased to be a revolutionary organization when it subordinated the strategic aim of the workers to the exigencies of the tactical struggle, finally liquidating the former entirely, transforming the organization into the world party of reform. When this transformation took place it would have been the height of folly to expect of the 2nd International the prosecution of the revolutionary struggle for power. It embarked upon a course of saving and patching up the rotting structure of world capitalism, thus creating the need of constructing a new International of the proletarian revolution.
This new international (The Communist International) arising out of conditions created by the Russian revolution and the collapse of Social Democracy, reorganized the workers movement on the basis of Marxism, taking as its main policy, or point of departure, the promotion of the world revolution. The central policy of the Communist international rested upon its conception of present-day Capitalism, entering its final stage. Any other policy would not have conformed to the objective conditions and a continuation of the line pursued by social democracy could have had no other result than a weakening of the proletariat. If the Communist International gained great strength during its early years, it was due only to its revolutionary internationalist policy. It entered into decline precisely at the movement it substituted a nationalist dogma for the international revolution.
When an international of the working class fails to respond to the needs of the objective conditions, when it substitutes the main strategic aim of the revolution with reform measures or purely tactical considerations, or, if it subordinates the interests of the world revolution to the construction of national socialism, that organization, by and large, ceases to exist as the international of the proletarian revolution.
International Social Democracy earned its spurs during the war. It surrendered to imperialism, supported the capitalist war, opposed the October insurrection, betrayed the German revolution, murdered Liebknecht and Luxemburg, entered coalition capitalist governments. In a word it embarked upon a course of saving world capitalism. Obviously, among revolutionaries, there can be no dispute over the question of whether or not, the 2nd International represents the interests of the world proletariat.
Since the war, much has been written on this topic, and there is no need to belabor the point. It is interesting however, to observe its actions in Germany during the rise of Fascism and following Hitler’s victory because they bear out further the above contentions. Then too, it will permit of judging their actions alongside of the actions of the Stalinists and in such a manner draw the necessary lessons from this highly important event.
(Continued in the next issue)
 



(Continued from last issue)
II.
The German social democracy, not to be distinguished from its International, did not pursue a revolutionary class policy, but in a period of approaching civil war continued to travel the road of reform. It feared most of all, the possibilities of a proletarian revolution in Germany and the bureaucracy of the G.S.P. did everything in its power to prevent such an occurrence. Taking advantage of the bankruptcy of Stalinism upon all important questions confronting the German workers, the officialdom of the G.S.P. toyed with the idea of the united front, hoping at all times that it would never really be consummated, because the development of the united front struggle against Fascism, would indisputably have pushed to the foreground the struggle for power by the German working class.
The main policy adopted by it during the whole situation was the support of the “lesser evil” as against Hitler. Under the policy of “toleration” of the “democratic elements” in Germany, it proceeded to support the Junker Hindenburg as the bulwark of democracy, against Fascism. Its main struggles against Fascism were purely parliamentary, and its fire was directed against the Communists.
Now that Hitler has taken power, how do these people look upon events in Germany? What have they learned over a period of years in which they pursued the policy of reform, of safeguarding bourgeois democracy, of prolonging the life of capitalism? At the international conference of the 2nd International, held in Paris last month, the German situation was chiefly discussed from the point of view of its effects upon the world socialist movement. The main points of view are presented below.
The opening speech by Friedrich Adler, Secretary of the International, reads as follows:
“The German Social Democracy was too busy with its immediate problems and failed to formulate a general policy. THIS WAS THEIR MISTAKE, BUT THE REAL TROUBLE WAS THAT THE SOCIALIST MOVEMENT WAS FACED BY THIS BITTER HOSTILITY OF ORGANIZED COMMUNISM, and so Social Democracy was crushed ...” (emphasis mine – A.G.)
And from Otto Wels, the leader of the German Party, under whose direction the traitorous policies of that organization was initiated: “We made various mistakes but our critics mostly forget the circumstances and facts of the situation in which we worked. Why did we not declare a full Socialist revolution in 1918?” And here Wels goes on to attack the Allied countries and to say: “If they had been humane to our TENDER REPUBLIC EVERYTHING WOULD HAVE BEEN DIFFERENT.” (emphasis mine – A.G.) And again: “We were driven by terrible circumstances ... Only people who do not understand our terrible position can criticize us because we thought internationally (!). We estranged the middle class in the crisis and Hitler won them with the aid of the Communists, who fought us furiously to the very end.”
 
The French Socialist Party
The leader of the French Socialist Party, Leon Blum, eloquently declared : “Real political democracy is impossible without economic democracy, bourgeois democracy being but a stepping stone. The Bolsheviki think it is necessary only to gain power and to hold it, but we feel that we want real socialism and liberty.”
These men who sank in the swamp of chauvinism, who, whenever it was in their power, throttled movements of revolt and rose to save this social order, have summarized the colossal German defeat. You have the results: (1) The Allies were unfriendly to the “tender republic”, (2) The Communists were hostile to social democracy. The conclusions: (1) Greater defense of “democratic” capitalism. (2) Reaffirmation of the policies of the German social democracy.
Here you witness no criticism of the “general line”, no questioning of the theoretical outlook of social democracy, no criticism of the tactics of the leadership. It was circumstances and the Communists that were resposnible for the defeat. Along with the admission of a defeat, “there are signs that the Hitler regime cannot last much longer. The German socialists and workers will fight bravely and their victory is certain”. (Wels) Thus inflated optimism and the promise of struggle in the future.
It is quite true that little else could be expected from this gathering. Every revolutionary worker knew that there could be no other evaluation of the German events by these people. They prepared the ground for all that has taken place. We have treated them briefly, because much has already been said of them and of their role in the labor movement. But it is important to observe their actions during and after great events in order that we may learn from such occurrences, and make comparisons. Here nothing has changed since the first betrayal of 1914. We turn now to the Communist International and its relation to the German events.
 
III.
The Comintern
Matters stand in no different light with regards to the Comintern. The policy pursued by the Stalinist bureaucracy in Germany was essentially in an active political sense no different than the policy of social democracy. The likeness lay in that neither programs led in the direction of a possible victory of the proletariat. Quite the contrary, the line pursued by both organizations spelled inevitable defeat for the German workers. And here, the question of consciousness or unconsciousness has no real meaning. Objectively, the line of march of social democracy and Stalinism led to the victory of Fascism.
If Social democracy held to the theory of the “lesser evil”, the Stalinists advanced the position of “national and social emancipation of the German people”. When Wels and company came out in support of Hindenburg, Thaelmann and Neumann, drove the Communist party into Hitler’s referendum, at the same time substituting the historic slogan of the proletarian revolution with the petty-bourgeois and reactionary slogan of the “people’s revolution”. Advancing the theory of Social Fascism, Stalinism refused and prevented the formation of an effective united front struggle against Hitler. On this question, it play directly into the hands of the social democratic bureaucracy. In the course of the past three years, it successively denied the growth of Fascism, or, proclaimed that a victory of reaction would lead to the immediate triumph of the proletarian revolution. Instead of preparing the extra legal struggle, the party of the revolution carried on a purely parliamentary battle against the Brown Shirts, differing in no way from the methods of struggle of the social democracy. Its vacillating and speculative approach to the united front when Hitler was made Chancellor, bound the proletariat hand and foot.
 
Fascism and Social Democracy
Now, the working class is taught to believe that it has to go through the brutal stage of Fascism before it can experience the victory of the proletarian revolution. The decimated ranks of the Communist International is given to understand and made to believe too, that the height of revolutionary strategy consisted in maintaining the disunity of the German workers, and conversely, that the united front was inimical to the interests of the revolution. On the day that Hitler was made Chancellor, the G.C.P. proclaimed the main danger to be the social democracy. When the Fascists were marching into power, the Stalinists continued to assert that the main struggle must be directed against the G.S.D.P. All of these outrages were committed in the name of Marx and Lenin. And at each new stage of the struggle, when comrade Trotsky in his numerous pamphlets and articles, and the I.L.O. in its declarations, were pointing the revolutionary way out of the difficult German situation, new repressions, new slanders, new characterizations were invented by these organizers of defeats.
Accepting Fascist functionaries into its ranks, canonizing fascist army officers who excelled in the anti-semitic campaign taking place in Germany, publishing their pamphlets and printing their articles because they announced their adherence to the Party when it issued its nationalist slogans, only hastened the collapse of the German Party.
Revolutionists never expected the prosecution of a revolutionary course by social democracy. But they did expect that the tactics of the Communists would have severed the millions of social democratic workers from the tail of reformism and win them to the side of the revolution. This was possible only through one tactic: the united front. From the moment that the G.C.P. refused to utilize this supreme tactic of unifying the proletariat, all thought of winning the social democratic worker, was pure illusion. Experience is the only test for policy. What transpired in Germany stands out as the greatest indictment of the policies pursued by social democracy and Stalinism.
 
Evaluating the German Events
How does the Comintern evaluate the German events? From a disgraceful silence of almost three years, it finally recorded itself in a declaration that appeared in the world Stalinist press. The contents of the declaration can be summarized as follows: The victory of Fascism is not a defeat of the German workers. The German revolution has not only not been defeated, but is well-nigh on the upgrade and will break forth very soon. The German Communist Party is stronger and more active today than prior to the victory of Hitler. The policies of the G.C.P., under the leadership of Thaelmann (that means the policies of the Comintern) were absolutely correct. There were no errors committed. The social democracy is to blame for the victory of Fascism. The Party could not make the revolution because it did not have the support of the workers in Germany (!). Then the statement concludes by garbling and distorting a quotation from Lenin on what constitutes a revolutionary situation, in order to prove that such a condition was absent in Germany prior to March 5, 1933.
What essentially is different here from the “explanations’” made by the social democracy? Nothing of genuine importance. Social democracy blames the Stalinists, the Stalinists blame social democracy. The social democrats feared the united front because it would inexorably have led to the proletarian revolution. The Stalinists played into their hands by preventing the execution of this tactic. The social democracy carried on a pure parliamentary struggle against Fascism, the C.P.G. did likewise, warning the Brown Shirts, following their march before the Liebknecht House, to beware the results of the ejections. Social democracy declares that Hitler is on the verge of collapse and that his overthrow is imminent; the Stalinists declare that the revolution is today on the order of the day. Both declare their policies to have been entirely correct and signify their intention to continue along the same lines. The revolutionary worker can begin to draw his own conclusions on the basis of these facts.
 
IV.
With the defeat of the German party, the backbone of the Comintern was broken. Aside from the German party, the largest and strongest party in the International in the capitalist world, the C.I. is composed of small ineffectual organizations that play either small or no roles at all in the countries where they exist. With the collapse of the German party, the most powerful defense instrument for the Soviet Union has been destroyed. Yet, apparently undaunted, the Stalinist leadership organizes distinct defense organizations of musicians, actors, pacifists, soldiers, scientists and others of the same stripe who are and represent nobody in a class sense, as the defenders of the Soviet Union. The anomaly consists in this: that the revolutionary organizations of the proletariat, the only real defenders of the October Revolution, are hampered and made sterile, and are thus unable to build truly revolutionary organizations for the struggle for power (which in the last analysis is the decisive defense of the Soviet Union), while neo-sympathizers of the Soviet Union (those who are rallying to it since the construction of the isolated, independent and nationalist socialist society) are being made the defenders of the Soviet Union and apostles of anti-war work. The latter, as life has shown time and again, will be the first ones to fall and stumble over one another in their hurry to reach their homes, when the first serious conflicts arise, while the revolutionary has been strangled.
 
Capitulation to Fascism
Before the Nazis gained their victory, the party and the International always boasted about what would happen AFTER Fascism took power. Thus, Remmele in the Reichstag: “If they (the Nazis) once come into power, the united front of the proletariat will be established and sweep everything away ... They will come to grief more speedily than any other government.” (Rote Fahne, October 16, 1931) We do not doubt that eventually and finally the proletariat will come to victory in Germany as elsewhere. What the events in Germany prove is what has always been understood by Marxists: there is no hopeless situation for capitalism, just as there are no guarantees for the proletariat. The decisive element in such situations is the party of the working class. Post-war events have shown that in most cases it was precisely this subjective factor that was lacking, in order to bring about victory for the workers. In Germany this failure of the subjective factor has brought about tragic consequences for the international movement. Today, following this defeat, the German Party offers conditions by which to overcome Fascism. These conditions were borrowed almost totally from the proposals made by the Left Opposition of Germany, in December 1931. At the present moment these proposals have no concrete importance. To think that you can today organize a united front of the working class in Germany is to learn nothing from events. Or, to believe that it is now possible to establish committees of action or armed defense corps, to carry on the fight against the Fascist butchers, is to run about two years behind events.
 
The Recognition of the German Working Class
What is necessary in Germany today, is clarity. The workers must be taught to understand what took place and why it tok place. The German working class will reconstitute itself in a final struggle against Fascism. But one thing certain, this reorganization of the ranks of the German workers will not take place upon the basis of the social democracy of Stalinism. The lessons of the social-democratic betrayal, the confusion and error of the Stalinists, which objectively brought about the same results as did the policy of Social Democracy, have left deep scars upon the proletariat. The “lesser-evil” theory, the policy of toleration, Social Fascism, united front from below. People’s Revolution, bureaucratic centrism and national socialism are dead in Germany, and cannot play any role in the reconstruction of the German revolutionary movement. The German working class will reconstitute itself on the basis of the proletarian revolution, upon the foundation of Internationalism, above all.
The international proletariat is marching toward a new period of clarification. Betrayal by social democracy for twenty years, ten years of defeat under the bankrupt policies of Stalinism are forcing definite changes in the ranks of the world proletariat. Clarification as to these defeats of the working class in the “era” of wars and revolutions is indispensable. The needs of the situation demand a re-examination of our own ranks. In this period of clarification, the world proletariat will march forward on the basis of a revolution of events and a reorganization of the forces upon an international revolutionary foundation. That foundation is Marxism, mutilated today by Reformist Social Democracy and the National Socialist doctrines of Stalinism.
 



Chicago – The mass meeting on the German situation held by the Chicago branch of the Communist League, proved to be a great success. Over two hundred workers gathered at Redifer Hall on March 20, to hear the position of the Left Opposition on the united front and the turn of the Communist International, presented by comrade Albert Glotzer.
The main feature of the meeting was the discussion that followed Glotzer’s speech. An invitation was extended to any party representative in the hall to take the floor and present the position of the party. One active party member, Hans Pfeifer was given twenty minutes in which to present the position of the party and to defend its line. His remarks only further strengthened the position ot the I.L.O. But he made a plea for the unity of the Communist forces, and declared that he would investigate the charges of violence against members of the Left Opposition and protest such methods of solving disputes between Communists. As an active member of the Unemployed Councils he extended a public invitation to the Opposition to participate in the State Hunger March; an invitation that was at once accepted by the Chicago organization.
In the course of the discussion a resolution on the German situation was presented by a member of the Chicago Left Opposition, who proposed its adoption and suggested further that the resolution be sent to the German consulate and the Daily Worker and Militant for publication. This proposal was carried unanimously with an amendment that a committee elected by the mass meeting go over the resolution before sending it out. As a reflection of the sentiment of the meeting a committee was elected representing the Communist party, the Left Opposition and the Spartacus Youth Club. The party was represented by comrades Hans Pfeifer (an aldermanic candidate who drew 1,100 votes in his ward) and Norval Allen, a Negro comrade. They met together with Joe Giganti and Al Glotzer of the Left Opposition, and Nathan Gould of the Spartacus Youth Club.
The resolution signed by the committee elected by the mass meeting represents further evidence of breaking down the walls between the party members and the Left Opposition. It signifies that the campaign on Germany has not been in vain; that it has really penetrated the ranks of the class-conscious workers. The bankruptcy of the line of Stalinism becomes more and more evident in the course of the active life of the movement.
* * *
Resolution Adopted
Approximately 200 workers, representing various revolutionary tendencies, gathered in mass meeting to discuss the German situation, at Redifer Hall, 30 North Wells Street, in Chicago, on Sunday, March 26th, 1933, under the auspices of the Communist League of America (Opposition), record their strenuous protest against the Fascist terror reigning in Germany today against the proletariat of that country and its revolutionary leadership, the Communist party and the Young Communist League, also against the terror inaugurated against the class conscious working masses in the social democratic party and the trade unions that are struggling against Fascism
The German bourgeoisie through its henchmen, Hitler and the National Socialists have been persistently attacking the German proletariat.
Today, aside from the hundreds and thousands whose “heads have rolled in the sand” following the attacks of the Fascist forces, thousands of leaders and members of the Communist party are rotting in the Fascist dungeons and undergoing tortures paralleled only by that of the mediaeval period.
Comrades Thaelmann, Torgler, Pieck and Remmele, the leaders of the Communist Party of Germany are in prison. Direct information as to their condition is not available. But that they are victims of the “mustard-rub” and the “castor-oil” has already leaked out.
In this regard, we, assembled in mass meeting today, protest and demand the immediate cessation of the murder and torture of the German working class and its leaders, by the Fascists.

We demand the immediate release of comrade Thaelmann and other leaders of the German Communist movement.
 
We demand the release of all victims of Fascism notwithstanding their political tendencies.
 
Forward to the revolutionary united front of the working class organizations against Fascism!
 
For the defense of the German working class against Fascist attacks!
 
For the proletarian revolution in Germany.

Submitted by the Communist League of America (Opposition)



 


Signed: The Committee elected by the meeting
HANS PFEIFER, member of the Communist Party of America
NATHAN GOULD, member of the Spartacus Youth Club of Chicago
JOE GIGANTI, member of the Communist League of America (Left Opposition)
ORVAL ALLEN, member of the Communist Party of America
ALBERT GLOTZER, member of the Communist League of America (Left Opposition)



 



The role of social reformism, how it arises and grows, has been sufficiently established by the Marxists since the post-war period. It grows simultaneously with the advance of the revolutionary movement. Its aim is to act as a brake upon rising tide of struggle. The more acute the class struggle the more active do the reformists become. They pretend at a struggle, only to retreat, cripple and destroy such conflicts at their decisive moments. In the “democratic era” of capitalism they flourish like the proverbial mushrooms after a rain. When capitalism resorts to an open and naked dictatorship (Fascism) as in Germany they are thrust aside as a hindrance to the process of completely decapitating the proletariat.
Quite contrary to the “third period” theorists of Stalinism, social reformism in the United States is not dead, nor is it in the process of extinction. The “span of life” of reformism in this country is not the point under discussion at present. The decisive question is whether or not reformism has the possibilities of activity and growth under the given, conditions and state of class struggle in the United States. And to this we must answer in the affirmative. To decry the “Fascist Hoover Government” and “Fascist Commissions” as the Daily Worker does in its most delirious moments, results only in confusion and error. In doing that it signifies that the path of reformism has already been beaten and is covered with the footsteps of American Fascism.
Four years of crisis have torn deep roles in American capitalism. They have posed weaknesses that appeared absent during the “prosperity” years. The impact of the crisis is demonstrating to American imperialism more clearly than ever, that it must direct and base its economy on a world scale. We will witness a greater participation of the United States in world affairs on the political field, and an intensified activity in the sphere of international economy. In preparing for this stage, American capitalism must first of all settle accounts at home. It proceeds to lower the standard of living of the American working class nationally. Since the crisis a series of uninterrupted wage-cuts has taken place. This process is being completed. And it is being completed thus far, without apparent resistance by the working masses.
Whatever the level of recovery may be it will be carried through by smashing the living standards of the masses. That is inherent in the situation. American capitalism has not yet been seriously burdened with the problems of relief and social insurance. With brutal callousness it has resisted every demand for these. To expect that these demands would have been granted without an intensive struggle on the part of the workers is a serious error. It is precisely because on a national scale such struggles were absent and serious resistance was not recorded, that the ruling class in this country was able to carry through its drive against the masses to lower their living standards and at the same time refuse aid to the unemployed without serious difficulties.
The weakness of the subjective factor: the state of consciousness of the American workers, are flowing from this the absence of a mass Communist party with correct policies, and a militant labor movement, is in the main the reason for the lack of great class battles. Whatever struggles have taken place were at best sporadic, intensive though some of them may have been. The gains however were small and localized and thus their scope is entirely too narrow. The bulk of the struggle was carried on almost primarily through the direct initiative and activity of the Communists.
 
Growing Mood of Struggle
The crisis will prove to be a great impulsion to the class conscious development of the American workers. This is evidenced by a growing mood of struggle seen in great demonstrations of unemployed, the auto strikes, the movement of the Illinois miner’s and the recent organization of the “Progressive Trade Union Educational Committee” at Gillespie. In all of these events the Communists have played an active and leading role. This role will increase with the development of the struggle. It is important to remember this.
With these remarks let us examine the call for a “Continental Congress of workers and farmers for Economic Reconstruction” to be held in Washington on May 6 and 7. The leading elements in framing the call and the conference are the socialists and their allies in the American Federation of Labor. Page one of the call is adorned with a cartoon showing how labor is driving the moneybags out of the Capitol. This cartoon is supposed to describe the statement of William Green, arch-reactionary head of the A.F. of L., also appearing on page one, as an introduction to the call itself.
Green declares:
“For we shall soon be on the march ... We shall FIGHT with every legitimate weapon at our command ... We have come to what we are determined shall be the END OF SUFFERING ... We prefer the council table, but we do not shun the BATTLEFIELD ... I am ready to LEAD the hosts of labor into a BATTLE ... The die is cast for THE BATTLE out of which labor expects a new America!” (Emphasis mine – G.)
What strange words, coming from the reactionary leader of the organized labor movement who has done everything in his power to throttle the slightest note of militancy in its ranks. The apostle of class collaboration will lead the hosts of labor into a battle, a battle for a new America!
This is the introduction to the call addressed to the workers and farmers of the United States, to convene and “draw up a program to right the grievous wrongs we have suffered and set up a national council of the working people in the city, state and. nation to ensure its realization”. And to this congress are invited
“(a) Progressive organization of farmers; (b) Organization of Labor; (c) Cooperative Societies; (d) The Socialist and Farmer-Labor Parties, single taxers, and other liberal political groups; (e) Labor fraternal bodies and unemployed leagues WHOSE PURPOSES ARE IN HARMONY WITH THE OBJECTS OF “THIS CONFERENCE.”
The call further declares:
“Through vigilance, the strength of a just cause, and the pressure of our democratic mass strength we shall ENDEAVOR to win for all men, women and children of this Nation a TRUE FREEDOM. – FREEDOM FROM POVERTY, HUNGER AND ECONOMIC SECURITY”. (Emphasis mine – G.)
The mere statement of Green, veneered with a dash of militancy, is an indication, above all, of a fear of a developing movement of the American proletariat for militant struggle. This fear is accentuated by the thought that this developing movement may form under the leadership of the Communists who have until now been the main factor in those class struggles already taking place. It is axiomatic that when a Green wishes to do battle in the interests of the proletariat the real purpose in such militancy is to check the movement of the workers, to choke it before it begins, or if unsuccessful in that, to canalize it into the stream of reformism.
 
Aim of Conference
In that respect at least there are no differences between Green and his socialist comrades who signed the call and have taken the initiative in bringing about the conference. They are going to bring about a true freedom, a freedom from poverty, hunger and economic security. Under what kind of program will this political, economic and social change take place? Under the program adopted at this congress that will be attended by the widest variety of elements. Is this a merely another Utopian plan? No, its main aim is to head off and destroy at once the growth of the revolutionary movement. To do this it is not enough to organize a united front movement in the struggle for the demands of the suffering unemployed. These people must rely upon something else; a substitute offering for social reorganization that will sound “reasonable and capable of achievement” and yet be a far cry from the revolutionary program of the Communists.
Isn’t this clear in the nature of the call? To secure this aim all organizations are invited except the Communists and revolutionary workers. Even the single taxers (!) are invited. But the Communist party, the T.U.U.L. and the Unemployed Councils, the revolutionary wing of the proletariat are not invited. The intention is to build a movement that will go into “battle” for a “true freedom”. What kind of a battle and what kind of true freedom will this be when the heart of the proletariat is to be excluded from participation? The answer is: there will be no battle nor a true freedom if the leaders of this movement carry through their purpose of excluding the revolutionists from the conference. The real aim is the building of a reformist movement that will attempt to check the rising class conscious American proletariat.
That the socialists, who consistently profess their “adherence” to Marxism and socialism, take the lead in this movement only testifies to their theoretical and political degeneration. It is in the name of Marxism that they are creating this movement. It is in the name of socialism that they are attempting to bring about a true freedom in joint “struggle” with the reactionary labor leaders, liberal political groups, single taxers, etc.
The Communist, revolutionary and militant workers must break through the closed-door policy of the congress. The congress without doubt, will be attended by many workers’ organizations of all shades of opinions and aims. While exposing the program of disunity and reformism, the Left wing must counter with the demand for a genuine united front. It must fight against the exclusion of any section of the working class. It will have to present a counter-program of action, free from the confusing reformism designed to throttle the growing class consciousness of the American workers. Such a tactic, intelligently and correctly carried out, will win the support of the workers assembled in the congress. It may prevent the emergence of an organization whose main purpose will be that of fighting the Communists, and turn it into an organization of militant class struggle whose purpose will be to fight for the interests of the working masses.
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 



The Student Congress held in Mandel Hall, University of Chicago, on December 26th and 27th, gave further testimony to the political revision invoked upon the Communist movement by Stalinism. The congress signified that the struggle against imperialist war and militarism was the task not of the Communists and revolutionary workers, but of the students. The progenitor of this gathering was the Amsterdam Congress held in Brussels in the summer of 1932. For that occasion, the International Left Opposition presented an extremely sharp criticism of the present regime in the Communist International, because it turned the struggle against war over to an arbitrarily appointed group of pacifists, liberals, poets, musicians, artists, actors and what not, removing this decisive activity from the hands of the Communist International, and its sections.
Over the question of the war the working class movements during the war-years split. The culmination of years of political and theoretical struggle in the 2nd International came at the outbreak of the war when the leading party in the 2nd International, the German Social Democratic Party, voted for war credits. That action was a signal for the other Socialist Parties to follow suit. With each section of the Socialist International supporting its own fatherland, the doom of Social Democracy as the leader of the revolutionary proletariat was sealed. Out of the background of this collapse, rose the international Left wing which was later to form the Communist International. The attitude toward the war in particular, and militarism in general, was the burning question in those trying days, and upon which the attitude, the political fate of the movement depended.
Upon the experiences of the world war, the Communist International in its early years set for itself the task of clarifying the great confusion of that and made clear to the revolutionary movement that the struggle against war is one of the chief tasks of the Communists. It must at all times carry out a systematic agitation and propaganda against war. The ranks of the army must be penetrated by the Communists. In the event of war the aim of the Communists must be set upon transforming the imperialist war into a civil war. Upon concrete issues the Communists must initiate united front movements of the working class and its organizations against war and militarism. But above all do not entrust the struggle against war, to pacifists, to liberals, to the socialists, the petty-bourgeoisie or other such groupings. Unless the Communists direct the struggle against war, that struggle will in the end result in betrayal. Wasn’t that the lesson of experience? Certainly! International pacifism, international social-democracy, international liberalism, betrayed the masses and came to the support of the imperialist conflicts. That is why it is all-important that in organizing united front movements against war, political policy must be absolutely correct. It is impossible to unite on the basis of an “agreement” on program with other political groupings. The basis for united front action is the concrete situation— but the Communists at no time surrender their political aims, modify them or alter them in the interests of forming united front action. That is why the Fourth Congress of the Young Communist International found it necessary to declare:
“The Young Communist International and the Young Communist Leagues, in close connection with the Party and paralleled with the struggle against bourgeois militarism and the danger of new imperialist wars must carry on a SPECIAL AGITATION, PROPAGANDA AND EDUCATION FOR THE INEVITABILITY OF THE CIVIL WAR, THE NECESSITY FOR MILITARY PREPARATION AND THE ARMING OF THE PROLETARIAT AND THE RIGHT TO DEFEND THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION BY FORCE OF ARMS, THAT IS TO SAY THE CREATION OF THE ARMED PROLETARIAN POWER, THE RED ARMY.”
Not any artificially treated organizations have the task of carrying on the general struggle against war, not the pacifists, or the liberals, but the Communists. Isn’t that clear? The Communists do not conceive of war as an abstract issue but understand it as a product of the economic order of capitalism. The elimination of war and militarism will come about with the abolition of capitalism. Thus the struggle against war as an integral part of capitalism must be unified with the general social system and its replacement with Communism.
The Amsterdam Congress marked a departure from Communist principles. The Communist International, instead of organizing and leading the struggle against war, turned this task over to Barbusse, Rolland, Patel and others. Officially the Communist International was represented at the Congress. But the actual organization, of the Congress, its political program, its direction, was in the hands of an arbitrarily selected group who in reality represented nobody. Is it any wonder that the ripples created by Amsterdam have now settled to a dead calm? Confusion marked the program of that Congress. Genuine issues making necessary the existence of such a congress were not fully blossomed. The Congress in Amsterdam only succeeded in creating confusion on the question of the struggle against War. The Communists hid behind the veil of the congress.
How does the further confusion of Amsterdam take place? It took place in the form of the organization of the American Committee against War, another arbitrarily selected committee of elements akin to those who organized the Amsterdam Congress. And just as the Amsterdam Congress not only formally but actually replaces the C.I. and YCI, as the organization to lead the struggle against war and militarism, so the American Committee against War, accomplishes the same end nationally. It was also, on the basis of a cable from the Amsterdam Congress, that the National Students League initiated the movement for the Student Congress Against War. Building upon the experience of Amsterdam and the American Committee Against War, the NSL arbitrarily organized a National Committee for the Student Congress Against War composed of a variety of elements representing numerous political views ranging from pacifism to Communism, but actually representing no organizations or members. It was this committee that organized and directed the congress. But behind this committee, as behind Amsterdam and the American Committee, stood the Communist party and the Young Communist League. Official Communism hid once more behind the cloak of a “National Committee”. And so we witnessed again the spectacle of the Communists turning over the struggle against war to semi-Communists, pacifists, liberals, and anti-Communists. But what is outstanding in relation to this affair, is that for the first time since the organization of the C.I. and YCL, we are made to understand that the struggle against war and militarism is to be carried out this by the students, divorced from the working class and the class struggle.
Paying lip-service to the contrary, means nothing. The fact is that the first organized attempt to build an anti-war movement was turned over to the students. It is necessary to analysis this further. But before that, one other observation is necessary Stalinism, which rejects the united front tactic as originated at the third and fourth congresses of the Comintern, and so much insisted upon by the Left Opposition, on the basis that they could not “unite with leaders”, ‘’but only from below”, betrays itself on the question of war. Here of all places, the “united front from below” is completely forgotten and what does take place is a united front purely from the top, with individual and isolated leaders of various movements, without contact or control by the workers. It is but another instant of Stalinist zig-zags.
The advanced student in capitalist countries represents socially and ideologically the ruling class. The percentage of proletarian students is extremely small. Students do not play an independent role in the class struggle and for the most part they support capitalism and become its intellectual leaders. As a mass the students are reactionary. Only small sections of the students can be won to Communism or to the support of the proletariat. But under no circumstances can the students independently engage in struggle let alone lead any struggle against capitalism. That is the view that dominated the Young Communist International, at its inception. (At a future date the writer will present for discussion an article on the role of the student and National Student League.) It is the task of the Communists to win support of the small minority of proletarian students and draw them into the struggle. That activity belongs to the Young Communist League. But what happened is that the student movement initiated the anti-war movement, gave it its leadership and only succeeded in realizing what Amsterdam has: confusion.
If our analysis of the student is correct (that analysis coincides with the resolution of the Young Communist International adopted at its 2nd congress) then it was utterly false to transfer the anti-war work into the hands of the students. Actually in relation to the youth, this task is one of the chief activities of the Young Communist League, which embodies in itself the glorious traditions of the world youth movement during the war days. But here again, following the logic of Amsterdam, the YCL, which should have initiated the movement was nowhere to be seen. It was not even represented at the congress. It was afraid to taint the congress with Communism. “Keep it pure” was the slogan, because the aim is to win the pacifists and liberals! That is how the pre-congress period looked. The students were organizing the movement against war and militarism!
Let us examine briefly the pre-congress period. First of all, a burning concrete issue was absent. Therefore the congress took on the character of a united trout (among students!) for the drawing up of a program in the struggle against war. When it is understood that the whole affair was initiated by the Communists, the criminal nature of the understanding becomes clear. The working youth was not invited to the congress thereby cutting off all relations between the students and the workers. That was criminal act number two. In an effort to win the pacifists and liberals the call for the congress was addressed in the vaguest terms. What is more the congress call was false. It raised the cry for a struggle against war without specifying what kind of war. In popularizing the congress, the Soviet Union and its defense was not even mentioned. So close a sympathizer to the Communist movement as Carl Haessler, in speaking for the congress at one of the colleges in Chicago, did not mention the Soviet Union and its defense. When confronted with objections by members of the Spartacus Youth Club, he replied that if he were to do that it would drive the non-Communists away from the congress. Such and more marked all the activities of the NSL. The Young Communist League remained ignominiously silent during this whole period.
It was on of the above mentioned situation that the Spartacus Youth Club in Chicago issued two statements, one addressed to the National Students League and the other to the YCL, outlining our criticisms of the congress preparative and proposing the necessary changes. These statements were well received by the rank and file. The leadership, however, attempted to edge out from under the criticism with charges of “Leftism” and “sectarian”. The proposal to invite working class youth organizations to the congress, made by a member of the Spartacus Youth Club at a meeting of the high school division of the NSL, was defeated by the vote of members of the YSL. It was to be a pure student gathering and the organizers made sure in advance that it would be tainted by delegates representing workers organizations.
The nature of the congress becomes clear. Its composition was woeful. There gathered some five or six hundred students. A majority represented the NSL, some socialists and pacifists, and a great number individual students. The agenda of the Congress was an unserious one. For a Congress that was to take up the question of how the students should struggle against war, to work up a. program and resolutions, one day was allotted to speeches by Communists, pacifists, and socialists. The various speeches did not help to clarify those gathered. At best confusion became more confounded. On the evening of the first day, study classes were held on various questions relating to war and militarism, directed by Communists, pacifists and socialists. And mind you, this was a congress. On the second day the practical questions of how to struggle against war, the resolutions, the election of the executive was to take place. Quite understandably, the proceedings the second day were rushed through with such speed that it was impossible for the delegates to actually assimilate its deliberations.
On the opening day of the congress the Spartacus Youth Club distributed a statement expressing the views of the Opposition youth on the congress and making concrete proposals to it. In addition to this statement the declaration of the International Left Opposition to the Amsterdam Congress was distributed. The Opposition pointed out in the statement the false nature of the congress, its failure to unite with the working youth, confusion in program, the need to adopt a revolutionary position in the struggle against war, the error in attempting to organize a permanent anti-war organizations and called upon the Young Communist League to issue an invitation for a broad united front conference of working class organizations to struggle on concrete issues against war.
(To be continued)
 



Chicago. – The famous Kincaid battle between Peabody’s company thugs, scab miners, all armed for battle and. the pickets of the Progressive Miners Union has been shifted to the court struggle for the moment. The result of this fight in which fifty pickets were attacked by two hundred thugs and scabs, has been the indictment of 54 members of the PMA and the Women’s Auxiliary charged with law violations of various kinds.
Twenty-two of the indicted miners are under charges of murder or double murder.
The first trial scheduled for Mar. 13, has been continued to March 25. It becomes increasingly clear that the Peabody Coal Company in alliance with the UMWA and the state forces are intent upon gaining convictions in this case. For this reason a mere court struggle would be playing into the hands of the forces of reaction. In the interest of the indicted miners and the PMA it is of paramount importance to prevent this struggle from being sealed within the four walls of a capitalist court that is bound up hand and foot with the Peabody Coal Company, the Lewis machine and similar interests. What additional examples are needed to prove this, than the refusal of the Sheriff in Christian County to accept the warrant sworn out for the arrest of one of the thugs who shot and killed the wife of the striking miner, Cumerlatto? It is also significant that in the arrests following the fight at Kincaid only members of the PMA and the Women’s Auxiliary were rounded up. So, it becomes obvious, that this affair is another attempt to railroad a group of militant workers engaged in struggle.
That briefly is the background to the meeting called by the Civil Liberties Union of Chicago on March 14, and participated in by some of the leading organizations in the city. The aim of this meeting to build a broad united front defense movement in the interests of the Taylorville miners. Present on that night were representatives of the Chicago Workers Committee on Unemployment, the International Labor Defense, the League for Industrial Democracy, the Socialist Party, the Chicago branch of the Communist League of America (Opposition) represented by Joe Giganti and Albert Glotzer, and the Chicago Civil Liberties Union. Although not presented in person, the General Defense Committee, signified its intention to participate in the provisional committee that would be composed of the above-mentioned organizations.
The meeting opened with reports on the case by Tom MacKenna of the Civil Liberties Union and Glotzer of the Communist League. An interesting discussion followed, where agreement was reached upon the calling of another meeting of the provisional committee which would plan the enlarged conference on as broad a basis as possible. The discussion centered around the character of the united front primarily. It is of particular importance to the members of the Left Opposition to know the position of the International Labor Defense which was represented by Andy Newhoff. When asked what the position of the ILD was in relation to the united front he said in effect: The ILD is prepared to participate in any united front effecting the interests of the workers. We are prepared to unite with anybody, no matter who they are, on any minimum basis, except of course, that we shall have the right to our independence. On such a basis, we are prepared to participate in this movement. That has always been our position.
This has not always been the position of the ILD as is known to everyone. Quite the contrary, it is a decided departure from the previously known position of the ILD and as such marks a positive step forward. How far the ILD will go in arriving at a correct position on the vital question of the united front remains yet to be seen, and this conference will be a test for the organization. But if it is really prepared to follow a correct position, it will be a decisive force in this movement. If not, if it will continue its previously disastrous line, it will only continue to lose prestige in the eyes of the working class.
The real work of the conference still lies ahead. There are excellent possibilities for the creation of a mass movement that will struggle in the interests of the indicted miners who run the danger of being railroaded to jail or to the electric chair by the allied interests of reaction. The working class of Chicago, as everywhere, must be made acquainted with the Taylorville case. They must be mobilized into action to prevent a deliberate attempt to cut into a movement of militant worker’s in struggle for their bread and butter. Silence will only help to defeat the miners.
 



Chicago. – The lecture that Scott Nearing delivered here a few weeks ago under the auspices of the Chicago Forum, on What Next in Germany, was an additional illustration of his ignorance of the dynamics of the class struggle. Coming just a few days before Hindenburg chose the leader of the Fascist butchers to the chancellorship, one had the right to expect of Nearing an analysis that would cover at least the fundamental questions relating to the present civil war period in Germany.
He gave a historical picture of the post-war period of Germany and, coming closer to the present situation, measured the relative strength of the political parties by their votes. In Nearing’s schematic set-up, the Communist party is overwhelmed by heavy odds. These heavy odds preclude the possibility of a struggle for power by the Communist party. To Nearing, there are no differentiations to be sought in Von Papen, Von Schleicher, Hitler, Hugenburg, and the social democrats. They are all lumped together as if they make up an integral whole. On the basis of such a consideration Nearing concludes that these forces are too strong a combination for the Communists to attempt to struggle against. The likely variant according to Nearing, was the establishment of a coalition between all these gentry.
It would be a good thing if some of the social democrats could be won to the support of the Communists, including too, some elements of the middle class. Then perhaps the revolutionists might make a struggle for power. And here one expects, that Nearing would take up the question of the united front to show how and in what manner the Communists could wage a victorious struggle. But apparently he has heard nothing of this tactic. It was not mentioned once in his lecture. Is it any wonder then that in his summary Nearing declares:
“Unless the revolutionary movement (!) wins to its side some elements, either the social democratic elements or some of the middle class elements, they are whipped before they start, because the round-up of the class forces with the middle class and ruling class and the aristocracy of labor on one side of the round-up is unbeatable. That is the position of the German Communist Party and I believe it must be dismissed as an improbable way out of the difficulty.” (My emphasis – A.G.)
Having dismissed the possibility of a victory and rejected the need for a struggle, Nearing concludes that the possible result of this seeming blind alley of German politics, would be a coalition of Von Schleicher, Von Papen, Hugenburg, Hitler and the social democrats, under the charge of the first. Thus a few days before the Fascist chief took over the chancellorship and his legions spread a reign of blood over Germany, Nearing dismissed the idea of a Fascist assumption to power.
Some days later, after Hitler’s assumption to power, Nearing again spoke on Germany. Added to the confusion of his first lecture, was hopelessness and despair. Nothing could be done now. It was too late!! As in his first lecture, the fundamental questions of the situation were left out entirely. If one expected to receive from Nearing a way out, he was greatly disappointed. It was not for nothing that the reaction of the Communist workers who listened to him speak was utter disgust.
Nearing is not a member of the Communist party and therefore does not speak in its name. But he has been a member of the party and is sufficiently close to it now, to give his speeches a semi-official character. He is looked upon as a representative of Communism. His lectures, up until this date, were the only ones to be held, in addition to those by the Left Opposition in Chicago. The party here, has as yet not moved a finger on the German situation.
 



To the Editor of the Militant:
Allow me to protest the printing of the article, The Daily Worker Goes to the Masses – in the Militant of September 16th.
There is absolutely no law in nature which says that a Communist paper should not take up the question of sports or even breakfast menus; on the contrary, it is obligatory for Communists to approach and penetrate into the sports’ clubs social clubs, etc., and present the class point of view there, of course and explain to the workers the class struggle from the angle with which they are most acquainted with and interested In.
Writing about workers sports or even submitting medical advice is very important and even necessary – in a workers’ Sports’ Club Magazine or the Bulletin of a Workers’ Mutual Benefit Society.
For the central organ of the Communist party however; to emulate capitalist papers in their drive for circulation, devote columns of advice to the sick and the love-lorn and the well-dressed; to waste pages in all sorts of nonsense and tomfoolery of that sort ... that is absolutely impermissible. “A Bolshevik paper should be a Bolshevik paper.” Its circulation and influence can only be increased by penetrating into the organizations of the workers, by becoming a leader of their struggles and by awakening to political life strata of indifferent and solid workers. It can only gain prestige and confidence by posing and answering the burning problems of the working class, providing leadership in workers’ struggles and by working out correct slogans, to which the workers will inevitably be attracted. It can only be done in this way.
All this should have been explained simply; clearly; the purpose of a Bolshevik paper, its functions, etc., etc., but t.n., either through inability or because he just didn’t want to, splurged through a lot of stupidities accompanied by all sorts of “smart” asides worthy of College Humor, with “brilliant” fanfarolls and frills.
Such stuff does not belong in a Bolshevik paper.
A.G.
* * *
Editorial Note – It should be needless to say that we agree entirely with what comrade A G. says about the duty of the central organ of the Communist party. But we cannot entirely accept his criticism of the jest we made in our article in question. Moreover, sometimes we even feel a temptation to jest at the humor contained in the Daily Worker political articles and refrain only because it is too tragic. But when confronted with the silly bourgeois apings of these special Daily Worker departments, what else could we do. Sometimes ridicule becomes an effective means of correcting foolishness.
 



The Revolution in World Trade
by Samuel Lubell
Harpers.
This is a hodge-podge of ideas on how to resolve the grave problems that face the United States in the present world struggle. It deals with the difficulties of the American economic position in the world by attacking the better known programs emanating from Washington on how to alienate friends and lose allies in this world struggle. Lubell thinks it can be done by some drastic “reforms” in character of foreign trade and the accommodation of the United States to needs of its friends abroad.
We doubt that it will seriously influence future events or help to resolve any of the basic problems of the present imperialist struggle.
 



The American Revolution Considered as a Social Movement
by J. Franklin Jameson
Beacon Press. 105 pp. Ind.
A revolution usually means an attempt to tear down or overturn a government or wreck the existing institutions of a country. The American Revolution did none of these things; on the contrary, it was a war fought to preserve the principle of the colonial governments, it was fought to maintain the liberties of the colonies which George the Third had tried to take away. Americans abhor the kind of revolution which destroys and overturns, which murders, loots and burns.
This fanciful writing comes from a Manual of Citizenship issued by the Daughters of the American Revolution for free distribution to potential citizens. All of which led James Street in his demythizing book, The Revolutionary War, to say:
“Those Liberty Boys dressed like Indians and throwing tea into Boston Harbor might snicker at that.
“Those revolutionists burning their neighbors’ houses and barns because their neighbors were Tories might laugh out loud.
“And the ghosts hanging around the gibbets where necks were stretched surely would get a kick out of the lesson to aliens.”
For, as Street points out:
“... we revolted. Make no mistake about that. We were rebels. We overthrew a government as that government affected us and by bloodshed, by looting and burning. We set the pattern of revolution that is rocking the world today.”
While Jameson’s valuable monograph does not quite deal with the above aspects of the Revolutionary War except in passing, but more directly on the question of confiscations, it is important to bear the above in mind, for the book takes off where the revolutionary struggle ended.
The central theses of the book is that The Revolution was not just a political struggle for power between “our” heroes and “their” villains, but a social struggle that helped to shape the post revolutionary world. In that sense, although not with exactly the same degree of consciousness, it takes its place alongside the French Revolution and as a matter of sequence, preceded it.
Jameson was one of the first to break with the old historiography which treated all the great events in American history from the point of view of immediate and transient politics, based on the hero and villain theory in which the exploits of the military assume dimensions out of all proportion to their contributions.
He looks behind the myths of the American Revolution for the source of the movement for independence, the men behind it, the objectives of the struggle and the means by which the revolutionaries achieved their objectives. Although much has been written since his book came out in 1925 (a year before the Beards’ Rise of American Civilization), it was just about the first book of its kind.
Jameson points out that while not all of the participants were fully conscious of the meaning of the struggle, there were many who were; the outstanding figures did know what they wanted and were ready to fight to the end to achieve their great aims of a democratic revolution that embraced a vast social as well as political reform.
The outstanding figures of The Revolution, Jefferson, Madison, Hamilton, Hancock, and so on, were young men, under the age of forty, and many under thirty. “As is usually the case,” writes Jameson, “the revolutionary side was more frequently espoused by young men, the conservative cause by their elders.” Not only that:
“But the fact remains that the Revolutionary party knew what they wanted. They had a definite program, they had boldness and resolution, while those adverse to independence were divided in their counsels, and paralyzed by the timidity which naturally cleaves to conservative minds.”
And so, against what appeared to be overwhelming odds, the indifference of most of the colonies (at least one-third was Tory and another third indifferent), the frightful poverty of the Revolutionary Armies, intrigue, cowardice, bumbling errors and despair, the leaders drove forward to the end. No doubt British strategy played into the hands of The Revolutionaries, but the incessant drive of the leading figures, Sam Adams, Franklin, Jefferson, Hamilton and others, with Washington as more passive follower of the Continental Congress, prevailed.
The actual war for independence is interesting in itself. Jameson does touch on it, because he was more concerned with the aims of the Revolution and more importantly, what it brought in its wake as an aftermath.
While it is true that self-interest played a role for many of the great figures of the day, the Revolution was a plebeian struggle of the vast propertyless or small property holders in an agricultural economy, for by and large it was “... the bulk of property owners who belonged to the Tory Party, and it was strong also among the middle classes of the towns and among the country population.” Jameson was at this point referring specifically to New York, but the same held true for all the other colonies as was borne out in the vast confiscations in every colony which followed the victory.
The democratic Revolution was not felt fully after the military struggle and the establishment of the new government. Only with the adoption of the Constitution was basic progress to be made. But the major directions were already set. These changes were to be felt in all aspects of economic and social developments, in relation to slavery, agriculture, industry, education, democratic rights, etc.
While slavery was not nearly the powerful institution it became in the South after the invention of the cotton gin, it existed in all the colonies, except Vermont. Already, in the midst of the Revolution, the colonists were laying the groundwork for its abolition. It took place in the North first. Yet, even Virginia voted down the institution.
Political franchise based on property was gradually destroyed. Education, almost non-existent before the Revolution, made its beginnings thereafter. Commercial and manufacturing advance, held in the vise of a series of Crown Acts, was freed for national development which was destined to create the greatest capitalist economy in the world.
Foremost, of course, was the revolution in the land and the break-up of the great estates. It made possible a redistribution of the land and the creation of a nation of small farmers which, in that period of social development, served as a basic force in the democratic evolution of the country.
But this was done in a thoroughly revolutionary way, by the willful destruction of the old order and the confiscations carried through by the new government against all those who opposed the Revolution. It was estimated by the American Tories that they had lost lands in the value of eight million pounds, although Parliament, trying to reduce the claims of the allies, estimated it to be three million pounds sterling.
Ten years after the Declaration of Independence: “... every state had abolished entails, except two, and those were two in which entails were rare. In fifteen years, every state, without exception, abolished primogeniture and in some form provided for equality of inheritance ...” Jameson, to bear out his thesis that the political nature of the revolution reflected its economic base, points out that while the thirteen colonial legislatures had such difficulty agreeing to the Constitution, they all acted “with one accord making precisely the same changes in their landlaws. Such uniformity must have had a common cause, and where shall we find it if we do not admit that our Revolution, however much it differed from the French Revolution spirit, yet carried in itself the seeds of a social revolution?”
Oh, yes, we Americans had a revolution. Indeed, we had two of them, for the Civil War was another revolution in the development of the Capitalist United States. That they were violent revolutions, political revolutions, goes without saying. But they were, above all, social revolutions.
A paradox of our times is the Daughters of the American Revolution (and the Sons, too), in their individual and collective selves, shuddering at the memory of that great historical past and their own inheritance. Since they cannot change their name, they try to change the meaning of the event itself. Small comfort to George III bones.
 



“Behold the man – the greatest and most significant of our contemporaries ...
“He towers over Europe and Asia, over the past and the future. He is the most celebrated and yet one of the least studied men in the world ...
“A man with the head of a scholar, with the face of a simple working man, in the clothes of a simple soldier ...
“He is a man of iron. His name describes him. Stalin – steel. He is as inflexible and flexible as steel. His power lies in his profound common sense, his extensive range of knowledge, his amazingly ordered mind; his passion for precision, his inexorable consistency, rapidity, certainty and intensity of his decisions, constant care in choosing the right people for the right place ...” Henry Barbusse. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
This paean to Stalin by a French Stalinist literary hack is one of a library of similar effulgences. If it was not written on orders, it was in unconscious compliance with and flowed naturally out of the Stalinist ideology. The ritual of Stalin-worship was integral to the system so long as “the friend and liberator of the peoples of the world” was alive and demanding. But, especially in the light of the destruction of the Stalin myth by his erstwhile disciples, the paean is a stale rendering of allegiance and offensive to sight.
Khrushchev now says that Stalin was the victim of “phobia,” “not himself” and suffered from “delusions and derangements.” At the start, Khrushchev limited these aberrations to his “later years.” He was not phobic, deluded, deranged and “not himself” during the decade when he destroyed the old Party, wiped out the revolutionary cadre and murdered the whole generation of Lenin’s co-workers! He couldn’t be, could he, since it was precisely in that period, and on the basis of the great purges, that so many of the present ruling class began their services as Stalin’s disciples?
We are told that certain trials and certain purges were frameups: that Stalin almost destroyed the Army; that the Stalin-Hitler pact was not just a mistake but almost proved the undoing of the nation; that the Vohzd threatened everywhere and everyone; that none were safe. Life described by Khrushchev seemed one prolonged nightmare.
Ten and twenty years ago, on the sixtieth and seventieth birthdays of Stalin, the very men who now talk and write like archeologists making a prehistoric discovery, expressed themselves with an energy surpassing all their previous panegyrics to the man they say they dreaded so much. The sickening sycophancy had the quality of totemism.
On Stalin’s sixtieth birthday, V.M. Molotov, forever first in line of Stalin’s idolators, wrote:
Under Stalin’s leadership, we have successfully demolished the enemies of the people, have cleared, and will continue to clear, the state apparatus of hostile elements, of spies and wreckers. As we know, such measures help greatly to improve the work of our organizations and to clear the way for the promotion of fresh, honest and politically enlightened cadres, and for the consolidation of our state.
This remark was made during the celebration of Stalin’s great strategic achievement, the pact with Hitler, so Molotov continues: “Comrade Stalin’s initiative and guidance have played a cardinal role in all those decisions in our home and foreign policy which have ensured tranquility and prolonged peace to the peoples of the Soviet Union ...” And that is why “Comrade Stalin enjoys the profound love and trust of the working people.”
How the times did mock his cardinal role in the struggle for peace! But, Khrushchev now reveals that he suffered Stalin’s emasculation of the army in silence! An afterthought! For then, the picture-book marshal, Klementi Voroshilov, Stalin’s official military biographer, declared:
One cannot speak or write of Stalin, without speaking or writing of the heroic history and heroic battles of the Red Army, just as one cannot speak or write of the Red Army without speaking or writing of Stalin ... That is why today, when our whole country, united in an outpouring of love and appreciation, is celebrating the anniversary of Comrade Stalin’s birth, all the men, commanders, commissars, the entire political personnel – all who make up the armed forces of the Soviet state – greet our great Stalin with a feeling of profound gratitude and joy.
And so, once more, “Long may our Stalin live, to the joy of the peoples of the Soviet Union and of all progressive humanity.”
What of Lazar Kaganovich? Having read, heard or been told that Marx said that “revolutions are the locomotives of history,” he proceeded to describe Stalin as the greatest locomotive engineer of all time, whether of steam or diesel. He “boldly [opened] the throttle still wider,” and “drove the locomotive of history down and up steep inclines and over sharp turns and curves; he left in the firebox only what was valuable as fuel to create driving power and promptly threw out the slag, without, however, littering the track.”
Isn’t that a beautiful image! You think that is all? Oh, no.
By choosing the exact moment to put on speed Comrade Stalin ensured the construction of a firm foundation ... had theoretically to plan the track and lay the rails so that the locomotive could move on other routes for which the theoretical rails had not yet been laid and for which even the track had only been generally indicated.
But above all, Stalin “smashed the enemies!” He is “the greatest organizer of a Party and a state in history” and “every leader must assiduously learn, learn and learn from Comrade Stalin.”
What of Mikoyan? “Today, our country and toiling humanity all over the world are doing honor to their leader, father and friend – Comrade Stalin.”
Stalin is the ...
universally recognized leader, but also a great theoretician ... created the theory of the building of socialism, which is enunciated in the Constitution of the Soviet Union ... enriched our theoretical science with his principles of organization ... illuminates the practical path of struggle with the rays of theory ... [is a] theoretical and organizational genius.
Mikoyan ended with: “May Comrade Stalin live many, many years, and remain as fresh, as young and as vigorous as ever!”
Khrushchev, too, entered the lists. Presumably unknown, he was yet important enough to be included in a volume of the leaders ordered by Stalin to pay their respects to him.
Today, on the sixtieth anniversary of Comrade Stalin’s birth, all eyes will be turned on our great leader of nations, on our dear friend and father (!) ... In Comrade Stalin the working class and all toilers, possess the greatest man of the present era, a theoretician, leader and organizer of the struggle and victory of the working class ... an outstanding authority in many fields.
These are but a few representative samples from a mountainous material produced in the greatest effort man has ever seen to make a genius of one so plain in everything except malevolence based on police power. Did these men believe all they wrote? What difference does it make? The history of it all is indelibly recorded and the present destruction of the Stalin myth has to be sought, just as the myth itself, in the nature of the Russian social order, in the ideology of that new class society.
 
AS WE HAVE OFTEN written, the Stalinist parties throughout the world, were mirrors of the Russians. As the Russian party was totalitarian, so were they. Each had a national Vohzd. In France, Thorez; in Italy, Togliatti; in England, Pollitt; in China, Mao; and in the United States, Foster. The party hierarchies were identical to the Russian. Each leader had his own coterie of hangers-on. Each party reflected the same totalitarian practices. In each, the same lack of freedom, lack of discussion, lack of debate, and the same deadly unanimity and abject conformity that characterized the Stalinist party in Russia.
If Stalin’s birthday was celebrated in Russia and in all Stalinist parties, Foster’s is celebrated in the United States, Duclos’ in France, Mao’s in China. The system had operated for so long that the conduct of the parties was automatic in their subservience to the events, instructions, and the forever changing strategies of the Kremlin.
Thus, when Khrushchev, Mikoyan, Bulganin and even Stalin’s heir, Malenkov, took to the hustings to open up their hearts on what a monster Stalin was, a disorientation for the entire Stalinist movement seemed to follow. And why shouldn’t it have? Think of all that has been poured into the Stalinist mold for the past two decades and it will be understandable. But Khrushchev was not really taking a chance. He knew the stuff this movement is made of. He knew that though there might be some dissatisfaction, perhaps even some disaffection, in the main, the movement, created, trained and educated in the image of the parent, would rally behind the new leadership of “Mother Russia.”
Who knows, the de-deification of Stalin might even give the movement some new life and the ranks a new confidence and a new attachment to Russia. But more important than this, the needs and interests of the Stalinist parties are subordinate to the Russian and, finally, there is no real chance of a serious disintegration or opposition inside these subject parties. In any case, what they are getting is a new myth!
It would be unbelievable if the Stalinist parties were not momentarily or partially stunned. This in no way contradicts the above. The great Stalin – the sun, moon, stars, nay, the whole firmament – is suddenly smashed by men who were his closest associates. Not one of them has a record of having opposed Stalin in anything, certainly not the very acts for which he is so bitterly denounced.
In all countries, reports have it that this or that individual leader was surprised and dissatisfied, and questioned the whole business. The common question asked: where were the present leaders when Stalin dominated the scene? Khrushchev answered the question in a way, even before he was asked: we were all afraid; we didn’t know who was going to be shot next.
It remains now for the Fosters, Duclos, Togliattis and their brethren to supply the explanations. In the United States, furthest from the frontiers of Russia, the Stalinist Party and its Daily Worker have opened a discussion to explain to their followers what it is all about and to “enlighten” them. The discussion began with self-questioning by its editor Alan Max, who wrote about how jolted he was by the news. He, too, wanted to know where the party leaders were during all this, and whether or not they are “giving proper weight to the achievements of Stalin.” He continued:
... we went overboard in defending things like the idea of Stalin as infallible, in opposing any suggestion that civil liberties were not being fully respected in the Soviet Union, in discouraging serious discussion and criticism of Soviet movies, books, etc. As a matter of fact, while the defense of the Soviet policy as a policy of peace was proper and necessary for the welfare of the American people, going overboard on these other matters was wrong and hence, self-defeating.
This was followed by a letter from Ring Lardner, Jr. in which he attacked the “near deification of Stalin (!)” and “the cloying panegyrics.”
“I wonder,” wrote Lardner, “if some of the rather maudlin testaments to William Z. Foster on his recent birthday are really the most mature and effective way of acknowledging the respect due America’s outstanding working class leader.”
Afraid of his own daring, and wondering where this will all lead to, Lardner suspects that “any expression of doubt regarding Soviet judicial procedure” could be “an unforgivable sin.” It would bring into question all the trials held in Stalinist Russia during the successive purges. What then would be left to a faithful believer in the cause? Anyway, this kind of public posturing might lead to God knows what, and “America’s outstanding working class leader” joined in the discussion to steer it away from dangerous channels.
With the same abjectness with which he accepted the denunciation of the former hero Tito as an imperialist agent, Foster accepts Tito’s exoneration on the say so of Khrushchev. He is toeing the line for the new Vohzd as he did for the old.
Foster asks a series of questions (they are only rhetorical for he is not really interested in the answers). Khrushchev’s policies are to him a “theoretical reevaluation.” He wants to know to what extent was there “a failure to develop a real collective leadership.” Above all:
“... what, if any, decisive political mistakes were made by Stalin? What alternative polices to Stalin’s were suggested by others and rejected? What resistance was made in top circles to Stalin’s trend [trend, mind you] toward supercentralization and denial of collective leadership? Were injustices committed during the purges?”
It would be pointless taking Foster’s questions seriously. He knows the answers to each of them as well as do those of whom he asks for answers. Even so, he offers a few answers in a feint at independence, which, even before the Daily Worker reached the newsstands, already required a new reorientation by him in order to fall in line.
Foster explained Stalin’s “excessive stress upon individual leadership” by the
prolonged struggle against the inner and outer party opposition, the long-continued, monumental effort to industrialize the country; the formulation and application of several five-year plans; the carrying through of the bitter world war against Hitlerism ...
But Foster, you see, wants to be quite fair about this whole business:
Stalin, in his earlier years earned an outstanding reputation as a Marxist by his great fight against the Trotsky-Zinoviev-Bucharin traitors, especially in the big struggle around the elementary [everything is so elementary to Foster] question of building Socialism in one country ...
But, Stalin did make mistakes:
... in any event, mistakes would have been made in handling the many immense and complex tasks that the USSR has had to face ever since its establishment.
What sycophancy! All these years we have heard nothing but that Stalin made no mistakes. He was the Father, the Benefactor, the Locomotive, the Genius, the Great Man of All Times. Foster even wrote a book entitled From Bryan to Stalin in order to emphasize his complete devotion to the bloody tyrant. How now mistakes? It is “elementary.”
The essence of Stalin’s errors is that he multiplied, complicated and intensified these mistakes by his virtual liquidation of collective leadership and by the atmosphere of omniscience and the extreme adulation with which he surrounded himself.
... the general effect was, more or less, to weaken the work of the Communist Party and the Soviet Government. This fact inevitably produced the present down-grading of his reputation.
How does Foster know what is the “essence of Stalin’s errors?” When did he learn all this? On March 27, the day before his new article appeared in the Daily Worker? Or had he known it all the time? If he did, then he was a sniveling coward for having kept quiet, and an unconscionable bureaucrat because he imitated, advocated and defended the Stalinist system. Or, is he accepting the word of Khrushchev in exactly the same way he accepted Stalin’s?
In either case, he remains a faithful Stalinist chinovnik. He does, however, grasp the essence of the attack on Stalin in that the present pack “did not deem it necessary to reverse the basic policy if the Party.” This is what is important in the whole situation and the theme to which we will return further on.
Foster’s leap into the discussion was, from the point of view of the American Stalinist summits, unavoidable. In a rash of “democratic” posturing, the Daily Worker opened its columns to a discussion of the “downgrading” of Stalin. Letters from readers reveal the stupefying effect on Stalinists of lower rank.
Even one of higher rank, Howard Fast, joined these writers in a brash display of his sophisticated cynicism. Fast finds refreshing interludes in the discussion. He is so enthralled that he felt it necessary to address a letter to Joseph Clark, an outstanding Daily Worker hack, to explain his wonderful feelings. Fast finds that “if there were no errors there would be no self-criticism and no correction. There would also be no life and no motion.”
“We in America,” he writes, “still have a criminal feeling about errors ... How many people have we both known who have felt that the admission of an error is the one unforgiveable sin.”
What Fast means is “we American Stalinists” have a criminal feeling about error because “error was impermissible. Error was sabotage; error was the agent of imperialism; error was the espionage technique of the British, the French, the Germans and the Americans. Error was “wrecking;” error was the use of infectious germs. We knew all through the years, as the Stalinists are being told only today, that the victims of “error” were really the innocent victims of frame-up, whose corpses were an offering to the insatiable blood-lust of Stalin.
Then, what is all this Fastian talk of error for? Merely to excuse his .Stalinist associates and himself from a devious, and murderous past of their own, so that he could employ Mark Ethridge’s defense of the New Deal: “For what in hell should we apologize?”
Another writer discovers that Stalin’s greatest mistake was to permit “that creature Beria to influence him.” This faithful follower, still under the narcotic of an older official line says:
“It is my belief that Beria was behind every colossal blunder that Stalin made. What prevented the USSR from failing were ... (among other things) ... the determination of Joseph Stalin in spite of Beria’s influence.”
Poor Beria! Never in his most halcyon days did he believe that he was anything more than Stalin’s hand-picked subordinate. Never in his wildest fantasies could he have believed that on his death he would rise to the greatest power in Russia, even above the Holy Father.
Other letter writers are frankly puzzled. Some attacked the lack of democracy, others the unquestioning acceptance of any line from above. One, however, quite pointedly writes:
These leaders who today rise like great new giants and hurl denunciatory rocks at the body of the dead Stalin must have been very willing to let that same Stalin make the decisions then. They did not dare assume the responsibility in those fateful critical days. Otherwise Stalin could not have attained such frightful, overwhelming personal power. But they were the eager and willing water, as it were, that, inevitably, made the Stalin plant grow.
Now, they howl with vast, righteous indignation! It would become them much better if they would, first, publicly make slashing, punishing attacks upon themselves.
I think it would have been far wiser and much more constructive to let a later generation (from which they would be excluded) to be the judge of Stalin ... The mind cries out: If there was so much self-serving invention substituted for fact all along, not, as far as we know, opposed by the present leaders, how do we know that they are telling the truth now?
As for us, the supreme lesson in this whole horrifying and shocking business is not to be creatures dancing to the (often unintelligible) grimaces of others, but to use our brains in our right, creatively, never abdicating individuality. Otherwise, the sun and the stars, the heavens and the earth – the whole universe placed in our pockets would be worthless.
This is honest indignation. One feels the outrage of the person who wrote the above letter. How strikingly refreshing it is to the dreadful conformity and depthless hypocrisy of a Foster calling for continued rank and file allegiance based on nothing more than faith. It was Foster who wrote that what really happened can be understood “most authoritatively only by those leaders who have worked closely with him [Stalin] in the top circles of the CP and the government of the Soviet Union.”
This call upon faith and belief contains within it also a plea by Foster not to be too hard on him because, after all, that is what he lives by. He has faith and belief in his Russian masters. He exonerates himself because he, too, only followed their gospel. What difference does it make whether a week ago it was Stalin; yesterday, Malenkov; today, Khrushchev; and tomorrow ...? The important thing is to play the game, to have faith and belief ... in the Russians.
 
III
THE CURRENT EVENTS in Russia demand more than just a game of speculation in which so many of the so-called Russian experts love to play. The character of Stalin is quite important in understanding present events, and so, for that matter, are the characters of the new leaders. But the important things about Stalin, theoretically, politically and personally, have already been said thoroughly enough by Trotsky, Souvarine, Wolfe and even Deutscher. Khrushchev, Mikoyan and their friends have added nothing. Indeed, they have said much less than has been said by others for several decades.
No doubt, the de-ikonization of Stalin has only begun. Where it will end, we do not know. It is not too important. Khrushchev goes back to the purges, the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Great War itself. It is now announced that Stalin was anti-Semitic and organized the frameups against Jewish party leaders and members and Jewish intellectuals and suppressed Jewish culture. Today, they say even as far back as 1922 Stalin was opposed to the genuine and justifiable aspirations of Russia’s national minorities when he proposed the incorporation of Ukraine, Byelorussia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Armenia into Great Russia.
Yes, they may go even much further. The question still remains: why?
Everyone has noted the individuals who have been rehabilitated after death – their names, that is. Some are well known, others are obscure figures. Yet, throughout the world, a most insistently asked question is: What about Trotsky? They also ask what about Zinoviev and Bucharin? But most of all, what about Trotsky? Mikoyan faced this interrogation in India and all he could reply was: “There were ideological questions.” By which Mikoyan meant that the fight with Trotsky was a struggle between two antagonistic class forces in Russian Society.
This is not involved in the present drama, that is why this dethronement of Stalin has for the people of Russia, only a limited value. The de-ikonization of Stalin’s ghost flows from the current needs of the present bureaucracy, from its efforts to fortify and strengthen its own rule over the backs of a discontented population. That is the only way to understand what is going on in Russia.
In the rise of the Stalin dictatorship, which no one at the time but Trotsky understood fully, it was a pastime to seek an explanation of Stalin’s rise to power on the basis of his tougher character in a conflict of personalities. The bourgeoisie even saw Stalin as a moderate fighting against Trotsky the extremist. They hailed the victory of Stalin over Trotsky because they felt an unconscious kinship to Stalin in his fight against the socialist opposition.
Trotsky explained Stalin’s rise to power as the product of the specific social relations in the new state, to which the personalities involved unquestionably lent their influence. The latter determined the techniques and mechanics of the struggle for power. But, in objective, historical terms, Trotsky said, the struggle reflected the conflict between the revolutionary elements of 1917 and the new rising bureaucracy. Stalin was the personification of the bureaucracy, the bureaucrat par excellence.
The Russian bureaucracy emerged triumphant through a counterrevolution far bloodier than any revolution in history. Stalin’s victory was the defeat of the Russian Revolution.
To insure the rule of the new bureaucratic ruling class in the new bureaucratic collectivist society, Stalin liquidated the entire old party of Lenin. In this liquidation, a new generation of leaders came to the fore with Stalin as godhead. The new bureaucracy was without revolutionary, socialist, internationalist traditions, culture or aims. It was a national phenomenon, christened in a state of a defeated revolution, without ties to Czarist capitalism, and without ties to the socialist ideal.
The new bureaucracy rested upon a collectivist economy, and its wellbeing, prosperity and future was determined by it. Five-year plans, as an expression of planning in economy, were without socialist aims, but purely class objectives of the new power, initiated to strengthen its own rule and to fortify its own aggrandizement.
The industrialization of the country could only proceed, in the absence of socialist policy, by the ruthless exploitation of the masses, both proletarians and peasants. This required the perfection of the police state, and the Russian State under Stalin evolved into the most thorough and ruthless totalitarian state that the world has ever seen.
Being neither socialist nor capitalist, the new bureaucratic state looked upon both bourgeoisie and proletariat as its twin enemies. The general strategy of Stalinism was the struggle against both. Internally it meant not only the destruction of all forms of organization and expression on the part of the masses, but it required the destruction of the nations comprising the union. Great Russian chauvinism run triumphant, created a deep-going national resentment, just as the intense exploitation and suppression of the working class and the peasantry created an immense mass dissatisfaction and disaffection in the country.
Under Stalin, the intense police surveillance of the country, the periodic purges which became a matter of state policy, the creation of a phobia of imperialist intervention, the transformation of the party and the GPU as overseers of the people, kept the regime in power over the years. It was absolute power used absolutely.
Thus, the industrialization of the country, immense as it has been and continues to be, arose not as the end based on an equilibrium of industrial expansion and a corresponding rise of the living standards of the masses, but by a depression of those standards and by the maintenance of agriculture in a permanent state of crisis.
To maintain the Stalinist system, a series of punitive legal measures was enacted to insure the enslavement of the population, under which the free movement of the workers and peasants was made impossible. Whatever movement did exist was illegal, or government-sponsored, the latter directed primarily to the multi-million inhabited slave camps. State decrees on overtime, incentive pay, and intensification of production all fortified and guaranteed the most brutal exploitation in modern times.
Purges were the norm in Russian society. There were periodic, extraordinary, spectacular mass purges. But behind those were the steady daily unabating purges everywhere against tiny groups, families, individuals. There was no discrimination in the victims to be purged: bureaucrats, workers, peasants, soldiers – every segment of the population. This was a new type of “democracy,” we were told. Indeed it was. A democracy of the knout which spared no one. But of free speech, free organization, free press, free discussion, free election, free decisions, there were none. Yet this “ democracy” was proclaimed by the Stalinist of the world and their cynical intellectual supporters who fattened themselves on bourgeois democracy.
The Russian masses have only endured it. They endured it because of force, naked and unashamed force, employed against them. They endured it in fear that a worse fate awaited them in the invasion of foreign interventionists and conquerors. But there is not the slightest doubt that they hated it. The cynics who defended this police regime on the grounds that it was all right for the Russian masses who, in any case, never knew a better life, were accustomed to it, as it were, merely exhibited their own depravity.
Even before the war, in the first onrush of Hitler’s troops, tens of thousands of Ukrainians, White Russians and even Great Russians, soldiers and civilians, went over to the enemy – such was their hatred of the Stalin regime. After the war, returning veterans from the Eastern European battlegrounds brought back stories of the enormous contrast between the living standards of the people in these backward or second grade capitalist nations and those of the Russians. The bureaucracy had to warn the people not to listen to the “tales” of the returning soldiers for fear that discontent might give rise to even more serious rebellions by the people.
The end of the war was in fact a turning point. Not only were fascist Germany and military Japan, the two foremost threatening invaders destroyed as powers, but the capitalist world as well entered a new stage of crisis. The danger of foreign attack and dismemberment of Russia was no longer threatening. Russian power grew enormously. The new power of the nation was presented to the people and the whole Stalinist world as the supreme and exclusive achievement of Marshal Stalin.
The masses, in the light of the real achievements in the war, had hoped for an upturn of their fortunes. But such was not forthcoming. For now, the nation faced the cold war and once again, or, in continuous form, the people were asked to live on as before. So long as Stalin lived the regime remained unchanged. And so long as he lived, the hatred of the masses for him must have been enormous. The smashing of the idol would be inexplicable if that were not a fact.
With his death a new stage in Russian politics became inevitable. For even though it is unquestionably true that the regime reflected the nature of the Russian society, the character of the dictator gave it the particular stamp it bore. It was a hard, coldblooded and murderous regime. Even the bureaucracy was nettled by it: once grown large and prosperous itself, the bureaucrats felt stifled by The Boss, who could not but appear somewhat of a paradox, an anomaly, and ancient force in their lives. The Stalin who led them to power, a power now vastly secured, was undoubtedly an impediment to their further existence and expansion. Most of all, they had lived in dreaded fear of the “psychopathic,” “phobic,” “deranged” chief.
After Stalin’s death the fight for succession was truly not a momentous one. Malenkov did not last long enough to accomplish anything. But he did sense the restiveness of the nation when he made a gesture to the masses by promising an increase in the production of consumers goods and a rise in their standard of living.
Malenkov, however, was a parvenu. He was not in tune with the bureaucracy. The bureaucracy, it is true, enjoyed the lion’s share of Russian production and their living standard was so high in comparison to the masses, that the gap between them and the population was and is greater than the gap between the bourgeoisie, or parts of it, and the working masses of the United States. But it is not willing to rest there.
With its new power in the world, the bureaucracy is entering a new phase of competition with the capitalist world, an economic competition. The bureaucracy cannot afford to disturb the present equilibrium of the economy by increasing the share of the masses in production. All it can do is promise a reduction of the present 48-hour-week to 42 ... in 1957!
The bureaucracy, in the image of its Father, gives the masses no hope for material improvement of its lot. It was one of the characteristics of the Stalin regime to initiate purges and blame the conditions of the masses on spies, saboteurs, counter-revolutionaries who literally took the bread from the people. So the Khrushchev regime shoots Beria, demotes Malenkov, threatens Molotov and warns Kaganovich and Voroshilov and now – it gives the country the corpse of Stalin. That, we have no doubt, is a popular act!
 
WILL THE RUSSIAN MASSES accept this gratuitous gift in place of a real change in their conditions? Only under force of the police regime. Surely, the people must ask: How was it possible for the evil Stalin to do all this, to commit such horrors and crimes and yet to receive no rebuke from anyone? Where were all those who presently decry Stalin as a frame-up artist, a murderer, an anti-Semite, an enemy of the national minorities?
They know their Stalin and they know the forces that brought him to the helm of the country. They are the same forces that have now dethroned him. They know now, too, if they had any illusions about it, that there will be no genuine and lasting change of their own lot so long as the fundamental nature of the bureaucratic regime remains unchanged.
In all the huff and puff of the dramatic destruction of the Stalin myth, what real, decisive and fundamental change has been made in the structure and function of the regime? None, absolutely none! And what is more, none has been promised either. Isaac Deutscher, who forecasts a new democratic stage in Russia, notwithstanding, there has not been one decisively important step taken toward what he described as a fact, namely, a democratization of the regime and the country. The only democracy that has been given, is the democracy to attack Stalin.
What difference does it make if Khrushchev dances a solo or, if Khrushchev and Bulganin dance a pas de deux, or if they and a Zhukov, or someone else, do a pas de trois. The sharing of power by a new group would imply merely that no one single individual has reached a point of personal triumph in the dictatorial regime. But the essential totalitarian character of the state power remains. In that regime, Khrushchev, the party secretary, is the most powerful.
In that, too, there ought to be a lesson for the muddleheads who see in every Kremlin conflict “new” forces asserting themselves in the struggle for power. Once it is the secret police. Another time, the army. A third ... well, when the fog leaves, the party, no other force but the party, rules supreme. In the one-party dictatorship, it is the party and always the party that dominates. It is the party, because the party is the organized bureaucracy, its brain, its force, its ideologue, to which all other aspects of the state are subordinate.
The great discussion in the Stalinist world, so closely and justifiably watched by the entire world, can be misleading if one takes seriously the overinflated, repetitious obeisances paid to “collective leadership” by all the little Stalins of the Stalinist parties. The language and the ideas behind the language, “traitors,” “democratic centralism,” “re-evaluation,” “discipline and centralization,” are part of Stalinist homilectics. They serve the conscious purpose of creating confusion and avoiding a discussion of what is real. What is real is the warning of Pravda that the humbling of Stalin does not mean a free discussion; that the party will not tolerate the criticisms of “rotten elements.” We are not told exactly, but it is easy to guess who the rotten elements are. It is those who misinterpret the meaning of Stalin’s dethronement. Pravda warns against “slanderous statements directed against the party’s policy and its Leninist foundations ... hackneyed slanderous inventions of foreign reactionary propaganda ... provocative anti-party statements” and the “Bucharinite” views of an economist, one Yarishenko.
This is endemic in Stalinism. Words and deeds, denunciations and liquidations are Stalinist in essense. The system is Stalinism without Stalin. Pravda is warning that the bureaucracy intends to remain in power without relinquishing a single decisive aspect of that power.
The action of Khrushchev, nonetheless, has already had an enormous significance. It has affirmed all that Trotsky and those who supported him had said about the regime; not only they, but a host of other observers. It has stirred sections of the ranks of Stalinism and it has strengthened the anti-Stalinist socialist movements. It can well have consequences that Khrushchev has not taken into consideration. He took a chance, a calculated chance in an effort to soothe the passions of the Russian masses. And thus, it may serve to carry the regime and its policies along for another period. But there are limits to human endurance in exploitation and oppression and the Russian people are at an exhaustion stage. If the great leader Stalin was all that the present leaders say of him, and they stood silently by, what of them? We have no doubt that the people arc thinking of that.
 



One hundred years after the introduction of Marxian Socialist ideas into this country by the post-revolutionary German immigrants, and seventy-five years after the formation of the Social Democratic Party of North America, the socialist movement is at its lowest ebb. Its organizations are few in number; those that exist are small and with little influence. In relation to the many millions of workers and lower middle class people whom they seek to win and influence, the socialist groupings are sects.
Such a condition does, in truth, call for an examination of the causes of the fateful decline of the only social force capable of regenerating and revolutionizing a decaying society. Studies made of the crisis of American socialism have had unhappy results. For one, these re-examinations have been made either by capitalist opponents of socialism or by apostate socialists. In the first case, we are presented with the repetitious thesis of an American alien to the world and insulated against any “foreign” ideas; in the second, a revision of formerly held socialist views and a re-discovery of an America which does not in fact exist. More recently, these “studies” have appeared in magazine essay form, and in the two-volume work on the subject issued by the University of Princeton Press, under the editorship of Stow Persons and Donald Drew Egbert. [1]
No important study of the crisis of socialism, however, has as yet been made by an American socialist, or American Marxist, still adhering to his ideas, on a subject which merits serious attention. Although it does not treat with this problem directly, Ira Kipnis’ study [2] of the most important formative phase of Socialist Party history will be amply referred to in the course of this essay.
The historical factors that need to be considered in understanding the evolution of American socialism are complex and subtle. It is incumbent upon socialists to explain why, in the most advanced capitalist nation in the world, in contrast to most European countries, no mass socialist movement arose to speak in the name of the working class and to challenge the two bourgeois political parties. In England, France, Germany, Belgium, and Italy, for example, such parties made their appearance long ago to challenge the bourgeois parties in the contest for political power. Even after two world wars which so gravely deepened the decay of European society, even after the rise of the post-war reaction of Stalinism, socialist parties, whether radical or reformist, made their reappearance in varying degrees of strength. But in the United States, with no large Stalinist movement to challenge it, socialism has not only failed to experience such a rebirth, it has declined to even smaller proportions. It has done so when, contradictorily enough, the preconditions and the possibilities are present for a swift development of the political class movement of the American working class.
 
The intellectual opponents of socialism explain the failures of American socialism not so much on the shortcomings of the movement and its leaders (they assert this too, however) but on the nature of the society. Briefly, the thesis reads as follows:
Socialism can grow only in those nations where there is a sharp class division and a long-standing class stratification; where there has been a feudal past and strong aristocratic remnants; where there has been no fluid movement of wealth and ownership, and where the capitalist society was outworn, in a process of decay, without resilience, inventiveness, or ability to improvise. American capitalism, if indeed it can even be called capitalism, is different from the European. It is a progressive society. Classes there may be, but the kind of class divisions that existed in typical capitalism are not to be found in the United States. Daniel Bell, an editor of Fortune and familiar with socialist theory and history advances the view that American society is not in fact a class society; economy is a “managed” one, a form of a planned economy (Republicans, please note!) and the nation is divided into “interest blocs” or “regional groupings,” rather than classes. The differences between the “interest blocs” and “regional groupings” produce conflicts, it is true, but no class conflicts. These differences may be sharp, or they may be resolved and the “interest blocs” coalesce as often as they may separate. No class movement, therefore, is possible in a fluid society such as we have in this country. It is not exactly a new theory, but a skillful version of an old one, for the American bourgeoisie in its rapacious accumulation of wealth, never failed to assert that this is a classless society.
The verisimilitude in the foregoing lies in the fact that American capitalism did experience an origin and development quite different from any other capitalist nation. Its rise as a capitalist-imperialist power was quite unique. American socialists and Marxists have for the most part evaded their theoretical and political responsibilities by overlooking the unique aspects of our national development in favor of the more simple and abstract scientific socialist theories of capitalist evolution. They did not do what Marx and Engels advised all socialists to do: to be concrete; to understand their national history, traditions and developments so they might be able to apply socialist theory intelligently to the problems of their respective nations. American socialists approached the problems of the class struggle from the point of view of a narrow economic determinism rather than through the incisive, all-embracing and penetrating conceptions of historical materialism.
We shall present what, in our opinion, are decisive and distinctive aspects of American development which determined the unique rise of capitalism and its classes. Some of the phenomena have been cited before, but they have not always been accurately understood. Nor have they been viewed in their total effect upon social developments in this country.
 
II
To say that the development of the American working class has been intensively uneven, that it is a class without class consciousness, nay, a class with a bourgeois ideology, or a bourgeoisified class, may be sufficient as a descriptive statement which is both true and untrue. The working class of this country has had a contradictory evolution, just as the socialist movement did. In more than one period of our history, large sections of the native American working class, not immigrants or foreign-born workers, reached a high degree of consciousness and combativeness against the bourgeois ruling class. Class struggles of genuine historical importance have been written permanently into the history of the country. Periodic rises of the working-class movement occurred up to the First World War, and once again during the great crisis of the Thirties. There were simultaneous advancements of socialism. Even as late as the Thirties, the hopelessly reformist Socialist Party became quite radical and began to expand rapidly while retaining its program and "philosophy.”
 
In the very early years of this nation, before its rapid industrialization, Utopian Socialism appeared on the horizon as millennial hope. The stark, bitter and endless struggle for existence and economic equality in the young agrarian capitalist nation witnessed the flourishing of Owenist and Fourierist socialism. Producers’ and consumers’ cooperatives arose and disappeared for over forty years. Kipnis points out that between 1820 and 1850 nineteen cooperative colonies were founded under the influence of Robert Owen, and more than forty “Fourierist phalanxes,” championed by the elder Albert Brisbane.
These were merely symptomatic developments. The continuous evolution of capitalism in this country precluded any further development of these experiments.
The beginnings of a modern socialist movement in the United States are at least as old as they were in England, and not far behind any other European country. As a matter of historical fact, socialism arose almost simultaneously in all modern capitalist countries. In the European countries, however, the socialist movement developed steadily and surely to become the movement of the largest class in society. Whether they were called Socialist, Social Democratic, or Labor, these parties became the parties of the working class capable of making the bid for political power. Only in this country, despite great promise and possibilities, did such a party fail to mature.
The question naturally arises: was such a party possible in the United States? If such a party was not possible, could a large, substantial, but less influential party have emerged out of the particular and peculiar conditions inherent in the nature of American economic and political development? Or was and is the United States really an exceptional or new type of capitalist nation, with characteristics wholly untypical of “normal” capitalism, different enough to make impossible the creation and growth of a Marxian socialist party and an even larger movement around it?
An answer to these questions, even a provisional one, is long overdue. For in seeking such an answer we are compelled to investigate the genuine problems of American socialism and create a basis for a resurgence of the socialist movement. It is necessary to begin, therefore, at the very beginning. The basic errors of the socialist movement occurred not in its later years but in its formative periods. It never understood this nation, its development, its needs. It never developed a program that provided a perspective capable of leading to the creation of an influential socialist working-class party.
Engels, way back in the ’90’s, spoke of the “exceptional position of the native-born workers” and what an obstacle they were to the newly-risen socialist movement. At the beginning of the crisis of the Thirties, Trotsky attributed the absence of a mass revolutionary socialist party to the nature of the unprecedented development of capitalism and the traditions which accompanied it. Let us see exactly what they meant.
A. The United States began as a colony which established its independence in a revolutionary war against its “mother” country, England. The war for independence was the work of a “minority.” That fact is of no decisive significance. The population of the country was small. The revolutionists were in the majority over the loyal supporters of the Crown; the large numbers of “indifferent” people, if they did not actively support the Continental Congress certainly were not hostile to it and the armies it put into the field. A colonial war for freedom, it embraced virtually all political, social and economic groupings in that simple society. Such a struggle, antedating the French Revolution, produced some history-making ideas and documents of a plebeian character, announcing the fiercely democratic aims of an early agrarian, incipient capitalist society.
There was no feudal past to contend with. That meant an absence of feudal class relations and as important as that, the absence of the deadly tradition of feudal relations. Capitalism could develop in this country in a free manner without going through the stage of the internal “bourgeois revolution” – except in the form of the later Civil War.
If the plebeian masses did not have to shake off the remnants of a newly-overthrown feudalism, they did develop a sense of the community of national interests of all the people regardless of conflicts which separated different groupings.
Staunchly democratic, these masses made it impossible for the rise to power of aristocratic tendencies in early American society. When the peaceful economic relations threatened to break out into fierce warfare, as they did more than once, the existence of limitless land and the expansion of the frontier permitted the absorption and softening of these conflicts.
B. From the beginnings of the nation to the Civil War, the United States remained a predominantly agrarian nation. The proletariat which did arise was a scattered group, small in numbers, and certainly not yet a class. So long as the nation spread its borders westward, so long as there was land to be had by settling on it, just so long did internal class relations remain fluid and softened. Moreover, this steady expansion was accompanied by an ever-rising productivity in the land and a growth of manufacture, which translated themselves into a generalized rise in the living standards of all the people. Economic crises arose; but these were shortlived. They were followed by new and unprecedented expansions.
The conflict which overshadowed all others was the Civil War. It not only resolved the great contradiction of American society, but was the impetus to the unprecedentedly swift emergence of modern capitalism with powerful monopolistic beginnings. The fact that the popular mind conceived of the great issues of the war, union and the abolition of slavery, as moral ones, only served to obscure the reality: a development of modern capitalism was not possible without the simultaneous destruction of the dual economy of the south. The Civil War created a general feeling of unity in the North which transcended the loose and soft class and group antagonisms. Thus, while European society was already sharply divided into distinct social classes the formation of permanent classes in the United States corresponding to modern capitalism was to come only after the Civil War.
The real “industrial revolution” of the nation began then but at a rate of progress unknown to any other capitalist nation. Even before the War, the borders of the country were pushed to the Pacific. Geographic expansion, piled onto economic expansion, offered all peoples the opportunity of escape from given conditions to new situations and produced a general state of social impermanence. The country was endowed with relatively unlimited natural resources. The land, too, was limitless, capable of absorbing millions of people. A new, expanding labor force was provided by mass immigration. A favorable geographic location with little or no military demands made upon it enabled the country to concentrate on economic expansion for fifty untrammeled years.
These were the decisive years of growth, “the Gilded Age” of American capitalism, as Woodward called them. The great monopolies and great family fortunes made their appearance. Class lines were more rigidly formed and the class struggle broke out in vigorous response to the severe exploitation which accompanied this tremendous growth of capitalism. These were not small skirmishes between impermanent and competing, undefinable, economic groupings, but genuine conflicts between class and class. The former unstable equilibrium of American society was replaced by the new one based on industry, finance and hardened class division in contrast to the agrarian decades. Yet, though class relations were becoming firmly established, the possibility of movement was still present to a great extent. The tremendous growth of the United States not only created a modern proletarian and bourgeois class, but also an enormous new middle class, completely subordinated to and at the mercy of Big Capital.
C. From 1870 to 1900 we saw the consolidation of the bourgeoisie and its virtual “ownership” of the government which spared nothing to insure the economic and political domination of this new class. Middle class and agrarian revolts against the “octopus” took the political form of Populism. The new working class, without important traditions and without a significant social and political ideology, fought back with the only “natural” methods at hand, the strike. The new capitalist class, young, vibrant, powerful and with an unshakeable faith in its own destiny, responded to strikes with a fury hitherto unknown in American life. Through local police, hired gunmen and thugs, the bourgeoisie sought to resolve all class conflicts.
C. Thus, the incipient class movement of workers appeared. Unlike the bourgeoisie, the new American working class had as yet no consciousness. Only the bare struggle forced its progressive and militant sections to seek an ideological understanding of the new society. Whatever socialist ideas did exist were to be found mainly among small groups of German immigrants who were themselves isolated from the main stream of the American working class. There was no harmony between the native American workers and the millions of immigrant proletarians who brought with them a prehistory of struggle and ideas. The American working class had so to speak no pre-history, nor any traditions that might guide it in the newly formed class society of an industrial capitalist America.
Yet, what appeared to be the beginning of permanent formations of proletarian organizations in America were merely temporary groupings isolated from the main trend of the society. Expansion, growth, the unprecedented, continuous increase in production, wealth and the prosperity of the nation served, at each apparently decisive stage of class development, to absorb and soften the class relations. There was enough freedom of movement, enough possibility for changing one’s class position, to hinder the rise of a working-class movement of any significance.
To develop class consciousness, class organization, and traditions a relative geographical and industrial stability is required even within a rising capitalism. In contrast to European countries, with fixed borders, small territories, classes of long origin and traditions of struggle, the United States presented a picture of impermanence and instability. There was nothing settled about the American nation. Not until the Thirties did the United States exhibit what every Marxist knew: its basic capitalist characteristics which had finally caught up with all the illusions about it.
As long as there was this instability, as long as there remained a possibility of inter-class movement, breath-taking expansion and prosperity, it was not possible to develop the kind of class movement which arose in Europe, even though socialist ideas had already appeared in organized forms.
The period of beginnings of union and socialist organizations was one of great hustle and bustle. There was no time for settling down. Industries were born, old ones expanded, and new lands opened. The population increased and moved ever onward toward the west. Despite the climate of never-ceasing change, of growth and movement, of new wealth and prosperity, a whole new era tacked on to a historical background unfavorable to the growth of socialism, and unionism as well, the first union and socialist organizations made their appearance. In the most important industrial areas, the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor were born as the organizations of the skilled craftsmen of American Labor. Socialism was most importantly represented first by the International Working Men’s Association, then by the Social Democratic Party of North America, and finally through the fusion of these two into the Working Men’s Party of the United States, which thereafter assumed the name of Socialist Labor Party.
Already one can observe a sharp distinction from what appeared to be parallel developments in Europe, a distinction which has had a disastrous effect upon the socialist movement to this very day. In continental Europe, the political and economic organizations of the working class were erected simultaneously. Socialists organized the union movements of the several nations and gave them an ideology and a program to work for in a field separated from but integral to the political activities of the various socialist parties. The union movements of Europe were not merely class economic organizations of the workers, but they reflected, together with the parties, the total class consciousness of the whole organized working class.
In the United States, from the very outset, there was a marked separation between the political and economic organizations of the workers. This became a “principle” of American union organization. Politics was regarded as something alien to the union movement, although the relationship between the socialists and unionists was still close (Gompers even attended the Brussels Congress of the Second International in 1891.) Underneath suspicion and hostility were unmistakable. “Political neutrality” was a byword of the Knights of Labor; it became a principle of the AFL. By that they did not mean political neutrality before all political parties, but only in a choice between the two bourgeois parties which the AFL did not regard as class parties but as representatives of all sections of society.
Although the Socialist Labor Party tried desperately to win control of the union movement and establish the kind of relationship which existed in Europe, the resistance of the pure and simple unionists was too powerful. The petty-bourgeois ideology of the union movement accurately reflected the objective conditions of the nation. Then, too, the methods of the Socialist Labor Party, composed largely of immigrant socialists, were highly objectionable. The party was ideologically out of tune with the real America. It did not have a genuine perspective of the problems and needs of the American working class, nor did it really understand the nature of American developments. And although it did champion the progressive idea of industrial unionism against the crippling, debilitating and self-defeating practice of craft unionism, its haughty, sectarian and ultimatistic attitude toward the AFL resulted in its almost total isolation from those sections of the working class which were organized and therefore made up the advanced section of the proletariat.
Frederick Engels, who interested himself greatly in American affairs, studied its problems very minutely and wrote some brilliant observations and proposals to the American movement (he even visited the country in 1888). He was much concerned and overwrought at the failings of American socialists who professed themselves the direct representatives of Marx and Engels and their scientific socialist ideas.
In a sometimes pedagogical and friendly tone, and at other times in anger, he tried to draw the attention of the Americans, most particularly the arrogant German immigrants, to what the real problems of the country were. More than that, he endeavored to explain from England what the American socialists did not understand about themselves and their own country, what tasks confronted them and what program they should pursue. We shall refer to him in some detail to show first, that he had no illusions, or few of them, about the United States; second, that through the method of historical materialism he understood better than anyone else at that time the nature of the new country; third, that he did not suffer from opportunism or sectarianism (the two diseases which contributed so heavily to prevent the rise of a substantial socialist party in this country); and finally, that while he erred in the matter of time, he was correct in his main recommendations.
Toward the end of 1892 he wrote to Frederick Sorge:
... Here in old Europe things are somewhat livelier than in your “youthful” country, which still doesn’t quite want to get out of its hobbledehoy stage. It is remarkable, but quite natural, how firmly rooted are bourgeois prejudices even in the working class in such a young country, which has never known feudalism and has grown up on a bourgeois basis from the beginning. Out of his very opposition to the mother country – which is still clothed in its feudal disguise – the American worker also imagines that the traditionally inherited bourgeois regime is something progressive and superior by nature and for all time, a non plus ultra [not to be surpassed]. Just as in New England, Puritanism, the reason for the whole colony’s existence has become for this very reason a traditional heirloom and almost inseparable from local patriotism. The Americans may strain and struggle as much as they like, but they cannot discount their future – colossally great as it is – all at once like a bill of exchange: they must wait for the date on which it falls due; and just because their future is so great, their present must occupy itself mainly with preparatory work for the future, and this work, as in every young country, is of a predominantly material nature and involves a certain backwardness of thought, a clinging to the traditions connected with the foundation of the new nationality. The Anglo-Saxon race – these damned Schleswig-Holsteiners, as Marx always called them – is slow-witted anyhow, and its history, both in Europe and America (economic success and predominantly peaceful development) has encouraged this still more. Only great events can be of assistance here, and if, added to the more or less completed transfer of the public lands to private ownership, there now comes the expansion of industry under a less insane tariff policy and the conquest of foreign markets, it may go well with you, too. The class struggles here in England, too, were more turbulent during the period of development of large-scale industry and dies down just in the period of England’s undisputed industrial domination of the world. In Germany, too, the development of large-scale industry since 1850 coincides with the rise of the Socialist movement, and it will be no different, probably, in America. It is the revolutionizing of all established conditions by industry as it develops that also revolutionizes people’s minds.
Earlier that year he directed the following comments to Herman Schlueter, editor of the New York Volkszeitung, indicating how accurately he measured the development of the working class:
Your great obstacle in America, it seems to me, lies on the exceptional position of the native-born workers. Up to 1848 one could speak of a permanent native-born working class only as an exception. The small beginnings of one in the cities in the East still could always hope to become farmers or bourgeois. Now such a class has developed and has also organized itself on trade-union lines to a great extent. But it still occupies an aristocratic position and wherever possible leaves the ordinarily badly-paid occupations to the immigrants, only a small portion of whom enter the aristocratic trade unions. But these immigrants are divided into different nationalities, which understand neither one another nor, for the most part, the language of the country. And your bourgeoisie knows much better even than the Austrian government how to play off one nationality against the other; Jews, Italians, Bohemians, etc., against Germans and Irish, and each one against the other, so that differences in workers’ standards of living exist, I believe, in New York to an extent unheard of elsewhere. And added to this is the complete indifference of a society that has grown up on a purely capitalist basis, without any easygoing feudal background, toward the human lives that perish in the competitive struggle ...
In such a country continually renewed waves of advance, followed by equally certain setbacks, are inevitable. Only the advances always become more powerful, the setbacks less paralyzing, and on the whole the cause does move forward. But this I consider certain: The purely bourgeois foundation, with no pre-bourgeois swindle back of it, the corresponding colossal energy of development, which is displayed even in the mad exaggeration of the present protective tariff system, will one day bring about a change that will astound the whole world.
At two separate periods it appeared that the above prediction was being realized, but, alas, two world-shaking events were to prove the undoing of the movement. But even in those years, Engels understood the tasks of the socialists better than not only his contemporaries, but those who tried to build a movement in the decades of the new century.
Writing to Sorge in 1892 on the political problems, he said:
There is no place yet in America for a third party, I believe. The divergence of interests even in the same class group is so great in that tremendous area that wholly different groups and interests are represented in each of the two big parties, depending on the locality, and almost each particular section of the possessing class has its representatives in each of the two parties to a very large degree, though today big industry forms the core of the Republicans on the whole, just as the big landowners of the South form that of the Democrats. The apparent haphazardness of this jumbling together is what provides the splendid soil for the corruption and the plundering of the government that flourish there so beautifully. Only when the land – the public lands – is completely in the hands of the speculators, and settlement on the land thus becomes more and more difficult or falls victim to gouging – only then, I think, will the time come, with peaceful development, for a third party. Land is the basis of speculation, and the American speculative mania and speculative opportunity are the chief levers that hold the native-born worker in bondage to the bourgeoisie. Only when there is a generation of native-born workers that cannot expect anything from speculation any more, will we have a solid foothold in America! But, of course, who can count on peaceful development in America! There are economic jumps over there, like the political ones in France – to be sure, they produce the same momentary retrogressions.
The small farmer and the petty bourgeois will hardly ever succeed in forming a strong party; they consist of elements that change too rapidly – the farmer is often a migratory farmer, farming two, three and four farms in succession in different states and territories, immigration and bankruptcy promote the change in personnel in each group, and economic dependence upon the creditor also hampers independence – but to make up for it they are a splendid element for politicians, who speculate on their discount in order to sell them out to one of the big parties afterward.
The tenacity of the Yankees, who are even rehashing the Greenback humbug, is a result of their theoretical backwardness and their Anglo-Saxon contempt for all theory. They are punished for this by a superstitious belief in every philosophical and economic absurdity, by religious sectarianism, and idiotic economic experiments, out of which, however, certain bourgeois cliques profit.
 
What disturbed Engels above all was the failure of the socialists to understand the nature of the country or the tasks of socialism in this “peculiar” and “exceptional” nation. In the numerous letters which he exchanged with personal and political friends, he tried as patiently as possible, to indicate correct perspectives and tactics for the movement. Through these years his trenchant criticism of the “arrogant” German immigrant socialists and the sectarian and stiff-backed Socialist Labor Party (dominated by the same immigrants), became open opposition to their policies and practice.
When in March, 1893, Mr. F. Wiesen of Baird, Texas, wrote critically about social democrats putting up candidates for elective office Engels replied, of course, that there was no principle involved and added about the United States that:
... the immediate goal of the labor movement is the conquest of political power for and by the working class. If we agree on that, the difference of opinion regarding the ways and means of the struggle to be employed therein can scarcely lead to differences of principle among sincere people who have their wits about them. In my opinion those tactics are the best in each country that leads to the goal most certainly and in the shortest time. But we are yet very far from this goal precisely in America, and I believe I am not making a mistake in explaining the importance still attributed to such academic questions over there by this very circumstance ...
Engels’ observations and opinions were not given much heed by the organized socialists. He lost all patience with their sectarian and ultimatistic attitude to the working class, and his comments became more and more severe. In a letter to Schlueter, he wrote:
The German Party over there must be smashed, as such; it is becoming the worst obstacle. The American workers are coming along all right, but just like the English they go their own way. One cannot drum theory into them beforehand, but their own experience and their own blunders and the resulting evil consequences will bump their noses up against theory – and then all right. Independent peoples go their own way, and the English and their offspring are surely the most independent of them all. Insular stiff-necked obstinacy annoys one often enough, but it also guarantees that what is begun will be carried out once a thing gets started ...
What did Engels have in mind? He knew at first hand that it had taken the European working class at least five decades to evolve its proletarian organizations in countries of long existence, with a continuity of peoples and traditions and where class divisions were not only understood by everyone, but taken for granted. There were strong bourgeois and democratic revolutionary traditions on the Continent, and yet years and years went by before the European proletariat proved capable of becoming a class for itself.
In the United States, events had moved much quicker without the great experiences of the European workers. Just as the nation had to start at the beginning, so to speak, so, too, the working class. But within a short number of years, the American working class, which American public opinion in 1885 held was not a class, organized its first union and socialist bodies. Great class battles burst out, the historic struggle for the eight-hour day began (yes, the struggle for the eight-hour day, a momentous demand, began in the United States!), the Pennsylvania miners’ strikes took place, followed by struggles in Chicago and Milwaukee. An incipient labor party made its first appearance in New York, Chicago and Milwaukee.
Following the pattern of European developments a few decades later, these were the first expressions of class consciousness, which seemed to become transformed immediately into political party organization. But it was only the first expression and the first attempt. It did not develop very far, for already other tendencies invaded the field. Yet the organized socialists, particularly the Socialist Labor Party, which already put itself forward as the party of the working class demanding that the working class must support it, opposed all such independent political developments.
As early as 1887, Engels wrote a rather pointed analysis of the political situation. After describing enthusiastically the prospect of an American labor party and analyzing the various forces in the country he came finally to the SLP. He wrote:
The third section consists of the Socialist Labor Party. This section is a party but in name, for nowhere in America has it, up to now, been able actually to take its stand as a political party. It is, moreover, to a certain extent foreign to America, having until lately been made up almost exclusively by German immigrants, using their own language and, for the most part, little conversant with the common language of the country. But if it came from a foreign stock, it came, at the same time, armed with the experience earned during the long years of class struggle in Europe, and with an insight into the general conditions of working-class emancipation, far superior to that hitherto gained by American working men ... but ... they will have to doff every remnant of their foreign garb. They will have to become out and out American. They cannot expect the American will come to them; they, the minority and the immigrants, must go to the Americans, who are the vast majority and the natives. And to do that, they must above all things learn English ...
To bring about this result, the unification of the various independent bodies into one national labor army, with no matter how inadequate a provisional platform, provided it be a truly workingclass platform – that is the next great step to be accomplished in America. To effect this, and to make that platform worthy of the cause, the Socialist Labor Party can contribute a great deal, if they will only act in the same way as the European Socialists have acted at the time when they were but a small minority of the working class ...
 
IV
The objective development of the United States in the new century did not allow for the settling process to which Engels had looked forward. On the contrary, some of those very characteristics remained in the period of greater class cohesion which had forestalled the development of the political movement of the working class. Neither the Socialist Labor Party, nor its successor, the Socialist Party, understood or cared about Engels’ opinions and proposals to them.
The aristocratic position of the American working class remained even as its class position became consolidated. It continued to be an “exceptional” working class. Ideological backwardness remained a hallmark of the working class, organized and unorganized. All of this was true, despite the outbreaks of class struggle which surpassed all previous experience. The fact remained that the process of maturation of this capitalist society did not take place until the end of the Twenties and the tasks which Engels believed were posed to American socialists remained present and to a fundamental degree remain to our very time.
The American working class has never yet become transformed, in Marx’s terms, from a class an sich (in itself) to a class für sich (for itself). That is, it never became class conscious and remains to this day a bourgeois-minded, or bourgeoisified, working class which has reached the stage only of union consciousness. This was the raw material out of which it was hoped to build the movement of socialism.
 
If all this be true, and we believe it to be incontestable, then the socialist movement faced an insuperable task. Clearly, in retrospect, it was impossible for the American movement to duplicate the success of the European socialists. It was not possible to organize this kind of working class as a socialist class, in the form of the third party in American politics. But, if that was not possible it was yet possible to create a large and influential movement capable of realizing its historic mission when the changes that were certain to come did, at last, arrive. The background reasons for this failure are to be sought not with the beginning of Stalinism in this country or the Socialist Party of 1920-1950, but in the formative years of the Socialist Party from its birth in 1900 to the presidential elections of 1912.
It is too bad that Kipnis’ book which describes these years in great detail contains no reference to Engels’ penetrating observations. He might then have been able to relate the material of his book to the theoretical and political views of the leader of world socialism and have drawn the indicated lessons from the great experiences of the party. The book is so splendidly documented, however, that the following observations draw naturally upon that material.
The Socialist Party was the result of a fusion of the “left wing” of the Socialist Labor Party under the leadership of Hillquit, Untermann, Harriman, Max Hayes, and William Mailly among many others, and the Social Democratic Party, whose outstanding leaders included such disparate figures as Victor Berger, the narrow-minded, anti-Marxist, reformist director of the Wisconsin organization, and Eugene V. Debs, the outstanding working-class leader of his times and an uncompromising rebel.
In the first years of its existence, the new party had to overcome the effects of the split with the DeLeonist SLP to guide the fused organization, composed of an almost unimaginable combination of forces from a non-socialist right wing to the sectarian, militant left, to a more normalized existence. The unity was not easily come by. Berger, Seymour Stedman, and Berger’s right-hand man, Frederic Heath, were not too eager for fusion, having felt that the “left” SLP ought to join the Social Democratic Party. Were it not for the vigorous pressure of the ranks of both organizations, unity would never have taken place. The “manipulators” at the summits of both organizations would have seen to that.
The militant Washington State organization of the SDP attacked the leadership and accused it of trying to attract “all the ‘Reformers’ ... [who] are ‘Socialistically inclined.’ With the magic name of Debs [who differed with the leadership on almost all questions and who was despised by them – AG] at the head of the party ticket, that policy may win votes, but they will not be socialist votes.” Berger, in an editorial in the Social Democratic Herald, wrote an attack on unity and denounced the Hillquit SLP for its “faith in Marxism”!
Berger, whose deadly influence on the Socialist movement has never yet been lived down by the SP, could not even tolerate Hillquit’s lip service to Marxism. The fact that Hillquit was not a Marxist did not stop this pro-German chauvinist with anti-Semitic feelings from denouncing Hillquit as a “thorough class conscious lawyer of New York,” a “Polish apple Jew,” a “Moses Hilkowitz from Warsaw,” and a “rabbinical candidate.”
For all their boasting, the SDP leadership lacked the strength to compete with the “left” SLP. Neither could it resist the pressures of the rank and file and the various proposals for unity carried in both parties despite the opposition of Berger, Stedman and Margaret Haile. After a brief period of the existence of several “unified” organizations, the Socialist Party emerged in the elections of 1900 with Debs as presidential candidate. The party polled 96,000 votes in its first campaign, surpassing the much older SLP. Henceforth, the political vote of the party was to increase until it reached 900,000 votes in 1912.
“The new Socialist Party,” writes Kipnis, “was united structurally by a loose party federation. Ideologically, however, there were few signs of unity. Almost all party leaders gave lip service to the philosophy of scientific socialism as expounded by Marx and Engels ... But when party leaders attempted to apply Marxism to twentieth century America, considerable disagreement appeared among the ‘scientists.’ ”
By 1904, the party was divided into three indistinct factions of Right, Center and Left. The Right, in the beginning at least, represented those elements in the SDP which had opposed unification. The Center and Left came from the SDP faction which had its center in Massachusetts and from most of Hillquit’s former organization. The latter made up the majority of the party. It was presumed to stand on the principles of Marx. The truth was that few in the party knew or understood the principles of Marxism.
The center-Left coalition, for example, “explained that the science of socialism was based on the ‘economic interpretation of history,’ or as Marx ‘unfortunately’ called it, the ‘materialist conception of history.’ They considered Marx’s name for his theory ‘unfortunate’ because it tended to inject historical materialism into the conflicting ideologies of philosophic materialism and idealism.” This is only one example of the kind of ideology that prevailed in the party, and it was not the worst by far.
In the person of Victor Berger, the party had a vigorous leader whose participation in a socialist organization remains a mystery to modern students. He was an American edition of Edward Bernstein, the father of socialist revisionism, but that was the only way in which he did resemble the learned and capable leader of German reformism. In all other respects, he was more nearly the opportunist type of American radical, often found in either the Republican or Democratic parties. His socialism consisted in a struggle for government ownership and “municipalization,” to be achieved in an electoral struggle against the Republicans and Democrats. The program of this right wing bore a close resemblance to Populism, from which it borrowed many of its ideas. Little wonder it was that the center-left bloc appeared quite radical to the right wing and the bourgeois world at large. The Center-Left bloc saw the revolutionary movement consisting of “three concentric circles.” An outer ring of Americans with a “ ‘dim, nebulous something called radicalism,’ ” a middle ring of those who accepted and voted for the ideas of socialism, and an inner ring of active, organized, party socialists. The Center-Left bloc of the party sought not only to win votes but to build the party into a mighty organization. There was no agreement within this bloc on the best elements that make up a socialist party. The Left expressed its strong doubts about the middle class and the Center emphasized the unity of brain and manual workers, expressing the fact that there were few or no workers among its leading elements. In general, the conception of workers’ power in this Center-Left bloc was naive and confused, just as the ideology of the whole party over an extended period was reformist, unreal and naive.
When the Center and Right formed their unity against the Left, they not only dominated the party as a whole, but produced an alien ideology and tradition that continues in one form or another until this very day.
The party was to become, and in fact did become, a purely electoral organization. It sought political power in order to effect its program of nationalization of, at one time, the monopolies, and at another, the “public utilities.” This program was to become the sum total of the socialist program around which its ideology revolved. Composed largely of middle-class elements, the program of the new Right-Center bloc reflected the dual interests of this group and the labor aristocrats in its ranks. In contrast, a large part of the Left wing was made up of manual workers, adherents to industrial unionism, and those who professed themselves to be Marxian socialists, even though they did not always know what Marxism meant.
In order to carry out a semi-Populist, purely reformist program in competition with the reformists of the Democratic Party and the Teddy Roosevelt Progressives, both of which won considerable strength from the Socialist Party, Berger had to amplify his opportunist policies with a broadside attack on Marxism, the object of which was to demonstrate the respectability of the party and to win the support of the middle class and, believe it or not, the capitalists themselves. Proudly assuming the mantle of the “American Bernstein,” he launched an attack on the whole system of Marxism.
The Right held that the conception of workers winning elections and then inaugurating socialism was false. It held such a theory to be “utopian and unscientific.” No doubt it was, but the reason the Right rejected the theory was because “Socialism was partly here now [in 1904], and more of it was coming every day” in the United States and under the bourgeois government. Proof of this expansion of socialism within capitalism were “limitation on dividends of public service corporations, the police department, the post office, and municipal ownership of street railways. Socialism was to replace capitalism by a gradual process of growth. It was to permeate and transform the capitalist system.” What remained for the Socialist Party? To increase this permeation and transformation! In the conception of the Right, socialism was inherent in the capitalist organization, was already present and growing, was, in fact inevitable!
The Right was not for nationalization. As Kipnis points out, they believed that economic justice “like charity, began at home.” Home was the municipality. Thus, home rule was a great ideal of the Right. This was followed by municipal ownership of public utilities, better schools and hospitals, and civil service reform. How did this differ from the bourgeois reformist parties? Oh, a great deal. The bourgeois reformist parties were interested in municipal ownership “in order to lower taxes, while the Socialists wanted to use the profits to aid the workers.”
So insular, provincial and narrow-minded was this Right Wing that they found it necessary to assert that such a program could not be understood in New York City “that Babel of sin and deviltry. There can be no doubt that even Socialism and Socialists will become corrupted – or rather poisoned – in that sea of evil.” The hope of socialism lay in the smaller cities like ... Milwaukee and San Francisco!
The Right "warned that if socialism were just a proletarian movement it could have no hope for success. The proletariat was not ‘ripe for socialism.’ ” Moreover, the masses were stupid, indolent philistines. Social progress was not carried by workers but by the intellectual “cranks,” the intelligent men who would guide socialism rather than the ignorant and desperate workers trying to obtain socialism through force and bloodshed. “Class consciousness,” said one of them, “is the idol of narrow-minded, dogmatic, pseudo-scientific Socialists of the orthodox type.”
If this was not in accord with the ideas of the Communist Manifesto, so much the worse for Marx’s historic work. It was necessary to realize now that “the ruling and ruled classes ... stood on exactly the same footing before the law ... wage workers in progressive countries have the same political rights as capitalists.”
Until the Right and Center came together, the above ideology did not dominate the party, but shortly after this alliance, Victor Berger and his hosts made such theories and practice those of the party as a whole. If Hillquit did, on ceremonial occasions, pay tribute to Marx and his system, he managed at all other times to pursue a policy not in any principled way different from those of Berger, assenting more than once that the Socialist Party was not a Marxist party.
This alliance could not but force into opposition the forces of Left. The Left, whose revolutionary instincts and concepts were far superior to that of the Right-Center bloc, was itself without a consistent theory. It was sectarian in many important ways and although it fought vigorously against the dominant party faction, its lack of theoretical clarity and a correct program of trade-union work did not help its struggle in a party which very quickly became a party of middleclass adventurers, job-seekers, and opportunists.
Between 1905 and 1912, the issues came to the forefront and remained in dispute until the Left was dispersed. The dispute intensified with the formation of the Industrial Workers of the World in 1905. Leading socialists like Haywood were founders of the IWW. Every officer at the time was a member of the Socialist Party. The movement arose as a reaction to craft unionism of the AFL. The leaders in the IWW contended, and quite correctly, that given the nature of American industrial development, the working class could not be organized, except on an industrial basis. As long as the AFL refused to change its form of organization or its orientation, it remained an aristocratic labor organization of the skilled workers and left the unskilled, the manual worker, who constituted the majority of the working class to the mercy of the capitalist class. The industrial unionists contended that no great socialist movement was possible without industrial unionism.
Although the party was oriented toward the AFL, it dared not openly denounce or disassociate itself from the IWW if only for the reason that, in large measure, the IWW was a creature of the SP. For a number of years it sought the endorsement of the AFL. It adopted the theory of separate domain: the economic activity of the working class belonged to the trade unions; the political activity to the Socialist Party. The party had no right to dictate policy or tactics to the unions; the unions ought not to dictate political matters to the party but should support it on the political field as the working man’s party.
The syndicalist idea gathered strength under these conditions. Many good socialists who became known as the “Wobblies” in the party, did not begin as syndicalists, but as industrial unionists. They were firmly convinced that the AFL would never organize the American working class and they were right at least up until the great crisis when the CIO was born and revolutionized the entire labor movement. The party’s ambiguous attitude toward industrial unionism and its equivocal relations with the IWW, at the same time that it curried favor of the AFL hierarchy, drove many fine unionists completely out of the corrupt AFL into the IWW and to pursue a syndicalist course.
The IWW did not begin with a program of opposition to political action or activities. That position arose somewhat later and no small reason for it was due to the reactionary campaign which the Right-Center leadership carried on against the IWW and its own comrades, who did a heroic job in trying to organize the lower strata of unorganized and unskilled workers. Indeed, Haywood was very active in many political campaigns of the party and so were countless other IWW workers and leaders. It was disgust with the type of political campaigns that the party carried on that drove many socialist Wobblies to adopt a disastrous anti-political policy. Certainly, Hillquit’s frameup to remove Haywood from the leadership of the party, following his election to the leading committee by the second highest vote of the membership, did not help.
In truth, however, the party was embarrassed by the IWW not only because of the strong current of syndicalism within its ranks, but even more so because of its militancy and the fights it waged. It was even embarrassed by the Wobbly struggle for free speech. Berger and the Wisconsin organization repeatedly threatened to leave the party and demanded on one occasion after another that the party choose between the “rabble” and the “respectable” social democrats. Again and again the party refused to support the political activities of the IWW. No wonder Haywood declared that the IWW had participated in far more political activity than the Socialist Party ever did.
Gene Debs, who sadly avoided all factional struggle within the party, sided openly with the IWW and the comrades of the left. He was intensely hated by the Berger Right Wing. Present-day socialists ought to know that every nominating convention of the old Socialist Party broke out into a struggle over the nomination of Debs. The Right Wing consistently opposed his candidacy, rejecting Debs as an irresponsible rabble rouser. If Debs was the party candidate in all presidential campaigns until 1916, when in the heat of war patriotism, Berger finally succeeded in preventing his nomination, it was the continuous revolt of the ranks that made it possible. Debs, who was tolerated by the Right-Center bloc because of his great popularity with the rank and file in the party and tens of thousands of workers who voted Socialist, had no great power inside the party. But he was in sentiment strongly attached to the left.
The victory of the Right-Center bloc began the most lurid period in the history of American socialism, a period which was to leave its mark on the party. With the adoption of the opportunist reformist program of competition with the Teddy Roosevelt Progressives and the Democratic Liberals, there was not much to distinguish the three, except the composition of the respective organizations, their respective traditions and names. No, there was something more. The Bull Moosers and the Democrats were comparatively cohesive organizations, while the Socialist Party did contain revolutionary elements which gave the party its contradictory appearance.
The new leadership strove hard to change the complexion of the party. The “party” press had wide circulation, tens of thousands of readers and, aside from The International Socialist Review, was mainly in the hands of the Right Wingers, the outright non-socialist reformists and refugees from Populism. They gave socialism an entirely different meaning than the founders of scientific socialism, but it was in accord with the ideology of the leadership. The party attracted adventurers of every description: intellectuals who despised the workers, unemployed editors who found jobs through and in the party, ministers of every description who achieved places of leadership in the party – but very few militant workers. This was accomplished by the design of the new party leadership.
And what a party it produced! Its conceptions of socialism have already been indicated. In every important struggle and on every important issue, it equivocated for fear that its respectability might be questioned by the bourgeois world. It hesitated to support the great fight of the Western Federation of Miners in the famous Haywood-Moyer-Pettibone case, even though the leading defendants were members of the party. It warned against “impatient” actions by the workers; it would not tolerate violations of what it regarded as “law and order.”
The party was now dominated by men like Berger, Stedman, Spargo, Simons, Barnes and Thompson, while Hillquit and his New York and other Centrist supporters played the role of softening the effects of the course that was to prove permanently disabling for the Socialist Party.
Symptomatic of what was wrong with the party can easily be seen in the great debates on the immigration question. The Japanese Socialist Party had appealed to the American party leaders against the vicious attacks on Japanese and Chinese immigration by West Coast Socialist papers. It asked the party “to be true to the exhortation of Marx – ‘Workingmen of all countries, unite.’ ” In March of 1907, the National Executive Committee adopted a resolution, endorsed by the National Committee, which was submitted by Hillquit to the International Socialist Congress at Stuttgart. The resolution called upon all Socialist parties to educate immigrants in the principles of unionism and socialism and to “combat with all means at their command the willful importation of cheap foreign labor calculated to destroy labor organizations, to lower the standard of living of the working class, and to retard the ultimate realization of Socialism.”
Hillquit explained the position of the party leadership as not wholly in agreement with the trade union point of view, but it did oppose “artificially stimulated” immigration, especially from backward countries because the people “are incapable of assimilation with the workingmen of the country of their adoption.” The Chinese would be excluded and the exclusion of others would be determined as the question arose.
The Stuttgart resolution rejected the American resolution and adopted one condemning all measures restricting the freedom of immigration on racial or national grounds as reactionary. Recognizing the effects that mass immigration could have on a national working class, the resolution urged the organization of immigrants and the struggle for their political and economic equality. This resolution outraged the Right and sections of the Center and Left wings. Berger denounced Algernon Lee and A.M. Simons, as betrayers of the American proletariat for permitting the passage of a resolution that would admit “Jap and Chinaman” coolies into United States.
The debate prior to the adoption of the resolution and the Stuttgart Congress indicated just how reactionary were the Socialist leaders on this question. The party had been particularly violent over the danger of the “yellow peril” and joined with Hearst in his foul campaign against the Japanese and Chinese peoples. Ernest Untermann, a leader of the Centrist faction and considered a leading “Marxist” theoretician (they were all theoreticians!) found that he could not oppose immigration on economic grounds alone because that might exclude some desirable whites. “I am,” he averred, “determined that my race shall be supreme in this country and in the world.”
Berger declared that if socialism was to be achieved in the United States and Canada, these must be kept “white man’s” countries. Even Herman Titus, a leader of the West Coast left wing, reminded everyone that racial incompatibility was a fact and that “no amount of Proletarian Solidarity can ignore it. We must face facts.”
The December, 1907, NEC meeting considered the Berger-Untermann resolution to reject the Stuttgart position and readopt the American resolution. It was a fact, said Berger, that the country would soon have 5 million “yellow men” invading the country every years. Citing the presence of the Negroes, Berger added that, unless something was done, “this country is absolutely sure to become a black-and-yellow country within a few generations.” The authors of this resolution adopted Simons’ substitute motion saying that the International had no power to determine the tactics of the national parties and that the American party “at the present time, must stand in opposition to Asiatic immigration.” This resolution was at first rejected by the NEC but shortly thereafter adopted 26 to 11, insofar as the resolution applied to those “coming from Oriental countries or others backward in economic development, where the workers of such countries have shown themselves, as a body, to be unapproachable with the philosophy of Socialism.” They were, obviously, not nearly as approachable as Berger, Spargo, Stedman, Wilshire, Barnes and others! The debate in the 1908 convention was further evidence of what was wrong with the spirit of the party and what would finally destroy it as a vital socialist organization.
The viciously reactionary position of the leadership was cloaked in reasonable “socialist” rationalizations. The resolutions committee reported a compromise position which asserted the guiding principle of the Socialist movement to be the interests of the working class. Therefore the American working class could not be denied its right to protect its living standards from the competition of “imported laborers” and to do so would be “to set a bourgeois Utopian ideal above the class struggle.”
As a sugar coating to its real views, this compromise declared the party opposed all immigration “subsidized or stimulated by the capitalist class,” although it could not yet (!) commit itself on legislation designed to exclude any particular race. The committee did not feel itself competent on the subject of racial differences but recommended that the subject be investigated!
If the Committee did not feel itself competent on the subject, almost everyone else did. Gustave Hoehn said that “No mere sentiments or ideals of the present can wipe out the result of centuries of blood and thought and struggle.” Another said, “The brotherhood of man has no place in a capitalist society.” Berger exclaimed that the white race could not hope to compete in a propagation contest with the yellow. The first duty of the comrades was to their class and family. The white immigrants or their descendants were striving to raise standards of living while the “yellow races” were not. Now the class struggle dominated Berger’s views! Finally, Max Hayes, of the AFL Typographical Union arose to demand immediate exclusion and referred “deprecatingly to Marx’s great ideal and slogan. After all, Hayes informed the delegates, Marx wrote sixty years before then and knew nothing of our Pacific Coast”!
The genuine left wing fought back as hard as it could. It prevented the adoption of an “immediate exclusion” resolution, but the committee position did carry. If the party was thenceforth to display an increasing chauvinism which burst forth once more during the First World War, the ideology behind it can be seen in the debate on immigration which was of incalculable significance. For in this debate, one could measure the departure of the dominant party leadership from socialist theory, politics and ideas.
Interestingly enough, the party showed signs of growth and increasing influence. Much of it was due precisely to the reformist and opportunist program and policies of the party, to the manner in which it hid its socialism. This was especially true in small localities, in municipal campaigns. But this is also true: in the great national campaigns, it won its greatest victories only when the Left wing forced upon the party its more militant views; especially when the party found itself drawn into the great New England textile strikes centering around Lawrence, and led by Haywood and other party men. The party declined in national campaigns when the Left was unable to impose its views and the party competed on “equal” grounds with the bourgeois parties.
 
V
We believe the evidence is clear: the Socialist party and the movement failed in the formative years not because the movement was Marxist, or revolutionary, but for exactly the opposite reason: it was non-Marxist or anti-Marxist; it was predominantly reformist and opportunist. The defeat of the Socialist Party did not begin with the Left Wing split in 1919, but with the victory of the Right Wing in 1905. The Right dominated the party ideologically and organizationally. Yet the party never did rise to the position of the leading organization of the working class, even if it was not possible for it to become the great third party in the United States.
In all important respects, its perspectives guaranteed its defeat. When it should have been the champion of the great mass of unskilled workers, all of them unorganized, it accommodated itself to the Gompers-led AFL, of craft unionists, the aristocrats of American labor. If it did not openly fight against industrial unionism (in effect that is what it did), it certainly did not help, did not stand out as the leader in the organization of the mass of American labor. Thus, it bound itself to an organized, self-interested, and most bourgeois-minded minority of the American working class.
Even then, it might have been possible to accomplish much given the large support the party had in the AFL, were it not for the fact that once more the party defeated itself with a theoretical and practical theory that surrendered the organized workers to its reactionary labor leadership. The influencing motive foi this policy was the party’s desire to win the middle class, whom it regarded as the harbinger of socialism, and sections of the capitalist class itself. It therefore approached the great events of the class struggle with diffidence and ignored such great questions as the organization of the unorganized, the problems of the poor farmers and the Negro question. Where it did express itself, its positions were wrong or reactionary.
The party had no real guiding perspective. If it did, it would have become the champion of an independent labor party for the many reasons that Engels already understood. But, given its views on the nature of socialism and the kind of electoral struggle it did evolve, it is easy to understand why the party regarded the formation of such a labor party as inimical to its interests and fought every manifestation of such a party. It did not set its sights on winning the working class to it and felt victory was certain on the basis of support from the populists, middle classes, and sections of the Republican and Democratic parties. An independent labor party was a competitor!
Thus, the Socialist Party was tied to a labor movement which was small and isolated from the great mass of industrial workers; it rejected a political course that could alone have broken down the barriers to this working class. The party alienated the immigrant workers and it did nothing in behalf of the millions of Negroes. Women’s suffrage left the party cold: all it had to offer the millions of women in capitalist society was the “community kitchen” after the achievement of socialism!
 
The resurgence of a Left Wing in the party after the Russian Revolution was to bring about the great split. This time, no Left force remained in the party. The Socialist Party was now free to pursue its course without serious interference. The objective circumstances were indeed bad for the party in the 1920’s. But a new opportunity offered itself in the Thirties, when the party did grow and became more militant. The militancy of the party, however, was pasted onto an ideology not far removed from the old. With the rise of the great struggles of the crisis years and the formation of the CIO, the basic orientation of the party was false: it still opposed the formation of a great class party of the workers, an independent labor party, which would mark the first step in this country of the emancipation of the working class as a class from the bourgeoisie.
The early Communist movement showed signs of real progress despite its own theoretical and political unclarity. But before this party had a chance to show its mettle, it had already been taken over by Stalinism and its degeneration began almost before it was born. Undoubtedly, it hurt the prospects of the Socialist Party among the class-conscious minority of the working class by its militant tone and activity in struggles. The Socialist Party became an inactive organization; divorced from all class activity. It again rested its hopes on a new political formation, not of the labor movement, but of the petty bourgeoisie (LaFollette). It spent most of its time in a feud with the Communist Party, not so much over current questions of the class struggle, but over the 1919 split and the responsibility for the split.
Today, the Socialist Party is a shell of its former self. It hardly exists as an organization. There is no future for it whatever, since even now, in seeking to emerge from its isolation and despair it turns away from militant socialism, from Marxism (which it regards as outlived) to a reunification with that tendency which bears the greatest responsibility for the demise of American socialism, the Social Democratic Federation.
The need for reconstructing a socialist movement in the United States occurs in unfavorable world circumstances. The rise of Stalinism, which has been so often treated in these pages, is a factor of tremendous difficulty. Even so, the troubles are of a continuous nature and the influences of the past weigh heavily upon the minds of this generation whether they understand it or not.
Socialism failed in the United States to accomplish those tasks which it was capable of solving not because Marxism is outlived and something new is needed, as Norman Thomas declared not long ago, but in large part because the Socialist movement in this country was non-Marxist, if not anti-Marxist; because the main perspectives of socialism were wrong, disorienting and self-defeating in relation to the kind of working class and labor movement we had and continue to have in this country; and finally, because the party was opportunist, ultimatistic and isolated from the main stream of the American working class.
The rise of a socialist movement in this country depends today on the rise of a politically-conscious working class, on its separation from the bourgeoisie and bourgeois ideology. That will come about, we believe, in the establishment of an independent political party of the workers, a labor party. This would be the first evidence that the class as a whole has broken with this society. There are many signs present that such a development can occur quickly. Socialists should dedicate themselves to the purpose of hastening and influencing such a development. And then we shall see.
* * *
Footnotes
1.
Socialism in American Life, 2 vol., edited by Stow Persons and Donald Drew Egbert, Princeton University Press.
2.
The American Socialist Movement 1897–1912, by Ira Kipnis, Columbus University Press, 496 p.
 



On February 10, 1953, Max Shachtman, national chairman of the Independent Socialist League and editor of the New International, applied at the State Department Passport Office for a passport to travel to Europe. The application, made on the stationery of the ISL, stated the purpose of the trip to collect material and information for lectures and articles to be given and written in the United States.
The passport has been denied, but it has taken a year and a month of unceasing pressure to get the Passport Office to make a final and clear decision. For the first six months of this period the State Department was completely silent: it neither acknowledged the application, nor answered any correspondence. Now, the denial has been made on such tricky grounds that no recourse is possible on an administrative level and Shachtman is preparing a suit against the State Department in the Federal Court. This suit will have been filed when this issue of the magazine appears.



Following is the text of the last communication received from the Passport Offic of the State Department, dated March 8, denying Shachtman the right to appeal to the Passport Appeals Board:
My dear Mr. Shachtman:
The Department has received your petition for appeal, dated January 2, 1954, of the decision of the Department refusing you passport facilities.
You are informed that the Department's refusal of a passport to you was not based on the findings that such issue was precluded under the provisions of Section 51.135 or 51.136 of the Passport Regulations. The authority for the refusal is set forth in Section 51.75 of Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations which reads as follows: “The Secretory of State is authorized in this direction to refuse to issue a passport ...”
In this connection it may be stated that Sections 51.135 and 51.136 do not limit the authority contained in Section 51.75 but merely prescribe certain categories of persons to whom passports must be refused. No regulations have been promulgated providing appeal procedures for persons who are refused passports for reasons other than those set forth in Sections 51.135 and 51.136 of the Passport Regulations since normally these refusals, in effect, are temporary and conditional and further consideration will be given to the application upon removal of the conditions which caused the refusal. As stated in my letter of January 21, further consideration will be given to the issue of a passport to you if there should be a change in the findings of the attorney general respecting your organization. You were granted an informal hearing in the Passport Office similar to that provided in Section 51.137 and your case thereafter carefully considered by the Department. In the circumstances there does not appear to be any further procedure which you can follow in connection with the passport application at this time.






 


Sincerely yours,
(Signed) R.B. Shipley
Director Passport Office



We are presumably indebted for this situation to the principle under which passports are granted in this country. The granting of passports to citizens of the United States is considered a privilege in sharp contrast to other countries where a passport is regarded as a right of citizenship. We can think of at least one other country, Stalinist Russia, where a passport to travel abroad is granted as a privilege—and then only to the ruling bureaucracy. There, the internal passport does exist, neither as privilege nor right, but as a necessity. Ironically, too, its purpose is to prevent the free movement of its citizens.
If granting a passport in the United States is a privilege, then criteria have to be established to determine when that privilege is granted or denied. Once such a condition exists, however, it is clear that abuse must accompany the rules where decision depends entirely on bureaucratic, administrative whim. In the specific case of Shachtman’s application, we were confronted with a failure or refusal, it amounted to the same thing, of the Passport Office to acknowledge the application or to answer communications. How does one go about remedying such a situation? One writes letters again and again, or telephones, in the hope that the administrative powers will take note of the efforts to establish communication with the office. And if there is no response, as there was not in this case for six months? Either surrender or continue to make demands upon the responsible persons.
In any case, there exist at least three regulations under which passports are not granted to applicants. They are, not necessarily in their order, as follows:

Section 51.135 of Passport Regulations: “Limitation on Issuance of Passports to Persons Supporting Communist Movement.”
 
Section 51.136 of Passport Regulations: “Limitations on Issuance of Passports to Persons Likely to Violate Laws of the United States.”
 
Section 51.75 of Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations. It reads in part: “The Secretary of State is authorized in his discretion to refuse to issue a passport ...”

It was assumed in advance by us, given the above fact, that the Passport Office was having difficulty in making up its mind because it had its eyes cocked on the attorney general’s list. There was clearly no ground upon which to deny a passport to Shachtman under Sections 51.135 and 51.136. But in these times we could not be certain of that.
 
Through the intervention of Shachtman’s counsel, Attorney Joseph L. Rauh, of Washington, D.C., a hearing was finally obtained from the Passport Office. More accurately, on November 3, ten months after Shachtman’s application, an “informal” hearing was held with Mr. Ashley G. Nicholas of the Passport Office. Mr. Nicholas went through the farce of trying to establish the identity of Max Shachtman, even as he sat there with an endless number of documents and “confidential reports.” The hearing was brought down to earth with material presented by Shachtman, and Gates for the ISL, and the demand of Mr. Rauh that the Passport Office either grant a passport immediately or state what Communist movement Shachtman was supporting or what laws of the United States he was likely to violate abroad.
It was with some difficulty that we learned that the Passport Office did not believe that Shachtman was connected with any Communist movement, or that he would violate any law of the United States. But we were advised that the difficulty lay in the existence of the attorney general’s list of “subversive organizations.” Wasn’t there anything we could do to settle the matter with Mr. Brownell! It was obviously proving embarrassing to the State Department, since it could not, or would not grant a passport to anyone prominently associated with an organization on the list. At the same time, it would be hard put to defend the denial of a passport on such a flimsy ground without proof that any law, principle, or perhaps, person, would be violated.
Following this hearing, Shachtman was promised an immediate decision. A decision had in fact already been made when the Passport Office refused to acknowledge the application and failed to answer any letters. Its first confirmation came in writing two weeks before the hearing when Mrs. R. B. Shipley, Director of the Passport Office, wrote to Shachtman denying him a passport on the grounds of membership in an organization on the attorney general’s list. But no specific code was cited for this action. That is why Attorney Rauh asked Mr. Nicholas the specific questions mentioned above.
The reader should remember that sometime before, the new administration had promised to establish an Appeals Board in the State Department to hear cases of passport denials.
This was the result of considerable pressure put on the administration. But after almost the whole year had passed, no board was in existence. Only the threat of suit against the de­ partment by other parties forced the Secretary of State to establish such a board.
When the board was publicly announced, Shachtman at once appealed to it under Sections 51.135 and 51.136. The Appeals Board replied that it had no record of any denial of a passport to him under these sections and therefore no case was before it.
 
A sharp communication to Mrs. Shipley finally brought the answer to the above riddle. Mrs. Shipley stated that the denial of a passport to Shachtman was not based on Sections 51.135 and 51.136 which would make the denial mandatory and appealable, but under Section 51.75, which placed the matter within the discretionary powers of the Secretary of State. We were informed that there was no appeal possible from a denial of a passport under that section. Why?
Because the denial of a passport under that section was temporary, since the removal of the condition under which the passport was denied would then permit the issuance of a passport. And the condition? The attorney general’s list. Why don’t you settle your case with Mr. Brownell, we were advised informally. It would save the fearful State Department, already under so much attack, a great deal of trouble.
There’s the rub, as our readers know. How do you get the attorney general to do anything? A year ago, when the new administration came into power and it was rumored that Mr. Herbert Brownell would become the new attorney general, many genuine liberals and democratics sighed with relief. They believed that Mr. Brownell was democratic (with a small “d”) and that the attorney general’s office would become a true Department of Justice under him, in sharp contrast to the conduct of Mr. Truman’s ward heelers. It didn’t take very long for the country to learn that the new attorney general was, above all, a politician, and not on a very high level either. His assaults on essential democratic procedures and policies are even more threatening than anything done under the old administration.
Although the new administration set up procedures which seemed to guarantee certain rights to organizations listed and to be listed, few of them have been carried out. Mr. Brownell is far too busy trying to set up his own telephone company by seeking the passage of a wire tapping bill to be used under his own discretionary powers, to pay much attention to the new procedures under Executive Order 10450.
Under this order a “subversive list” was to be set up but supposedly with this difference: No organizations would, could or should be placed on it without a prior hearing. But Mr. Brownell proceeded to relist every organization, none of which ever had a hearing, from Mr. Truman’s list. In his mind, the important provision of the new order applied only to new organizations which his office might contemplate listing. Precisely what this meant to Mr. Brownell was shown when he publicly convicted the National Lawyers Guild as “subversive” without any hearing whatever.
When the new order was announced, the ISL immediately protested to the attorney general and demanded an immediate hearing. That was in May, 1953. In accordance with the new procedures, the attorney general, for the first time in five years, presented the ISL its statement of grounds and interrogatories (the reasons for the listing) to which the ISL replied in full (See Labor Action for Sept. 3, 1953). The monstrous nature of the grounds and interrogatories brought a number of protests from all quarters, including Norman Thomas, John J. Finerty, Francis Heisler, the Weekly People, The Reading Labor Advocate, and the Socialist Call among others.
 
In submitting its replies in proper form and within the time limits provided for in the new procedures, the ISL renewed its demand for an immediate hearing which was mandatory. No reply was received from the attorney general. This is a chronic bureaucratic disease in Washington. Another letter finally brought a response from Assistant Attorney General Warren Olney III that the request was received; no need to worry, for if and when a hearing would be granted, we would be notified in time to prepare for it? If and when! What about the procedures which stated that upon a reply to the interrogatories the attorney general “will” set a date for a hearing? No reply! And that’s exactly where the matter stands now.
The State Department refuses a passport to Shachtman under the “discretionary powers” of the Secretary of State. The Passport Office “suggests” that we settle our case with the attorney general. And the august and pompous attorney general sits on his royal seat in the Department of Justice office and does not answer mail; he simply does nothing.
On October 29, 1953, the ISL replied to Mr. Olney pointing out that the matter of a hearing was mandatory; that with the reply to the interrogatories, the attorney general must set a date for a hearing. Six months have passed and not one word has been received from the attorney general.
We leave to the philosophers the speculation over the meaning of this situation from the moral and democratic point of view; perhaps they can enlighten us further on the significance of “ends and means.” For, nothing is more conducive to understanding than the process of life itself!
We do know this: the attorney general’s list had its origin as a guide to government employment. It has long since passed far beyond that point to become a national index. That it has no legal standing is quite beside the point. It has all the power it needs without legal standing. The bureaucratic administrative system has operated to avoid a legal test of the listing and the administration, past and present, has achieved its objective just the same.
When in January, 1951, it was pointed out to a Mr. Raymond P. Whearty, then assistant attorney general, that the list has ceased to be a guide to government employment, and that the government itself was responsible for this by its wide publication of the list and by inciting its use in private industry, the professions and the entertainment world, he merely shrugged his shoulders and said: “Well, it is too bad; but that is not what it was intended for!”
We have gone a long way since then. The attorney general’s list still has no legal standing; the attorney general has still zealously avoided a legal test of his action. Yet the list has an incalculable power to do harm to organizations and individuals who have no recourse for legal redress.
The Shachtman passport case is in point. Why should the attorney general’s list, which formally, at least, is an employment guide for the government, be used by the State Department as a guide for the issuance of passports, particularly when the Passport Office does not use Sections 51.135 and 51.136 as its criteria? Nevertheless it is. And it is used everywhere whether or not it has legal standing. The attorney general’s office prefers it that way; it is not required to test its actions legally while at the same time it achieves its purposes nevertheless.
The Shachtman passport case is important not only because it challenges the bureaucratic actions of the State Department Passport Office, but above all, because it will permit the first fight to be made against the attorney general’s list. It needs the widest labor and socialist support.
 



Containment or Liberation, An Inquiry into the Aims of United States Foreign Policy
by James Burnham
Published by John Day. 254 pp, $3.50
What Europe Thinks of America
Edited and with an Introduction by James Burnham
Published by John Day. 222 pp., $3.50
Several months ago Max Eastman and others wrote a letter to the New Leader complaining that James Burnham’s Containment or Liberation was being sabotaged by bookstores and reviewers. They were certain that some kind of plot was afoot to prevent people from learning of this devastating criticism of American foreign policy. Had they that opportunity they would presumably rise in wrath at what the author describes as administration and State Department “appeasement” of Stalin and the Russian State. We are inclined to doubt the existence of such a plot. It would have been superfluous since the book, by itself and unaided, is deadly enough to drive readers from it.
Like most of Burnham’s books, this one has died quickly. It deserved to die, too, for it is, like his other books, a highly irresponsible one. With a special gift for over-simplification, Burnham has presented the whole problem of American foreign policy so that it would seem that the successive administrators of American foreign policy (indeed, Burnham denies that a foreign policy, except in wartime, ever existed) were made up of imbeciles or outright enemies of the country.
For those of us who are socialists and see the dangerous folly of American bourgeois policy toward Stalinism, it is embarrassing to discuss a book like this. Criticism of it might be interpreted as a brief for those whom Burnham attacks. But we trust our readers are fully acquainted with our socialist program and views to understand our criticism of the irrepressible, irresponsible Burnham.
Is it possible that the United States has never had a foreign policy, except in war, as Burnham claims? “At other times,” he writes, “there has ordinarily been no foreign policy at all.” Is this really accurate? Is this what we learn from history? No, the United States, until recent years, had the foreign policy that it required, that suited its needs and purposes.
It is true that the United States did not prior to the two World Wars have great and insoluble world problems. The great world bourgeois problems were indeed borne by Great Britain. But the problems thrust upon this country in the First World War and which were increased in the Second have become so crucial that an inexperienced bourgeoisie bumbles and stumbles on its way, using its tremendous resources and power as a substitute for intelligent policy. What is nearer the truth, is that a bourgeois-imperialist policy is not an effective diplomatic or political weapon against Stalinism.
Burnham obviously equates an ineffective policy with no policy. That is why he proposes, instead of an intelligent bourgeois foreign policy, one that is irresponsible in that its purpose would result in a war quicker than anyone desires or expects.
Burnham is certain that if peace continues it can only mean such a consolidation of Russian power as will end for all time the possibility of its defeat. In this sense he is a defeatist who sees nothing but strength in Stalinism – a system without inner contradictions. This is not the first time that this ex-Marxist has issued his apocalyptic prophesies (does anyone remember his Managerial Revolution?). So certain is Burnham that Russia must be destroyed now that he is willing to chance the prospect of an early third world war, even though his side is politically and militarily unprepared. Since it costs him little, he is quite willing to guarantee that “Moscow will not deliberately start a general war in the next period.”
If it will not start a war in the next period, what must be done? End the policy of containment and go over to an offensive. With whom? The peoples of the Iron Curtain and the Russian masses? How? That is not quite clear. At any rate, that is the only policy for the United States because its allies in Western Europe are not reliable. What makes the Western European allies unreliable and what makes the people in the Iron Curtain countries very reliable? What program shall be offered to these peoples to make them rally around the American banner, a banner which hasn’t yet been able to rally the masses who are free of Stalinist domination?
There is no answer to these all-important questions from the man who writes in cliches (“Western culture,” “civilization,” “property rights,” etc.) which he himself not so long ago rejected as bourgeois myths. The book is unhistorical in its analyses, shallow in its proposals and haughty in its appreciation of the problems and feelings of the masses in Western Europe. It is, above all, snobbishly chauvinistic and imperialistic, and does not even have the quality of bourgeois realism, conveying a spurious and passionless Realpolitik.
There is a fair measure of sneering criticism of the “internationalist minded,” the “world government enthusiasts,” the “global humanitarians,” and the “all-out United Nationalists,” which ends with a dull homily: “Nations like individual men must put their first reliance on themselves.”
Burnham maintains that, if Europe won’t defend herself, the United States must nevertheless defend the continent against Asia. But only through “liberation” – not “containment.” For if “they (the Russians) merely stabilize, then we have already lost. That is why the policy of containment, even if one hundred per cent successful, is a formula for Soviet victory ... We are lost if our opponent so much as holds his own. There remains only a limited time during which it will continue to be possible to move against him. Americans will not even be granted much longer the desperate comfort that as a last resort there are always the bombs to turn to. If the political offensive is long delayed, it will be too late for bombs.”
If Burnham is serious, then there isn’t much time for his policy of liberation either; there is only time for immediate mobilization for war. As a matter of fact, that is the actual theme of the book. In his plea for an offensive against the Russians short of war or as a prelude to war, Burnham seems to care nothing at all about the post-war facts of life, the war-weariness of the great masses of the world, the war-weariness at home, the demobilization of Allied armed forces, the inability of the West to mount a military offensive since the close of the war.
Does Burnham think the United States can do the job alone? No, he doesn’t quite venture such an opinion. But if the United States must win allies in Europe and Asia, what kind of program can accomplish this exceedingly difficult and thus far unrealized goal? Burnham offers the world a Pax Americana against a Pax Stalinensis. That is why his whole book is truly a grim and irresponsible joke.
In a world of disintegration, dominated at one end by Stalinist totalitarianism and oppression, and at the other by a decadent bourgeois society maintained by an American power limited in its capacity to keep the system alive on a world scale, Burnham has no social program to offer and no single vibrant idea that could rally behind it the great masses unencompassed by Stalinist rule. Incredible as this may seem, it is inevitable for a man who fled the movement of socialism to embrace a bourgeois society that can barely hold itself together.
If Containment or Liberation adds little or nothing to one’s knowledge of the world and its problems, What Europe Thinks of America, the anthology compiled by the same author and also recently published, does pinpoint in part the problem of the Continent and American failures there.
The book is a collection of essays by Europeans of the Right, “friends” of America. Most are sheer exercises dealing in secondary or trivial questions of the likes and dislikes of the Europeans and Americans for each other.
One, by a British Conservative, Julian Amery, voices the common complaint of the British bourgeoisie against American economic policy and begs American capitalism to understand the economic problems of Great Britain and the Continent, to give the latter the possibility of functioning in competition with the United States in the world market. The plea will be of no avail.
There are three essays, however, which are outstanding in their analysis and appreciation of the problem of the relation of the United States to Europe. They are by an Italian journalist, Guido Piovene; a Pole, Juliusz Mieroszewski, and a French professor, Raymond Aron.
There is an underlying common chord in their writings: the old social order on the Continent is dead; you cannot fight Stalinism by merely pointing to the capitalism of the United States; a vigorous social program is indispensable to any progress in Europe; such progress must begin with the premise that the old order is dead. Their essays do not base themselves on vituperative denunciations of Stalinism; rather, they try to understand the attractiveness that Stalinism has for such large numbers of people. Although at least one of them is sympathetic to Burnham’s thesis of “liberation,” he cautions that this idea must be filled with a definite social content appealing to people who do not want to return to the good old evil days.
These three raise precisely the issues which Burnham has so studiously avoided in his own thesis.
 



(Concluded from last issue)
The Party changed its position on the united front in the Chicago affair. But it changed it in usual fashion. It remained silent about this reversal of policy. It continued to preach “united front from below”. It failed to educate its membership about this change with the result that there is naturally confusion in the party ranks. That is why it necessary for Gebert to discuss the lessons of the conference.
 
Party Confusion
In his appeal for funds, Goldman, the I.L.D. lawyer, characterized the united front quite correctly. He stated that it was a unity of workers of various political parties and other organizations, united in common struggle on an issue that effected all workers. Goldman went so far as to restate Trotsky’s declaration on the united front: we will even make a united front with the devil. Between Goldman’s speech and that of Williamson lay a great abyss. In the. District Committee of the party an intense discussion revolved around the united front, it found itself face to face with a reality that contradicted the position of the party. That is why comrade M., whom Gebert takes to task, could not understand why the leaders of the Socialist party and other Right wing organizations were seated at the conference. Comrade M., we must declare, correctly interpreted the party policy. And while Gebert is essentially in the right in his criticism of M.’s position, he should declare that the policy of the party is wrong and that the united front in Chicago marked a departure from the official Stalinist position on the united front.
Under the training of the theory of social Fascism, and having been taught that the party would not and could not sit around one table with social Fascists, nor for that matter in one conference, comrade M. drew his logical conclusions that it was wrong to have seated Borders and Schneid, of the Socialist party, McVeigh of the Farmer-Labor Party, and others.
What is more amusing is the close of Gebert’s article. After correctly criticizing the conference for its failure to attempt to draw employed workers into the movement, for having failed to appeal to the A.F. of L. for support (does this not sound strange coming from Gebert or is there a new line in the offing), for its failure to draw into the executive committee other delegates besides those from the Workers League, the Unemployed Councils and the Socialist groups, he makes a final plea for the extension of the united policy as practised in Chicago.
 
Our View
In the leaflet distributed to the demonstration (See Militant, No. 144) the Opposition, declared its approval of the united front and pointed out that this united front was precisely what the Opposition had been calling for at all times. We welcomed the change in the line of the party, because the change was a correct one, permitting the Communists to gain contact with wider masses of workers, to demonstrate before them the superiority of the position of the Communists over other political movements, and thereby winning support of non-Communist masses. It enabled further an exposure of the Socialists as splitters and betrayers, who kept the threat of withdrawal from the conference over the head of its participants, if too militant a policy was adopted. But we raised the slogan of: ‘Maintain the United Front’ because the struggle of the unemployed did not end with the demonstrations. It remains just as acute today as ever and the party must continue the correct beginning. But from all appearances the united front has disbanded not only because the Socialists welcomed the end of the demonstration and thereby their participation, but also, because the party likewise was prepared to end the united front with the close of the demonstration. This is a great error and a crime against the unemployed workers who need leadership and united action.
But Gebert’s humor is too tragic. He calls for an extension of the united front policy applied in Chicago, but does not raise the cry of maintaining the present united front and extending the struggle it began. He does not declare that the official policy of the party must be discarded because it is false and contradicts the entire event in Chicago. Which, shall it be? “United front from below”, which means no united front at all – or, a united front of all workers and their organizations, as took place in Chicago. The party must declare itself. It cannot face two ways on this question.
We have no doubt the pressure of the situation brought about this “new line”. But this change is only a beginning and because it is not a complete and thorough change, it is incorrect. The party gained in Chicago. The policy of the united front as advocated by the Opposition was vindicated there as it is vindicated everywhere. In Germany, the Berlin organization carried out a similar policy and locked horns with the Central Committee. In the United States, the Central Committee remained silent. Why?
The party has as its task to bring about clarity. It must not hedge, and make half changes while maintaining the theoretical base for a false position. Away with the theory of social Fascism and the “united front from below!” Then the party will be in a position to make greater progress.
 



All political parties in Germany are retrenching themselves for the general presidential election to be held in March. At present the nominations are taking place and the most important parliamentary drive in the history of German politics is under way.
Hindenburg has accepted the candidacy of a “coalition” drive to defeat Fascism. He will have the support of the social democracy, the Centrist party, the People’s Party, the Economic Party and the Democratic Party. In a word, the “democratic” forces are uniting on the basis of a defense and resistance against Fascism – and Communism. At the head of this drive stand the socialists. The object is to retain Hindenburg as the “iron man” to save the republic, and also to keep Bruning at the head of parliament.
The Fascists are orientating themselves for the drive. To them the elections do not close the question. They are confident that they can defeat this coalition even on the election field. The Nazi party and their counter-part, the Nationalist party, are grooming their ranks for a united stand against the “coalition”. The Fascists are now attempting to force through Hitler’s citizenship with the aim of legalizing his participation in politics and acting as a candidate for his party.
It. would be the greatest danger to the working class of Germany and the whole world, and particularly the international Communist movement, to believe that the Fascists will terminate their drive for power with the end of the elections. Quite the contrary. In the event of a defeat of Fascism at the election polls, they will begin instantly with a concerted drive for power through an armed coup.
At the moment of this writing, the detailed plans of the combined Fascist and Nationalist front are unknown. There is a certain uneasiness in the ranks of the democratic coalition because of this. They do not know how to resist the Fascist drive They fear the results of an election defeat of the Fascists because they understand that in such an event, Fascism will resort to an armed struggle against the government.
In this situation the role of the Communist party is of highest importance. Information from Germany demonstrates that the C.P.G. is now concentrating on the elections. Thaelmann is the party candidate for president. The party is now too, preparing for an intensive parliamentary campaign as a fight on two fronts: the fight against Fascism and against the Centre-social democratic coalition, stressing at the same time that the most important fight must be made against the Centre-social democratic coalition, and not the Fascists.
But the danger in the present situation lies in that the party sees no further than the elections. It is correct that the party should carry on the struggle gle on the election field. But that cannot be the final aim of the struggle. For the Communists it is more important to see further than just the parliamentary struggle. For us it must be clear that the elections can at best act as a certain barometer of the tendencies to the political situation.
However, to plan the campaign of the party without bearing in mind the situation as it will appear after the elections, the trend of the struggle in the event of a defeat or victory of Fascism, is to lose oneself in a purely parliamentary struggle. Such a situation would result in continued defeats of the party and victory for the black forces of reaction.
What should the party do now? It should prepare for the struggle that will follow the elections. The Opposition has pressed for a change of line on the part of the C.P.G. We have attempted to make the party realize that the situation in Germany is a revolutionary one, that it ought at present prepare its forces for an eventual armed struggle for power. The elections should serve as an indicator of the relation of forces and help in the preparation for the conflict. If the party is to successfully defeat Fascism and all the forces of reaction, it is necessary that it first change its analysis of the political situation, and reorientate itself accordingly. Concretely, this implies an acceptance on the part of the C.P.G. of the extreme danger of Fascism in Germany. The most important task confronting the party is the organization of the united front of all workers in the struggle against Fascism. But for this it is necessary that Thaelmann and Company first drop the theory that “the main danger is the social democracy”.
If the party does not at once change its orientation, the leadership of the C.P.G. together with the T.C.C.L., will be held responsible for the defeat of the German working class. It is they who are responsible for the failure of such a change today and for weakening the position of the workers which signifies, in effect, strengthening the position of Fascism.
The elections will decide nothing definitely. At best they may postpone for a short time the decisive struggle. Between Fascism and Communism only the armed struggle for power will decide the future. Supposing that the Centre-social democratic bloc should win the elections. It will at best give the working class more time to prepare itself for the final struggle. A victory of Fascism will push to the foreground the extreme acuteness of the situation, and force it to a head. In either case the election result will not change the perspective of struggle.
The party must foresee all the implications beforehand. The elections must serve it as a means of organizing its forces. The C.P.G. must begin to actually promote a genuine united front of the workers and their organizations. The perspective must be that of struggle – to defeat the Fascist front as the step toward the proletarian seizure of power.
 



The recent united front conference held in Chicago to fight the 50 percent reduction in unemployed relief instituted by the city authorities, was a striking vindication of the policy of the International Left Opposition and its American section on the united front. What lends this fact such importance is that for the first time in many years in Chicago, a genuine united front of working class organizations was constituted in the struggle on a specific issue affecting all workers. The organizing committee that initiated the conference was composed, strange as it may seem, of the Unemployed Councils dominated by the Communist party, the Chicago Committee on Unemployment, controlled by the Socialist party, and the Workers League, representative of the split-off section of the Proletarian party.
That the whole incident is regarded with utmost seriousness by our party is illustrated by the fact that the columns of the Daily Worker contained lengthy reports of the conference, the demonstration, and topped this off by publishing a page article by Bill Gebert on the Lessons of Victory of Chicago Unemployed. The Socialist party similarly engaged in such an inner discussion. To understand this heated discussion, we will endeavor to examine the conference, the demonstration and the post conference period.
 
Birth of the Movement
Without a doubt the birth of the conference was due entirely to the pressure of the rank and file elements in all three unemployment organizations. We shall not here take part in the discussion as to who were the prime initiators of the conference. The party claims this distinction – the Workers League contests this claim. We let the readers judge upon the examination of the material presented. The unemployed in Chicago have undergone severe suffering during these years of crisis. They have faced police clubs on numerous occasions. At other times they watched their comrades fall by bullets. Starvation and misery was and remains their lot. Those small numbers of workers receiving a measly sum for relief suddenly found this relief cut in half. It was this latest act which caused a fermentation in the ranks of the unemployed and was responsible for the pressure put upon the leadership of all three unemployed organizations to act. That is the only explanation as to how a united front was organized through the initiative of three organizations, two of which were the Communists and Socialists.
The need for such united front action has existed for a long time. It was not brought about because of the opposition of the Communist party and the Socialist party. The Socialist party refused to participate in united front actions because they did not want to join in struggle with the Communist party, because they fear real struggles of the masses, because their role in the workers movement is in reality to check the militancy of the working class. The party, whose duty it was in the very beginning and at all times to initiate such united front action, was bound hand and foot by its stupid, sectarian policy of the “united front from below”. This policy, based on the false conception of social Fascism, which ascribed to all other organizations and their membership a “counter-revolutionary” role, resulted in conferences organized by the party which brought to it only party organizations and party members, but no broad masses of non-party workers. It was this policy that isolated the Party from the masses at the time when the party should stand at the helm of working class movement. Then how is it possible for the party which maintained up to the Chicago conference and continues to maintain even now, officially and nationally, the policy of the “united front from below”, to enter into a genuine movement of this character, to negotiate with the “leaders of these organizations”. How did it come about that the Socialist party which has always stood in the way of genuine united actions of the working masses, likewise took part in the preparation and organization of the Chicago united front movement? The explanation is to be sought in the worker-members of these organizations who put pressure upon the leaderships and demanded an end to the trifling with their problems.
 
Workers Respond to Call
The call for the conference signed by the three organizations met with a huge response everywhere. The masses reacted as never before, and the conference bore testimony of this fact. 750 delegates representing 350 organizations made up the conference. Included in the conference were over 40 church organizations composed entirely of unemployed workers, the Farmer-Labor Party, the A.F. of L., fraternal organizations, the TUUL. Upon the invitation of the Workers League, the Chicago branch of the Communist League sent two delegates who were seated, quite obviously only because of the presence of such a wide variety of organizations and workers who resented any effort on the part of the party to unseat us.
The Conference had hardly convened when difficulties arose. This was to be expected. A gathering composed of so many conflicting organizations and political movements could not but go through deep antagonism and struggle. What was clear from the outset was the development of a Left wing group under the leadership of the Communist party and a Right wing group headed by the Socialists. The Left wing was in the great majority. But from the very beginning the party made the error of desiring to “capture” the conference, although it was quite clear that by virtue of numbers alone the Left wing dominated the conference. The election of a chairman brought the conferencen into its first crisis. Having previously agreed upon Karl Lochner, representing the Unemployed Councils, as secretary, the organizing committee referred the election of the chairman to the floor of the conference. The non-party elments proposed the election of a temporary chairman until such a time as the credential committee reported on the number of delegates. The party insisted upon a permanent chairman from the outset, and for whom everybody present at the conference, whether delegate or not, supporting the party, cast a ballot during the first vote. The farce was too obvious and upon protests from various delegates a revote cut the number of “delegates” in half. Even then the Left wing vote was in a majority.
The conference organized itself. Discussion opened. With a party member in the chair, the efforts of our comrade Edwards to take the floor were thwarted almost until the adjournment. The party was prepared to prevent our comrade from speaking and presenting our point of view to the conference.
In the main the position of the Left wing was correct at the conference. It was correct for them to warn the workers against betrayals, against vacillation and to urge a militant struggle. But when John Williamson, while speaking continued to declare that this united front conference, which included not only workers, but their organizations and their leaders, was a “united front from below” it marked a shame-faced attempt of the party to maintain its previous stupid position on the united front in the midst of a right-about change toward the correct position. In the presence of this great number of delegates, Williamson declared that “we do not unite with leaders, we unite only with the workers” while seated around one table were Lochner and Weber (the District Organizer of the Party), Karl Borders, representing the Socialist party, and Dixon from the Workers League.
 
The Demonstration
The organization of the demonstration brought out the sharpest differences in the conference. The party was absolutely in the right when they insisted upon drawing the political lessons of this protest. And they were right when they insisted upon carrying banners for Foster and Ford. Had the party agreed to march without carrying banners in support of their presidential candidates, or in presenting political slogans, that would have marked a capitulation to the Right wing and the reactionaries. The issue as to the degree that the party wished to give the demonstration a political character, has no real bearing on the discussion. But that it was absolutely correct for the party to insist upon this point is indisputable. And here we must declare that the Workers League in lending their support to the Socialist party, which opposed any political conclusions to be drawn from the whole situation, capitulated before the Right wing and themselves became party to the splitting tactics of Borders and the Socialist party. In turn the party introduced once again its petty Stalinist methods by proposing in the executive committee, that the conference return the money donation made by the Left Opposition because the “Trotskyists are a counter-revolutionary organization”.
In spite of a drenching rain, the day of the demonstration brought out between 35,000 and 50,000 workers. The demonstration was militant in character and displayed the immense possibilities inherent in the situation. [1] Quite naturally, the party dominated the march because of its militancy, if by nothing else The workers present recognized that only the Communists could give leadership to them in their struggles. Without doubt the party gained considerably in prestige during the demonstration.
But what is of greater importance is to draw the lessons of the united front. First of all it must be established that the party made a right-about face on the question of the united front, notwithstanding the fact that it was brought about primarily because of the pressure of the unemployed workers, and in spite of its conflict with the official party position which heretofore opposed such movements.
(To be continued)

Note
1. The Opposition marched with its own banners containing the slogans: Immediate Relief for all Unemployed; Six Hour Day and Five Day Week with No Reduction in Pay: For Social Insurance, The Extension of Long Term Credits to and the Recognition of the Soviet Union.
 



The tour just completed, which carried the writer through the most important industrial cities in the United States and the two most important centers in Canada allowed for some first hand observations regarding the effects of the deep crisis in Canadian as well as American capitalism. It enables one to draw beyond the confines of New York City, and to see the movement, in those industrial centers where the American proletariat dominates – in those sections where the existence of the revolutionary movement is imperative, for the future.
That which strikes one immediately is the extent of the economic crisis, its terrific sweep over the nerve-centers of the country, carrying in its wake misery for the masses. Miles of sidings are occupied by huge numbers of idle freight cars; small industrial towns with factories are silent. Smokeless chimneys! The largest cities have few factories at work. Thousands upon thousands of unemployed workers make up a weary trek. There is hunger while warehouses are filled with food. The vast, numbers of jobless proletarians are not confined to any one town, or state. They are everywhere. Discussions with many workers from various sections of the country exhibit their state of bewilderedness. They do no yet comprehend the causes of the vicious crisis. But they are aware that there is something seriously wrong with the character of the system.
There are few movements of the workers. Aside from the attempts of the Communists no movements of struggle exist. Those struggles taking place are under the leadership of the Communist Party. The movements of the unemployed workers are organized by them. But they are still very weak and in many cases ineffectual. Through the policies of the Party these movements have become narrow. They are sectarian and thereby isolated. The tactic of the United Front, the best weapon through which to rally scores of workers is cast aside by the Party and is one of the main reasons for their failure to make greater headway. The Unemployed Councils organized by the Party are choked by the heavy arms of bureaucracy and impede their growth. Yet it is significant that the Communists alone have the courage and will to organize the workers in defense of their interests and in a struggle against capitalism. This is apparent everywhere.
Certainly there are attempts of the reformists to counter the activity of the Party. This is to be expected. Whenever and wherever the Communists are active the reformists rise as a wall to prevent, their growth and to canalize these movements. Father Cox arose to check the activity of the Communist Party among the unemployed workers. Similar movements exist in other towns. The Socialist Party is conspicuous in the west by its inactivity, more so, by its reformist preachings and aims.
In the face of impending struggles the bourgeoisie is preparing itself. The revolutionary workers must note keenly the developments in Canada. There, the answer of the government to the growing moods of struggle among the workers, as a result of the deep crisis, is shown in the resurrection of the infamous Article 98 of the Criminal Code. It was through this law that six members of the Central Committee of the Canadian Communist Party were arrested and sentenced to long jail terms. We arrived in Canada immediately after the sentence was confirmed and the comrades sent to Kingston. In the Province of Ontario the revolutionary movement is already underground. The aim of the Canadian government is to nationalize the drive against the Communists. Repressions are taking place in the other provinces. A virtual reign of terror exists. Our own meetings were organized illegally. The clause under which the Party leaders were sentenced was written with the aim of preventing the slightest kind of activity. It prevents public meetings, hall owners from renting their property for meetings under the threat of arrest and revocation of license. The publication of revolutionary literature barring literature from the mails (The Freiheit, Party literature, Opposition literature is barred from entry). Those receiving literature are liable to arrest. Anyone arrested on a single one of the charges in this article is guilty until proven innocent. Civil employees are instructed to assume the role of spies and to open any suspicious packages and to forthwith inform the authorities. The American Party which has thus far remained more or less silent about the developments in the Canadian movement must take cognizance of them immediately and understand their significance. It is necessary for our Canadian movement to organize itself with the aim of circumventing the drive against it.
The massacre at Detroit and the planned drive against the Communists there; the attack against the Party in Chicago accompanied by frame-up charges of shooting policemen are beginnings of a definite attempt by the government to bring repressions to bear upon the Communists and the workers generally. Already these events have had deep repercussions among the other workers who are repelled by the brutality of Ford’s gunmen.
* * * *
The Left Opposition is gaining greater support. Our meetings had a larger attendance than previously. There is a definite increase of sympathy and support for our movement. In spite of the efforts of the Party bureaucrats to prevent successful meetings they proved more or less ineffectual. (The meetings will be discussed concretely in a forthcoming article.) The workers felt keenly our viewpoint on the German situation, and the discussions at our meetings were of a particularly high level. In many cities, the presence of Party members, and of sympathizers with its line, helped to enliven the meetings through their participation in the discussions. Each meeting brought forth new viewpoints and questions. They helped all the more in clarifying our viewpoint on all questions confronting the International Communist Movement.
There was an obvious increase of interest in our press. This must be said particularly of Unser Kamf. It has created a deep impression on wide sections of the Jewish workers. References were made to recent articles in the Freiheit articles of so low a character that they could be written, only by people who have received their political training on the staff of the Jewish Daily Forward. The Jewish workers are particularly incensed with the degenerated babble about the “counter-revolutionary Trotsky”.
On the whole we can record a wider influence of the Left Opposition. We must strive in the coming year to increase our organizational strength to correspond to our political influence. There is still too wide a discrepancy between the two.
What is outstanding in the whole situation? The lack of organization of the American workers. The Communist Party is still very small. The great mass of workers are unorganized. But the effects of this crisis are resulting in deep changes in the whole character of the American proletariat. Changes are taking place in their whole ideology. These changes, to be sure, are slow. But they are genuine. The great mass of unemployed workers are still in a dazed state. The workers with jobs are in fear of losing them. The absolute faith in unending prosperity is shattered by the crisis. United States capitalism reveals itself to be no more immune to crises than other capitalist countries. This will create possibilities for great work by the Communist forces. It is necessary to understand this development so that our movement can be prepared for the future.
 



The Strange Career of Mr. Hoover – Under Two Flags
By John S. Hamil
Wm. Faro, Inc. 384 pages, $3.75
This book is a forerunner of a series of books now published on the life of Hoover. In spite of its attempt at sensation throughout, the book has value in portraying the character of the individual who stands at the head of the American government. To the author the character of Hoover is responsible for the present crisis and the general difficulties confronting the economic life of the country. The individual is all-important and therein lies the explanation of everything – that, is the explanation of Hamil. If someone else were president things would be different. With this approach we have nothing in common. We regard the individual as part of the system of capitalism and its politics. We are concerned with the why and wherefore of the choice of the capitalist party at the helm of the government. In this sense the book offers an excellent explanation. It shows Hoover in his true light – as the individual who is best suited to lead his class and follow the dictates of Wall Street. More than that it is a profound exhibit of Hoover’s class ideology and his hatred for the working class.
The book begins with Hoover’s orphanage and his boyhood life with his uncle, a real estate “shark”, in Oregon. His uncle was in the business of selling real estate that never existed. The town where these lots were supposed to be, could not be found to this day, even by the official surveyors of the government. Hoover got his first training here. His uncle, a fraudulent land speculator was his first teacher.
At that time the Leland Stanford University was being organized and Hoover was dispatched there as a student. The records of the school show him to be an extremely poor student who could not master the rudiments of English. Here he studied geology, on the basis of which he later passed off as a mining engineer. But a school just organized could not afford to fail its students and Hoover was graduated notwithstanding his poor scholastic achievements.
The most important turning point in his life was his job with the Bewick Moreing & Co. of London. This concern dealt in mine speculations. Hoover was hired not as geologist but as “a claim jumper, a snooper and a spy.” In a word he was to be a promoter for this company. His work consisted in going to Australia as their “mining engineer” to send in reports on the conditions of the gold mines owned and promoted by this dubious company, whose standing in London’s financial circles was extremely low. There his task consisted of sending in glowing reports of gold to be mined. On the basis of his reports which were published, new stock was put on the market to be sold. When the public had been sufficiently duped, stock sold for hundreds of thousands of dollars, Hoover’s task then turned to that of sending in detrimental reports. The result of these reports would be a decline in the stock values of this or that company. The “insiders” knowing the outcome in advance, would sell out their stock and leave the “public holding the bag.” Or the process was worked in the reverse. With a poor mine that would not yield repayment for initial work, Hoover was to send in reports showing that these mines would yield anywhere from twenty to hundred percent profit. Again stocks sold by the hundreds of thousands. The “insiders” were becoming rich – the public duped again and left “holding the bag”. This was the manner in which Hoover served his apprenticeship with this company until he become one of its partners. He had proven himself.
The whole history of his work was that of manipulating stocks to the advantage of Moreing, Stanley Rowe, himself and one or two others. Once a partner, Hoover began to show more interest in the work. In Australia he becomes known as a hater of labor. There he attempts to get the ban on Asiatic labor lifted in order to bring in cheap labor from the Orient with the object of destroying the then powerful Australian miners’ union. On failing in this attempt, he begins a campaign “against the present high rates of working costs”. In other words, lowering wages, increasing working hours, and refusing to make better the working conditions of the mines. The death rate among the miners grows at an alarming pace. He wrote at that time: “The disregard for human life permits mining by economy in timber and the aggrieved relatives are amply compensated by the regular payment of $30 per man lost.” And again, “men were cheaper than timber”.
The company expands. In China Hoover’s object was exploiting and robbing the Chinese of their holdings. He participated in the steal of the Kaiping Coal mines, even to personally rob a safe to steal deeds covering the ownership of this rich mine. We find him in South Africa promoting fake mines and filching the small stock-holders of Britain. The “promoter” together with his associates conceives of a daring plan. Why not hire coolie labor to work the mines in the Transvaal region. The big campaign begins. In China the workers are promised a virtual fairyland if they would agree to work in the Transvaal mines. The result: 200,000 Chinese were sold into slavery. Hoover’s Chinese Engineering and Mining Co., Ltd. did the job. And why not? They received $10 for each Chinaman secured and $25 each for passage to South Africa on their own ships. From Johannesburg he wrote the following, describing this slave business as: “the great science of extracting the greatest possible amount of money from some other human being.” The war breaks out. Hoover discovers another “business”. Preying on the charity angle we see him now organizing the food relief to Belgium. This “job” consisted of buying huge food supplies, secured through the money raised by exploiting the sentiments of the people during the war, and then selling this food to Belgium at huge profits. It was easily done, once the head of the Belgian Relief was his business associate, Francqui, who assumed the role of the virtual dictator of Belgium in those days – the government having moved its capital to northern France upon the occupation of Belgium by the Germans. But it was precisely in those years that Belgium experienced the largest crops and during the first years of the war had more than sufficient food. Through arrangements with the Germans, the Belgium produce was to be sent to Germany, and the food Hoover supplied was to go to Belgium. Germany paid for its food to Belgium and Belgium paid for its food to Hoover. Between Francqui and himself the spoils were divided.
The rest of his career is well known. He returned to the States after twenty years’ absence. He was made. Hoover becomes a “worker” for the government. He becomes a member of Harding’s cabinet and participates in the infamous oil scandal. The myth of the “great engineer” is thrown at the people. He is elected president and in that capacity has more than once exhibited his intense hatred for the working class.
Hamil effectively destroys the myth of the “engineer” who was really a promoter and who in all the years of his business life helped in a grand steal that even made the ordinary business “ethics” blush with shame. The author points out a mining engineer must know chemistry, physics, mechanics, electricity, assaying, metallurgy – and of all of these Hoover was totally ignorant. But he was suited for his job with Bewick, Moreing & Co. He manipulated stocks, welched on his debts, was sued by China for his steal of the Kaiping Mines and through these years developed into the fit candidate of president.
He stands out today, built up by a great organizing campaign, as an able representative of the capitalists with an intense hatred of the working class. He is a typical representative of Wall Street who adorns the presidential chair with all the qualities needed for one whose job consists of leading his class against the workers. Selling Chinese workers into slavery, manipulating stocks, fraudulent mine promotions, sponging on charity and the sentiments of the people built up during a war period, making himself rich by intense exploitation of mine workers he has succeeded – from promoter to president; really not a strange career at all.
 



Kadikoy is an Anglo-American resident suburb of Constantinople, twenty minutes by boat from the Pera quarter of the city and located on the Asiatic side of Turkey, where the Bosphorous flows into the Marmora Sea. At the outskirts of this suburb, in the section called Moda, located on the bluffs overlooking the eastern shores of the Marmora, dotted here and there with many islands, is the home of comrade Leon Trotsky.
Comrade Trotsky has been living here for almost a year – since the lamentable fire destroyed his home of exile on the island of Prinkipo. The present house is a simple two-story, wooden-frame dwelling, that boasts of no historic pre-occupants. It is surrounded by a high picket fence, reinforced with barbed wire. In the garden running about the house is the abode where the two policemen, the cook and the fishermen live. It is here together with his wife, Natalia Ivanovna, his daughter’s son, his secretary comrade Frankel, and a stenographer, that Trotsky lives and works.
* * * *
We arrived at the house early in the morning and after making our identity known gained admittance into the house. In a few moments we found ourselves in the workroom face to face with the leader of the International Left Opposition. Comrade Trotsky pushed aside his manuscripts and greeted us warmly. Little time was wasted with formalities. We were too eager to question each other. We talked for over two hours, drifting from subject to subject and then proceeded to outline our discussions to cover the length of our stay.
* * * *
A subject of intense interest to ever revolutionist, one that came first to our lips and which our American readers undoubtedly are anxious to learn about is the state of comrade Trotsky’s health. In the past a variety of reports circulated regarding the numerous ailments with which he was afflicted. When we inquired as to his health comrade Trotsky replied:
“My two chief ailments are malaria and an ulcerated stomach. I suffer of these from time to time. The condition of my stomach forces me to adhere to a rigid diet and occasionally I have been laid low through this illness. Regarding my malaria I can add very little to what I have already told the comrades previously. There is very little that can be done for it in Turkey. The climate is extremely bad for malaria. Particularly in hot weather do I succumb to spells accompanied by terrific fevers which forbid me from continuing my work. If it were possible to live in a climate where the heat were not so in tense it would help considerably but, as things look now, I must consider Turkey my home for same time to come. My heart functions well and otherwise I feel well. If only for these two ailments I would consider myself a healthy man.”
We observed particularly, during our stay, the enormous energy of comrade Trotsky. While we were there he was completing the last chapters of the second volume of the History of the Russian Revolution. (The first volume will be out in February, published by Simon and Shuster Company.) Comrade Trotsky lives very methodically. He goes to bed early and rises early. He begins to work in the morning and continues until he is ready to go to sleep. All his energy is directed, toward the completion of his present work. In addition to the book, Trotsky maintains a correspondence with the leading sections of the International Left Opposition.
He reads the most important international periodicals of the Comintern, the organs of the various parties and the capitalist press of the leading countries. The only break in this program of immense work of the leader of the Opposition, comrade Trotsky finds in fishing occasionally and, on rare moments, to hunt. This is the only form of relaxation from the terrific pace with which he works.
* * * *
America absorbs a great deal of comrade Trotsky’s interest. To him the United States symbolizes capitalism at the height of its development. “This period sees America assuming the leadership of the capitalist world”, he told us. He continued:
“While it is not excluded that America can rise out of the present crisis and attain its former strength, she will have to do this at the expense of the rest of the world. The United States will turn its attention to the quest for a redivision of the world markets. And in this development she will exhibit her ruthlessness. One of the weaknesses in the present situation is the subjective factor. It is not enough to say that statistics point to the impossibility for America to rise out of the present difficulties. We must not forget that from the subjective point of view there does not exist a revolutionary working-class to harass America at home. She apparently feels free to proceed without much protest with wage-cuts on a national scale and repressions against the American working class.
“But in spite of this we have reason to be hopeful for the American working-class. The effects of the crisis have a tremendous influence in shattering their bourgeois and petty bourgeois longings, which came as a result of the stupendous rise of American capitalism during the almost uninterrupted growth of industry there. But America has passed that ‘golden era’. I think that it is correct to say that from now on her development will be a far more difficult one, made at the expense of the rest of the world and in particular through increased persecution of the working class at home. It is nowhere written that the United States must be last on the calendar of the revolution. The world character of economy, plus various combinations, can push the United States to the upper portion of the list. I have spoken on this same question to the American comrades before. The problem, however, assumes even more importance now.
“A great deal depends upon the preparations made by the Communists for the struggles of the future. The Comintern heretofore refused to recognize the role of American Imperialism and only after a criticism by the Opposition made a belated turn about face. But it is absolutely necessary for the Communist, to realize the role of American capitalism, to see its development and prepare for the future.’’
Jokingly we asked comrade Trotsky whether he would like to come to the United States to live. He expressed a real desire to be here, but replied: “I think it is best to wait until the revolution and I trust that you comrades will push a little faster to accomplish this.”
* * * *
Comrade Trotsky is deeply interested in the Youth movement. Repeatedly he asked us questions regarding the youth in the States. “Have you any youth in the Opposition?” “What kind of youth activity have you been carrying on?” “What are the possibilities of organizing a youth movement supporting the Opposition and training, educating and preparing the cadres of youth for the future?” He expressed himself as follows:
“It is absolutely necessary that the Opposition concentrate on winning the youth to its support. Unlike the thoroughly corrupted bureaucrats, it is quite possible to win large sections of the youth to the Opposition. They are less corrupted and are more susceptible to the ideas of the Left Opposition. We must concentrate especially upon winning them to our banner. They will become a tremendous reserve for us. I should really like to see efforts made in this field of work.”
The steps already taken by the National Executive Committee in promulgating youth work through the issuance of Young Spartacus and helping to create the Youth Clubs will find a favorable support from comrade Trotsky. He is especially interested in our efforts in this field of work.
* * * *
America is not altogether strange to him. He asked about the role of the Socialist Party in the present crisis.
“Does the Socialist Party take an active part in the struggles of the workers in the present crisis? Are they really making efforts to build their organization? Do the workers support the anti-working class activity of the Hillquits and liberal mutterings of the Thomases? American Socialism has not changed its reformist approach to the problems confronting the proletariat. It remains a constant danger to the working class.”
In connection with the Socialist Party, comrade Trotsky asked about the role of the Jewish workers in this country. He told us that it was quite possible to win their support. But for this it would be necessary to publish our literature in the Jewish language in order to make it accessible to them. “Yes, you should not neglect the Jewish worker. He will be a great help to you and the American comrades should try to attract them to the Opposition and win them to the support of the our ideas.”
* * * *
Comrade Trotsky takes a deep interest in the minutest tasks of the Opposition. He asked many questions about the Militant, which he regards very highly. “The Militant must be maintained as a weekly at all costs. It is a powerful weapon and no doubt is your strongest phase of work”. He questioned us regarding its sales, whether it was read by the members of the Party, what our financial condition is, and numerous other questions regarding the existence of the Lovestone group and the activity of the Party. He often repeated the absolute necessity to win the Party members.
“They are most important”, he told us, “and for this you must organize your Party factions. They must be active bodies, participating in the life of the Party. We must not lose sight. of the fact that we are a Party faction, and our future depends directly upon the whole future of Communism and the Party.”
* * * *
We found comrade Trotsky in good spirits despite the extreme hardships of his exile. He must write in order to live and this in a sense is a handicap in that it does not allow him to concentrate all his thoughts and energies on the International Opposition. We talked about life in Turkey, and often its humorous though tragic sides would come in for discussion. The fire that broke out almost a year ago destroyed his library and a box of valuable clippings that were collected over a period of years. Comrade Trotsky is planning a book on the International Situation following the completion of his present work. It was for this that he had been collecting material.
“When we first arrived, I made inquiries regarding a library in Turkey, which I might be able to use in my work. But unfortunately, I learned that such an institution was not to be found in Turkey. After the fire, I sent comrade Frankel to the National University of Stamboul requesting the use of the school library. They were anxious to help, hut found that impossible because the university did not have a library which I could use. So you see that I am really handicapped in this sense.”
We learned from the comrades there that the fire destroyed almost everything. It broke out late at night and before much could be done, it spread through the entire house. All that was saved from the ruins were the archives, Lenin’s letters and documents. His library consisting of 2,000 read and annotated volumes and clippings were burned. The clothes belonging to the entire family were destroyed and $l50.00 in cash was burned. “But even so,” comrade Trotsky said smilingly, “it could have been very much worse.”
* * * *
Comrade Frankel related the following incident to us:
“Shortly after the fire we engaged a room in a nearby hotel. All of us felt dejected and were very much disturbed by the irreparable losses of the fire – all except comrade Trotsky. No sooner were we settled, when he laid his manuscripts out on the table, called the stenographer over and began to dictate chapters of his book as though nothing at all had happened during the night.”
Upon news of this loss, books were sent to Trotsky from different parts of the world. These help to rebuild the library that he lost. Books on economics, history, politics and labor movement are especially needed and welcomed by him. In this article we appeal to our comrades, sympathizers and anybody who is interested, to communicate with us in regard to rebuilding the library of comrade Trotsky.
* * * *
Comrade Trotsky is much troubled by the situation in Germany. He regards the situation there to be decisive in its influence on the whole trend of events internationally.
“A victory of Fascism in Germany would have disastrous effects everywhere”, he told us. “The Party does not realise that should Hitler come to power he would destroy the Party and the Labor movement. But instead of that it plays with the situation in a most criminal manner. It recalls to my mind the period of 1923 when Brandler and Company capitulated. Then the Party followed behind events instead of leading the proletariat in the struggle for power. From all appearances the Party is continuing the very same course today. The Opposition must do all in its power to prevent this attitude of the Party from continuing. This is one of our chief tasks. We must make the Party realize that its task at present is to organize the working class resistance to Fascism and prepare for the revolutionary struggle.”
From Germany we went on to a discussion on the situation in the Soviet Union. We asked comrade Trotsky just what effects the world crisis would have on the Soviet Union. Comrade Trotsky was of the opinion that “the world crisis will have severe repercussions there. It appears now that the five year plan is experiencing a number of difficulties about, which we warned long ago, but the relation of economy on a world scale to national economy will cause a crisis of the five year plan and only increase the economic difficulties of the proletarian dictatorship.” Even now, while Stalin and Litvinov speak of the possibilities of the peaceful development side by side of Socialism and Capitalism, the capitalist powers only work to make matters more difficult for Soviet Economy. For the Opposition it means more determined efforts than ever.
“The capitulators find things more difficult than ever. Those who were influenced by the step of Radek and the other older comrades, and who sincerely felt that a change was taking place in the policy of the Party, found themselves returned to exile shortly after they were taken back info the Party. Radek tries to establish himself in the Party by continuously denouncing the Opposition and renouncing every principled idea that he ever held. He has become the must vicious of them all. Most of the capitulators do not exist politically. They have sold their ideas for the right to return to the centers to enjoy the existence of ‘marked men’. The genuine Oppositionists remain steadfast. There are many thousands in exile. It is hard to estimate how many. Official figures will tell nothing. Those in exile are forced to go through terrific persecution and in spite of the extremely unfavorable conditions of work (lack of writing materials, lack of books, periodicals, relations with other Opposition colonies, or with the Party itself) exhibit a fearlessness that should encourage every Oppositionist. There are in exile today between three and five thousand young Oppositionists as well as a few thousand old Bolsheviks. In the Party ranks there are currents of Oppositionists everywhere. Stalin thinks that by his severe repressions he can stamp out the Opposition. But he can never do this in spite of everything that he does. The Opposition lives because its ideas are the ideas of Marx and Lenin. Because their ideas are the ideas of the October Revolution”.
* * * *
It was not easy to part when the time came to leave. But there was no other choice and we made ready to go. The thought came often to us: What a horrible crime Stalinism has committed to the revolutionary movement. The exile of comrade Trotsky is a terrible blow to the Russian Revolution and to the Communist International. Trotsky in Turkey is Trotsky endangered. The nest of white-guardists in Constantinople and in the Balkan countries always loom up as a constant threat to the life of our leader. The great handicaps in the work, his health made more aggravated in this country, his general separation from the centers of the movement, are not easy to overcome. Comrade Trotsky keeps on fighting. The greatest tribute to him is to build the International Left Opposition and to carry on the historic fight against Stalinism – that virus which has brought these conditions upon the Communist movement – and thereby to regenerate the International Communist movement for the conquest of proletarian power.
 



The center of the political stage in the present international situation is occupied by Germany. What will transpire there in the coming six months will have a direct and immediate influence upon the whole development of the world revolutionary movement. The catastrophic economic and social conditions, the collapse of the ruling parties which are enforcing extra-parliamentary measures against the proletariat, the revolutionary feelings of the masses existing alongside of a menacing growth of Fascism have created a direct revolutionary situation in Germany and raise to the foreground the question of the struggle for power.
It is axiomatic for Marxists, that without the leadership of the Communist Party, based on a policy of revolutionary struggle, the thought of the seizure of power is impossible. It requires in the Party, independence, audacity and a will to victory. The absence of such a condition in the ranks of the Party spells defeat for the proletariat. It is precisely this absent condition which makes the situation in Germany today so fraught with dangers to the international working class. The German Communist Party does not understand its tasks. It has falsely evaluated the present state of affairs with the result that it pursues a policy that is little short of criminal.
 
The Basis For Fascism
The greatest obstacle in the path of the German proletariat is Fascism. Many workers will undoubtedly question: How is it possible that in Germany there should be such a huge growth of Fascism?
The defeat of the revolutionary situation in 1923 gave rise to the present fascist wave. Fascism in Germany, composed of the militarists, the petty-bourgeoisie, the administrators, office workers, degenerated unemployed elements (a great part of them youth), sections of the working class disgusted with the betrayals of social democracy and the capitulation of the C.P.G. and seeking new ways out of the present difficulties, receives support from the industrialists and financiers and to an extent from international capital. German capitalism remembers only too well that in 1923, had the Party pursued a correct policy, there would at the present time be no capitalism in Germany. It is with this in mind that she prepares herself against a recurrence of 1923. Fascism receives its strength from the social crisis and the weakness of the proletariat (expressed in Germany in the failure of Communism to unify the working class for the conquest of power). The bourgeoisie understands the nature of Fascism.
“The bourgeoisie advances its Fascist shoulder only at the moment an immediate revolutionary danger threatens the foundations of the regime itself and when the normal organs of the bourgeois state prove themselves insufficient. In this sense active Fascism signifies the condition of civil war on the part of capitalist society facing the rebelling proletariat. Contrariwise, the bourgeoisie is forced to advance its Left, the social democratic, shoulder in a period that precedes the time of the civil war, so as to deceive the proletariat, to pacify and disintegrate it, or in a period following upon a serious and lasting victory over the proletariat.” (The Strategy of the World Revolution, L.D. Trotsky, Pioneer Publishers, New York, page 35)
 
Fascist Growth And Threats
But neither the Party nor the Comintern has understood this. Confused themselves, they spread confusion in the ranks of their supporters. The lead is given by Stalin: “The social democracy is an objectively more moderate wing of Fascism”. Therefore, between the Nazi and the social democracy there is no difference. Hitler is the more extreme wing, the social democracy, the moderate wing.
Within the last year the small party of Hitler has grown to be the most menacing antagonist of Communism. In the provincial elections held to date (Hamburg, Anhalt, Hesse and Stuttgart), the Fascists have won sweeping victories. They are moving forward to the seizure of governmental reigns through “legal” means – -awaiting the general elections to be held in the early part of 1932. But Hitler makes no effort to conceal the fact that should the moment present itself, the Fascist Party will sweep into power through a putsch. The brown shirts in the meantime transcend parliamentary activity. They are carrying on violent reprisals against the proletariat in general, and the Communist Party, the trade unions and the Social Democratic workers in particular. They invade proletarian quarters and attack workers indiscriminately with weapons. Hitler promises that the moment he comes into power he will rid the country of the “pest of Marxism”. Every effort then will be utilized to destroy the revolutionary working class and the Communist movement through sheer physical violence. It appears that the experiences of Italian fascism should afford deep lessons for the Comintern and its Parties. But evidently this is not so.
 
The Capitulationist Policy of the Party
The German Communist Party advances numerous theories regarding the Fascist danger – all of them signify capitulation, and the surrender of struggle. The Party first says: There is no Fascist danger. That is all an illusion. The German working class will never stand for the existence of a Fascist dictatorship. But, if this is not enough, the Party continues: It will be a good thing if Fascism comes to power. Such a condition would lead to the unification of the working class and lay the basis for our own seizure of power. In a word, this new theory means that before the working class can seize power it is necessary to go through the school of a Fascist dictatorship which lays the basis for the proletarian dictatorship.
In an effort to win the support of the working class against Hitler (he recently paid a visit to Tyrol for the purpose of organizing his Fascist legions there and also to obtain aid from Mussolini and Italian Fascism), the Rote Fahne, official organ of the C.P.G. protests because Hitler saw fit to appeal to Italian Fascism which destroyed, “our language”, “our culture”, and “our traditions” in the Tyrol region. At the “einheitsfront” (united front) meetings held throughout Berlin with the object of organizing “resistance” against Fascism, the Party officially invites Fascist reporters to participate in the discussions. We witness the unique spectacle of a Party speaker against Fascism and a Fascist speaker against Communism, speaking from the same rostrum. Left Opposition workers present at those meetings, who protest against such an arrangement, denounce the Fascist “reporter”, and demand the floor themselves, are requested to maintain silence or be ejected from the hall by “Red Front Fighters”.
 
For a United Front Against Fascism
Against a unified German working class the Fascists could never take power. The proletariat can successfully resist and destroy the heterogeneous Hitler movement only on the basis of a unified resistance. The Party, instead of concentrating all its efforts in the creation of a genuine united front between the Communist and social democratic workers – rejects principally and practically this essential policy. Through the theories of the “Third Period” and “Social-Fascism” the Party has isolated itself from the trade unions, and draws itself further away from the millions of social democratic workers. The C.P.G. has aped the Fascists in an effort to stem their growth. In these efforts it has traveled another step away from a policy of revolutionary struggle and adopted instead a line of nationalism, dragging along with it the demands of Hitler. Within the Party a strong wave of anti-semitism exists.
The huge growth of the C.P.G. (its membership is now over 200,000) only testifies to the revolutionary character of the present situation. But the negative features of the Party policy, which is a negation of struggle and signifies a surrender to Fascism, will have disastrous results for the international working class. A victory of Fascism in Germany would mean the destruction of the Germany Communist Party. It would mean the dissolution of the labor movement. Once in power, Fascism would strengthen and unify its forces. It would cause a reaction to the Right in other countries. With the destruction of the German Communist Party, the Comintern would find itself weakened tremendously. A Fascist Germany, would in a short period of time receive the support of the imperialist powers and result in a quick attack against the Soviet Union.
The Party has as its task to prepare the basis for the seizure of power. It is an unavoidable task. The struggle in Germany is between Fascism and Communism. A victory for Fascism is a defeat for the international revolutionary movement. The Soviet Union would be in immediate danger of a military attack of the imperialist powers. It would be the signal for a reactionary turn to the Right on a world scale.
The international Communist movement, and in particular the German Communist Party must block this development. It can do this if its line is reversed. If it realizes that the foremost task for it is the organization of the working class for the revolutionary struggle. In this situation the Opposition must exert all its energies to force a turn in the Party line, and must actively project itself into the situation.
 



The Imperial Economic Conference held in Ottawa, Canada, for the past few weeks is of the deepest significance. Gathered here are the representatives of the domains comprising the British empire. The ostensible purpose of the gathering is to unite in closer bond the King’s “minions”. But as the conference progresses its object becomes clearer and all the more decisive. It is necessary to seek the driving force of the conference and for this we will divert for a moment from the actual proceedings.
The post-war period witnessed profound changes in the world economic and political situation. Upon the debris of the war arose unforeseen a new power, fresh and vigorous, unexhausted by the conflict. The United States of America became transformed then from a debtor into a creditor nation to whom the entire capitalist world is today indebted. In the course of a few years she dominated the European scene and opened war upon the world markets. Today America is the dominant world power.
 
America’s Rise to Power
American capitalism, through her own enormous resources, without experiencing the long winding road from feudalism to capitalism but building fresh upon a capitalist structure, her industries the most modern in the world, her technique of the highest, drove ahead to the topmost pinnacle of capitalist development. She displaced England as the financial baron of the world. In the field of militarism she has also surpassed the Empire. World politics is now dominated by the United States. And most important of all, in the field of foreign trade she has also displaced Great Britain. It is only necessary to cite the relative changes in the world market to understand fully what this displacement has meant. Prior to the World War the United States had 12% of the world export trade and Great Britain 18%. Toward the close of the past decade the figure was reversed with America in England’s place and England where America once stood.
Great Britain has not kept pace with this development of America. Her industrial technique for years remained unchanged. 19th century England could not keep abreast of the industrial apparatus of Uncle Sam. Her markets were grasped from her. Even her own dominions cast loving eyes to the United States. America invaded her South American markets seizing them one by one. Europe was already under the heel of Wall Street. In Asia the dollar penetrated deeply, ripping big hole in the British trade structure. And as has already been cited, in her dominions this same process took place.
It must be borne in mind, that the tremendous rise of American capitalism comes at a time when world capitalism is in decline. The hegemony of the United States exists at the expense of the rest of the world. Only by crushing Europe and putting her on rations has she been able to dominate there. By carrying on an intense assault upon the world market was she able to replace England. And there the conflict rages. The United States, seeks to perpetuate itself in power on the basis of domination of the world markets, made all the more necessary through her huge productive apparatus and by the contraction of the home market. England stands ready to defend her fortresses of world trade. Jarred and groggy she cannot stand many more steady blows.
 
Britain’s Demands
The stage is set; the play goes on. Great Britain is seeking closer ties with the dominions. The industrialization of the dominions brought them in constant conflict with the mother country. They challenged the seniority rights of England. To avoid open rifts, the Imperial Conference in 1926 established and recognized full equality of the dominions. That conference diminished their subordination to Great Britain. But it hardly solved anything. While politically holding the Empire together, it could not and did not solve the hard economic problems. They exist today. Represented by Stanley Baldwin, Britain demands that the dominions establish greater trade within the Empire. It demands that the dominions give preference to British-made goods for which in turn preference will given theirs. Britain will charge no duties on dominion goods if the dominions will likewise remove all tariffs on British goods. They plan to solve the crisis in that manner. But more than that the Imperial Economic conference is a direct challenge to the United States.
To establish a balance of trade within the Empire means to strike a blow against American capitalism. At present Canada is principally involved. The same condition however exists in the other dominions and in discussing Canada we speak for the general trends elsewhere. Of foreign capital in Canada, the share of Great Britain fell from 77% to 39% while that of the United States rose from 16% to 57%. The U.S. finds an outlet market here for 40% of her exports. On the reverse side of the picture 68% of Canadian imports come from the United States, as against 15.2% from Great Britain. Of 100 principle import items in 1930, Canada was supplied in the following ratio: The United States 79%, Great Britain 14%, and the rest of the world 7%. The following table of Canadian imports supplied by the United States is of extreme importance because of the key character of the industries:



Ratio of imports supplied by
the United States to Canada in 1930




  


  


91%


  


Electrical products




90%


Steel and Iron




90%


Machinery




99%


Automobile parts




98%


Automobiles




90%


Coal




98%


Farm implements




76%


Crude petroleum




99%


Gasoline




98%


Raw cotton



Great Britain exceeded only in textiles. In money values the relative import trade in 1930 was as follows:



Total Imports:


 


$1,248,273,582




United States


$847,442,037




Great Britain


$189,179,738




Dominions


$63,523,066




Foreign


$148,127,841



In addition it must be stated that of Canadian exports, 45% went to the United States. The aims of the conference become clear now. The conference aims at a general diminution of American trade within the Empire so as to allow for a general increase of Great Britain’s trade as one of the steps leading out of her severe crisis. The steps already taken to curb American products such as steel, machinery, electric will fail however from reaching their mark. There are 1,400 branch factories of American concerns in Canada. Any encroachments upon American trade will result in increased production of the Canadian plants to offset such restrictions as result from the conference. Almost the entire electrical industry in Canada is dominated or influenced by the United States. As soon as the announcement was made of an increase in the steel trade between Canada and Great Britain, which would necessarily result in a fall of American steel trade, the U.S. Steel Corporation declared its intention of expanding its Canadian mills at Ojibwa. Similarly this would take place with the automobile industry, electrical supplies and machinery.
 
Effects of Crisis
Thus Britain’s attempt to offset American trade in the dominions will be met with a powerful opposition. The crisis has had terrific effects on both nations. While America is adjusting herself for a big drive, Great Britain has already girded itself for battle. She is driving her first blow through the Empire. In the midst of the present crisis Canadian imports declined 27%. In this general decline American imports receded to 64.5% while that of Great Britain rose to 16.5%. The figures themselves while expressing the general effects of the crisis show the efforts of Britain to pull itself up by its bootstraps while the United States is acutely involved in the worst crisis of her history.
The loss of the immense Canadian market compromising 40% of American exports would indeed be a severe blow to the United States. While heretofore foreign markets absorbed only 10% of the surplus production in the United States, the present crisis has established this all-important fact: Imperialist America will open a planned and concerted drive upon the foreign markets of an immense character reinforced by the greatest military activity heretofore witnessed. There is no other way out for her. Her huge industrial apparatus which during the “prosperity days” functioned at only 60% of capacity, needs a far greater outlet than the shrinking home market. The absorption of surplus production must be sought elsewhere. It can find no place except in the field of foreign trade. The world markets continuing in a state of contraction are already divided. The United States arrived on the scene late: the division of the earth had already taken place. She must now win these from the other imperialist powers. And foremost of these is England.
In Europe she has already replaced her to a vast extent. She is dominant in Britain’s own dominions. In South America the trend is toward the United States. During the years 1913–27, the U.S. share of South American imports showed an increase from 24% to 38%, while that of Great Britain declined from 25% to 16%. In the rest of the world the same trend. At the expense of Great Britain the United States has gained hegemony. To maintain this it will be necessary for her to expand even more. But further expansion can come only in continued struggle with Great Britain. That involves a deep conflict. It has been raging for almost a decade. It will become more tense now. The Imperial Economic Conference is an example of this fierce antagonism. Here lies its significance.
To transform this into the language of politics is the task of the Communists. Even today the Stalinized Communist International, warped by its nationalist orientation, fails to grasp and fully understand the changes in post-war capitalism. In 1923 L.D. Trotsky, already established this fundamental change. In his brochure Europe and America, a few years later, he explained these new factors, tracing the decline of Great Britain’s power and its replacement by the United States. He pointed out that this significant change demanded the application of a policy on the part of the Communists concentrating specifically and orientating around this new situation. Had this been understood, it would perhaps in part have prevented such a miserable debacles in recent Comintern history as we have seen.
The dollar displaces the pound. America versus Britain. That is the tune of the world struggle. And therein lies the importance of the Imperial Economic Conference at Ottawa.
 




It will be observed that the World Congress of the Labor and Socialist International, which came into being, not as a result of the desires of the Buro, but, through pressure of the defeat in Germany, did not serve to check the agitation within the ranks of the LS.I. The Congress acted as a spur to the internal discussions taking place everywhere. Having briefly discussed the Congress and demonstrated the growth of left wing groupings in the International, we must of necessity occupy ourselves primarily with the American Socialist Party. No one can question the fact that the Americans, groups reflect world events and the decisions of the August Congress. But in the United States, some peculiar and interesting changes took place. The situation here does not mirror exactly the situation in Europe from the point of view of party politics. There is a greater confusion in America as we shall soon detect.
At the Congress, the reactionary wing of the international was in complete control. The Congress reaffirmed the policy of reformism of the L.S.I. In conflict with this position of the Congress and the majority of the delegations, stood the Polish Bund which rallied to its aide 18 votes out of 300 or more. The resolution as was shown, declared, for an end to the policy of reform and in favor of the “revolutionary” (!) struggle for power, for the, destruction of capitalism and the institution of the “dictatorship of the revolutionary party during the period of Socialist construction”.
It demanded an end to the policy of “coalition governments”, support of disarmament conferences, etc. On each of these questions, the Bund demonstrated confusion and showed that it had not learned anything since it endeavored to aid in the construction of the 2½ International. It does not distinguish between the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the “Dictatorship of the Party”. Nowhere is there mention made of the Soviets and their role in the struggle for power and after its seizure. It speaks of the “development of the dictatorship by the revolutionary classes (!) into a dictatorship of the workers and peasants”. The resolution calls for “new conditions of struggle”, and says too, that the Socialist Parties must prepare “without fail for the necessities of direct action”.
 
The Fundamental Questions
All of this, however, does not explain how, or what is meant. We said last week that now is not the time to write new doctrines. The program of Bolshevism answers every question raised by the left wings in the Socialist International and it answers these questions with clarity and, completeness. What the Bund has done has been to reiterate a stand it has held now for more than a decade and bring it up to date. The early Congresses of the Communist International answered the questions of the Struggle for Power, the Dictatorship of the Proletariat, the Struggle against War, the United Front, etc. They were answered then in detail and with thoroughness. The half answers and half-truths contained in the Bund position, can only lead to confusion. In this respect the program of the Revolutionary Policy Committee in America is far clearer than that of the Polish Bund, and even that is not yet a complete Marxist position.
But in spite of the confusing and vague character of the Bund position it served as the starter in the International discussion raging in the Parties of the Social Democracy. For that it deserves merit. But some of the groupings starting where the Bund began are now far ahead of it. The Bund instead of moving ahead is standing still.
In the first article we spoke of the following groups existing in the American Socialist Party: The Revolutionary Policy Committee, the Militants, the Forward Association, the Old Guard (Oneal, Lee, etc.), the Wisconsin Organization, the followers of the Polish Bund, the “Chicago Left Wing” of Senior and Krueger. Politically, there are not so many groups or grouplets. Such a division serves the purpose of differentiation. A political classification would find the R.P.C. and the followers of the Bund on the Left, the Old Guard, the Forward Association and the Wisconsin Organization on the Right, with the leaders of the American delegation, Krueger and Senior, which supported the Bund in Europe (!) and the Militants to whom they really belong ready to fall in line with any majority.
 
The R.P.C.
1. The Revolutionary Policy Committee. The articles of comrade Cannon have already discussed in detail the political position of this group. It is necessary however to examine their physiognomy a bit more. Without a doubt, the social composition of the group is its greatest weakness. The group is made up primarily of the petty-bourgeois and intellectual section of the Party, a great many of these being graduates of the League for Industrial Democracy. Thus, while the group enjoys a great interest and even support for its views, its lack of roots in the Party proper hampers its influence over the proletarian section of the organization. The sympathies that it enjoys so far have little realization in organizational gains. The Program is signed, by over 80 active party members, few, however, having any decisive influence on the Party. Most of these are new in the movement. While its program is ahead of that of the Bund, its closest approximation in this country, the R.P.C. has no connection with the Bund. Similarly with respect to the matter of international connections. Though its existence is to be explained by international events and is a reflection of international currents in the L.S.I., the group leads a completely “national” existence. This is confirmed by its program on “International Relations”.
The R.P.C. represents a serious movement within the S.P. towards Marxism, its program is not yet Marxism, but has moved a long way in that direction. The great number of omissions from its program gives it at best a skeleton character. It is not sufficient, however, to offer skeleton views to the socialist workers. You must take each fundamental question and painstakingly analyse it from the vantage point of Marxism. Each question has to be thoroughly and completely discussed, every variant considered. R.P.C. Program
The entire program is six pages long. Within these six pages are contained the position, of the R.P.C. on: The Road to Power, War, Labor Policy, a Labor Party, the United Front, NRA, Farmers, Negroes, the Middle Class, the Soviet Union, International Relations and Conclusions. Quite obviously in such boundaries a program can not touch properly on any of the questions it discusses. But this is not the main criticism we have to make. Our main criticism of the R.P.C. is that on the fundamental questions it is either ambiguous, incomplete, or wrong. This in spite of the fact that in general the program is of a left character, in the direction of Communism.
The question of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat is a case in point. After declaring in favor of it, the program says nothing of the Soviets, their position in the struggle for power and their relation to the establishment and existence of the proletarian dictatorship. On the one hand it speaks of the working class state as “an entirely new type of state”, without saying anywhere that the capitalist state must be destroyed and replaced by the workers’ state. Because of this lack of clarity it can conclude this section of the program by saying:
“Once socialists are in possession (!) of the state machinery by the mandate of the workers, their task is to secure and insure the governmental power for the victorious revolution by arming the workers for its defense against all possibility of a counter-revolutionary resistance, and to proceed to transform the economic and social basis of society.”
Which state machinery is referred to here? It is by no means clear. Apparently the capitalist state machinery! By the mandate of the workers! What kind of a mandate? The seizure of power as a result of the armed struggle of the proletariat or a ballot victory? The R.P.C. may protest and say: But we have already declared that we are for the workers state, the new type of state based upon the Workers Councils. Nevertheless, it is not clear precisely what is meant in the program.
 
The Question of the State
The question of the state is the most important question for the revolutionary movement. It is upon the evaluation of the state that the workers’ movement remains divided; on this question the 2nd International split. The organization of the Communist International was the outcome. And here too, the syndicalists and anarchists are divided from the rest of the workers’ movement. Quite seriously and earnestly, we suggest that the R.P.C. make a thorough study of the documents of the Communist International on the question of the State and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat, prepared for the 2nd Congress. Once clarified, the R.P.C. can become the instrument of clarifying and educating the ranks of the S.P., drawing large sections of its workers to the side of the revolution.
On “International Relations” the program is wholly inadequate and is in fact false, it says:
“The Socialist Party of America must make every effort to get the above principles (of the R.P.C. – A.G.) adopted by the Labor and Socialist International in order that it may be the effective instrument in promoting the world revolution”.
The program concludes with the following declaration in bold type:
“THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO REASON (absolutely none – A.G.) WHY THE SOCIALIST PARTY OF AMERICA CAN NOT MEET THE OPPORTUNITY WHICH CONFRONTS IT TODAY IF IT ADOPTS A CLEAR, WELL-DEFINED PROGRAM BASED UPON THE ABOVE PRINCIPLES AND TACTICS AND SETS UP ADEQUATE MACHINERY FOR EFFECTIVELY PUTTING THESE PRINCIPLES INTO ACTION.”
On one of the most decisive questions facing the workers movement today the program actually says little, and what it does say is wrong. It orientates itself completely upon the 2nd International. The question of Stalinism, the existence and role of Centrism, and the movement for the 4th International are entirely left out of the program. Without even as much as a mention of these questions it is clear why the R.P.C. has no genuine international orientation.
 
“Reforming” the 2nd International
These questions are of fundamental character. Around these the R.P.C. can make or break itself. While on many issues it is moving toward a position of Marxism, it is not there yet. When Lovestone says that “In substance, the program of the R.P.C. is Marxian”, it only expresses his patronizing attitude toward the R.P.C. and his desire to tie this movement to the kite of Stalinism. Genuine revolutionaries will endeavor to help the R.P.C. to move completely to communism, that is, to revolutionary Marxism. From its position on “International Relations” it is obvious that the R.P.C. orientates itself on the basis of the policy of reforming the Socialist Party and the Labor and Socialist International. There is not the slightest hint that the fundamental character of social democracy make it impermissible to remain within its ranks. The possibility of a break is not even countenanced in the program. And as already pointed out, its relation to the other international movements is not even as much as mentioned. The R.P.C. must begin rapidly to clarify its position on all these questions, and make clearer its point of view on those points expressed in the program. It should root itself deeply among the proletarian layers of the party and seek support there. We shall endeavor to help the R.P.C. make these steps forward and draw the proper conclusions to their present struggle.
 







Editor’s Note: This is the first of a series of four articles by Comrade Glotzer on the groupings and issues at the forthcoming convention of the Socialist Party.



* * * *
The Socialist Party of America will hold) its annual convention in Detroit on June 1, 2 and 3. The entire Party is now engaged in preparing for this meet. Discussions have already begun and groupings taken shape. The membership is in a state of agitation somewhat reminiscent of the time when the first left wing struggle broke out.
The present condition must naturally be contrasted to the almost decade-long period in which the Socialist Party was a small ineffectual organization. Since the crisis, however, it has grown steadily in influence and numbers, so that the Party approaches the convention with a membership of over 25,000.
In the National Headquarters’ Supplement of the Milwaukee Leader of March 3rd, are published numerous resolutions on the leading questions facing the Party: a – Declaration of Principles; b – National Recovery Administration; c – Labor Unions; d – Agriculture; e – the United Front; f – Socialist Press; g – Socialist Tactics; h – International Relations, Fascism, Democracy, etc.
With respect to the decisive fundamental questions, a series of different viewpoints are presented as the basis for the pre-convention discussion. These views vary from the crassest reactionary Right Wing position on the class struggle to the Left, including also a tendency favoring adherence to the movement for the Fourth International.
 
Groupings in the Party
The emergence of definite left wing groupings in the American Socialist Party may be received by many with surprise and doubt. An examination of the pre-convention material, however, is all that is necessary to convince one of this fact. Thus one sees the following groups and tendencies preparing to do battle for their respective points of view: The Revolutionary Policy Committee (patterned after the committee of the same name in the British Independent Labor Party), the Militants, the “Chicago Left Wing” (Senior and Krueger), the ultra-reactionaries of the Forward Association under the leadership of Abe (“Hear the Other Side”) Cahan, the Old Guard, the Wisconsin Organization (Hoan), and those who follow and support the position of the Polish Bund. In any case, there is variety.
What are the chief points of struggle? First and foremost is the principled question of: Reform versus Revolution. Allied with this and flowing out of it is the question of the proletarian dictatorship. Out of the disputes over these two fundamental questions of Marxism over which the workers movement has already split into well defined groupings (social democracy and communism), there has logically developed differences on all phases of work engaged in by the Socialist Party. The questions of Trade Union work, the United Front, The struggle against War, Labor Party Soviet Union, and a whole series of other questions are in dispute. Basis Causes of the Groupings The situation in the Socialist Party belies the Stalinist position on Social Democracy. They have and continue to regard the social democracy as on solid, immovable “social fascist mass” incapable of moving in the direction of communism. A Marxist approach to the question will demonstrate at once that conditions which made possible the emergence of an International left wing in Social Democracy during the war years, resulting in the creation of the Communist International on the basis of the old, recur once more in different form.
Outstanding victories of the proletariat (the Russian Revolution) are not the only motive forces of the international working class Major defeats likewise prove to be influences upon the workers’ movement, pushing it in one direction or another. Thus if the Russian Revolution had the effect of finally breaking off large sections of social democracy already dissatisfied with the banner of Kautsky, Bauer Scheideman, et al., and pushing them in the direction of Communism and the banner of Marxism, there is no reason why a catastrophic defeat, such as took place in Germany (and followed in Austria) should not bring about similar movements.
The defeats in Germany and Austria demonstrated the bankruptcy of Social Democracy and Stalinism. These two events are responsible for the movements within the Social Democratic parties the world over. The specific political and organizational conditions associated with the Social Democratic movement explain why it is going through another internal upheaval; and similar reasons, from another point of view, explain why Stalinism, momentarily, ids such tremendous internal disruptions on the basis of the series of defeats suffered by it. This we leave for a later discussion.
 
Roots in the International Situation
It is impossible to explain the situation in the American Socialist Party, the existence of such a variety of groups, with different views in. some respects and views that coincide in others, without seeking its roots. The background of the internal situation in the American Party is the European situation The defeat in Germany, carrying with it the destruction of the “dean” of social democratic parties, brought into existence an International Congress (August 1933). At this congress, in spite of the endorsement it gave to the policies and activities of the Germany Party, there emerged a definite left wing point of view under the leadership of the Polish Bund. This point of view disassociated itself from the policies pursued by the German S.D.P. and the Labor and Socialist International (2nd) which was dominated by the German Party.
While the left wing received but eighteen out of three hundred votes cast at the August, 1933 International Congress, since then it has grown everywhere. The Austrian situation also acted as an impelling force on the left wing in all countries. The left wing takes shape as an international grouping disassociating itself from the whole course of the L.S.I. pursued up to and through the German and Austrian events, demanding a complete revision in theory and practice, of social democratic policy. Just as the decisions of the international congress of last year did not and could not settle the international situation in the L.S.I., but has only raised them in a more acute form, so the coming convention of the American Socialist Party will riot settle the questions in dispute. The situation in the American Party is a reflection of the international situation. The left wing groupings here are a part of the international left wing groupings, all of them arising under the pressure of great European defeats. Irrespective of the outcome of the Detroit convention the main issues that agitate the Socialist organization today will continue until a definite solution, both politically and organizationally, of the questions in dispute takes place.
 
Probing the Disputes
A discussion of the coming convention cannot be held without consideration of:

The international congress of August 1933, in which the conflict between the Right represented by the German leaders and the international “Old Guard” on the one hand and the left wing led by the Polish Bund (supported by a majority of the American delegation!) on the other, broke out in sharp form over the fundamental questions raised in connection with the most decisive event since the Russian Revolution – the victory of Fascism in Germany;
 
The international groupings of a left character and the reflection of these tendencies in America; and
 
The possible outcome of these internal struggles, or more precisely: what to do!

The forthcoming articles will deal first with the Congress of the L.S.I. held in August 1933, the present situation in the L.S.I., and, finally, the situation in America. Only on this basis is it possible to understand what is taking place in the American Socialist Party and orientate oneself to that situation – that is, in viewing the situation here, not as an isolated event, but as the logical sequence to the International Congress and the discussion that took place therein following the German events.
 




The impending collapse of the German Social Democratic Party, shortly before Hitler’s appointment to the Chancellorship of the German Republic, was the background to the first decision to hold a world congress in January 1933 of the Labor and Socialist International. The actual surrender and resultant breakdown of the largest and most influential Party in the L.S.I. did not hasten this gathering but rather led to its postponement.
Its sessions did not convene until August 1933, and not because there was a real desire by the leadership of the 2nd International to hold such a world gathering to take inventory of the condition in which this movement found itself. The powerful reformist British Labor Party and the Swedish Social Democratic Party even opposed the original decision for the January Congress. In reality not a single member of the International Bureau wanted the conference. If it was held it “was due to the fact that no one member of the Bureau was willing to move its further postponement”. In a word, the pressure in the ranks of a good number of the leading parties in the International forced the holding of the congress. That explains the unwillingness of any member of the International Bureau to take responsibility for its postponement.
The congress became the forum for the expression of the diversified views current in the movement. The horrible defeats of the working class acted as the instrument in raising serious doubts in the minds of wide strata of social democratic workers as to the efficacy of social democratic theory and action. The leadership sensed at once that the congress could not meet without this question rising to the forefront. It was clear that here was involved no ordinary situation. The defeat of the German working class was one more great test of the international program of social democracy, applied to the concrete revolutionary situation in that country. The facts were that the German Party suffered an inglorious defeat, and committed a disgraceful betrayal of the working class.
 
Leading Role of German Party
It was a discussion upon these questions the International Bureau feared. It knew that the congress, willy-nilly, had to occupy itself not alone with the German Party and its leadership, but with the entire International. The German Social Democratic Party bore the same relation to the L.S.I. as does the Russian Communist Party in the Stalinist International. It dominated the 2nd International. That is why a discussion on Germany, and the role of the Social Democratic Party in the crucial situation meant unavoidably a discussion on the whole international course of social democracy. Yet the Bureau could not avoid the congress for fear of a worldwide inner revolt which would disrupt its ranks. The congress then became the means of stemming the obvious leftward trend of large sections of social democratic workers.
In order to understand the congress it is necessary to turn briefly to the executive session of the Bureau. In his pamphlet The Struggle for Revolutionary Socialism, Heinrich Erlich, one of the leaders of the Polish Bund, describes vividly the character of this meeting. He says:
“When the session of the Executive Committee was called, there was not a member on the Executive who had the least desire to discuss the past, particularly the German past.”
Naturally! An effort was made to discuss only the future without reference to the past. That effort was in no sense realized. The discussion, at the Executive Committee and at the conference centered about Germany. All ideas, plans, criticisms and defences developed out of that discussion. But in general, little discussion took place. The only criticism made of the course pursued by the German Social Democracy came from the Polish Bund which attempted to draw some lessons from the catastrophic events. According to Ehrlich, in the Executive Session, Otto Wels, the leader of the German S.D.P., spoke with an aim of eliciting sympathy for his party and for himself. “There wasn’t a trace of his former self-assurance. He was ready to admit that the toleration policy was a mistake ...” In the conference, records show that the greatest number of participants in discussions, were the critics of the line of the L.S.I.
 
Wels Defends Policy in Germany
In the Congress Wels changed his attitude entirely. He spoke sharply and vigorously as of old. He admitted nothing and defended everything. We refer to Ehrlich’s description of his speech at the congress:
“This speech was unlike the one he delivered at the Executive. There, he spoke as a broken down man, (!) as one conscious of his guilt, although without courage to admit it, as one who tries to explain away instead of defending his actions. At the executive session, Wels realized that he was addressing members of the International only.
“In his speech at the conference, however, he was surer of himself. He took the offensive. He thought it necessary at this conference to cast aside the accusations that the German Social Democracy was not nationalistic enough, that it had not shown sufficient interest in the German nation. In short, speaking as he did, Wels had his German audience in mind rather than the audience of the conference.
“It was a harrowing speech. Incidentally my gaze fell on the French delegate Marquet (representing the extreme right wing of the French Party, now split from it and forming the Neo-Socialist party in France – A.G.). With his characteristic smile, he listened to Wels. Marquet himself hasn’t too great a belief in internationalism. What a joy it must have been to him to listen to the nationalistic utterances of Wels”.
Graphic enough! The great majority of delegates at the Congress represented the same point of view as Wels presented to them. In a word, International Social Democracy reiterated its policy of reformism, coalition governments, the theory of the “lesser evil”, extreme nationalism, and a whole series of downright reactionary policies that were given expression by other delegations.
The report of Wels on the German situation more or less marked off the sides in the conference. Out of the report there naturally arose a discussion on the policies pursued here, and breaking beyond the confines of Germany, took up the whole course of the International. There were three points on the Congress agenda: (1) The struggle for power; (2) The struggle against war; and (3) The unity of the working class. Around each one of these a conflict broke out between those demanding adherence to the old policies, a continuation of the past and a small group demanding a break with the policies of the past. The lineup appeared as follows: The extreme right wing making up the majority of the Congress and led by the German delegation, the British Labor Party, the Scandinavian delegates and part of the French delegation. A center group led by Adler and Bauer, which always succumbed to the pressure from the right wing. And finally the left wing of the Congress led by the Polish Bund and supported by delegates of the French Party, the Italian Party, and paradoxically enough, the majority of the American delegation.
 
Polish Bund Leads Fight
The victories of Fascism forced the Congress to consider, under the discussion of the first point on the agenda, the validity of the policy of reform. The Polish Bund led the fight against the old point of view and presented the new position that is becoming current with the numerous left groupings in the Socialist movement.
That view calls for an end of the policy of reform and states that the only possible means for a victory against capitalism lies through the destruction of the capitalist state and the establishment of “the dictatorship of the revolutionary party (!) during the period of Socialist construction” This position, however, was by no means the dominant one. Reformism is all powerful in the 2nd International. Listen to the speech of the Danish Delegate, Andersen, who declared at the conference that:
“It would be very unfortunate if the workers as a result of our discussions, would gather the impression that recent events compel us to seek new ways (!) and new methods ( !) for carrying on our struggle. I should like to warn against the statements made here to the effect that the German events mean the end and bankruptcy of reformism. It is one of those slogans that result in dangerous illusions and leads to dangerous generalizations.”
Vougt, the delegate from Sweden, voiced similar sentiments:
“If the International wants to succeed it must openly and unequivocally state, regardless of all theories destined for the far distant future, that we defend democracy, the freedom of nations. We do not want a proletarian dictatorship. We want to preserve the democratic institutions ... Let us discuss the conquest of power, but let us talk less about how to go about making revolutions. When the International will appeal to the League of Nations for peace and freedom, for the struggle against war, for the defense of democracy, its purpose will be clearly understood, and its power will be manifest.”
The conference discussed all three points on the agenda as one. There were no limits to the subjects argued at one time, and the discussion drifted in such a manner. The majority resolution of the conference did not, as the minority claims, fail to give definite statements on their position. The resolution reiterated the position of reformism. It did so on all questions. There was one slight change. The resolution declared that in those countries where fascism was in power it would be necessary to employ “revolutionary means” to bring about its overthrow. But by no means should the working class employ revolutionary means in the “democratic” countries!
 
Right Wing Dominates Congress
So much did the Right Wing dominate the Congress that even the weak-kneed efforts of Bauer to state simple truths failed of their purpose. Thus the following clause was stricken from the original draft of the resolution:
“The German democracy of the future will either be Socialist or not come into existence. In the Fascist countries the goal of the revolutionary struggles must not be the return to bourgeois democracy but the conquest of Socialist Democracy.”
Criticisms of the League of Nations were stricken out. Affirmation of disarmament conferences as a means of preventing war was included. The Right wing insisted upon the deletion of the following:
“The international will oppose by all its means any aggression against the Soviet Union. It denounces once more the banditry of Japanese imperialism against the Chinese revolution, and the menace which Japan is creating on the Eastern frontier of Russia. It denounces the pitiable failure of the policies of the League of Nations in the presence of these dangers.”
The “Marxist” Bauer, who then sharply criticized the German Social Democracy, only to prepare the same fate for the Austrian proletariat, withdrew every time the Right Wing made its demand. The majority resolution in its accepted form, continued to endorse social democratic policy as we have known it to be: rejection of the revolutionary struggle for power, the proletarian dictatorship, the Soviet system, and reiterated its reformist policy. Just as Stalinism has not learned a single lesson from the events of the past years, the Labor and Socialist International similarly prepares continuation of a course that has brought disaster to the international working class. By its assertion of the class collaborationist policy, pursued now for more than a decade, and the promise to continue a nationalist course, there is not the slightest hope in this organization.
 
Resolution of Polish Bund
Contrasted to this was the resolution presented by the Polish Bund and supported in all by 18 of 300 delegates. This resolution represented the left current at the Congress. As pointed out previously, it was inevitable that any serious conflict on fundamental questions within the Socialist movement had to revolve around the question of the state and the struggle for power. This is the point of departure of the Bund resolution.
It says for example:
“The German events condemn at one and the same time the failure of the Communist policy of division (it should read Stalinist – A.G.) and the reformist policy of Socialism.”
Further:
“The Conference declares that it is not the task of the Socialist parties to attempt to straighten out the capitalist world or even to collaborate in such attempts. It declares on the contrary that by whatever means (!) they are going to achieve power they must not secure the exercise of power within the structure of the capitalist regime but must utilize power in order to destroy the bourgeois state and install the dictatorship of the revolutionary party (not the proletariat – A.G.) during the period of Socialist construction”.
Again:
“It is evident that the working class will defend energetically its democratic achievements against all reactionary attempts but the struggle against Fascism cannot have as its goal the maintenance or re-establishment of bourgeois democracy which is based on economic inequality but that of constructing a real Socialist democracy ... it is necessary that the working class begins to prepare at once for a struggle by all the means (!) which may secure victory.”
Asserting the need to struggle against the crisis, to work out plans, to win the middle class, expressing lack of confidence in the League of Nations, the Disarmament Conference, the Economic Conference, and concluding that only the working class alone can struggle against Fascism, War and the crisis, the resolution ends. The resolution was signed by two Bund, two French, two Italian, one Estonian, one Belgian and four American delegates. Six additional votes were registered for it in the Congress. Thus almost the entire Congress of 300 delegates supported the reactionary right wing.
 
Left Wing Confuses Issues
It is clear that in August 1933, the lines of difference in the L.S.I. were first beginning as a result of the German events. They were destined to grow sharper and clearer. But then, there was still a great deal of confusion. The Polish Bund always represented the 2½ International tendency and it needed only the German situation to force it into the open once more and reaffirm a position it has had for some time. Even so, the “left wing” resolution is marked by confusion, and by a failure to draw correct lessons from their analysis. The bulk of the congress, and that includes the largest and most influential parties in the L.S.I., asserts the policy that has been pursued by Social Democracy for many years, the policy that led to heavy sacrifices and defeats of the world proletariat.
* * * *
Since the time the congress was held new events have served to increase the discussion in the Social Democratic movement on the fundamental policies followed by it. The growth of Fascism reached a new height in its victory over Social Democracy in Austria. The armed struggle of the Austrian workers, who fought in defense, at a time when it was too late, has provoked new doubts in the minds of many social democratic workers. The decisions of the Congress in August 1933, when social democracy, following the defeat in Germany, reaffirmed the defense of bourgeois democracy, and declined to adopt a policy of revolutionary struggle for power with the aim of destroying the capitalist state and substituting for it the proletarian, received another blow in Austria. The continued rise of Fascism in every European country forces to a head the disputes over fundamental questions revolving around the fate of society and the working class. Thousands of social democratic workers are receiving new and practical instructions in the character of the state, democracy and the struggle for power. They are learning, and rapidly, too, that reformism has tied their hands and made them easy victims of capitalist oppression. The leftward movements in the 2nd International are therefore to be sought in the events of the last year and a half.
 
Left Tendencies Grow
Since August, the left tendencies have grown throughout the L.S.I. The Polish Socialist Party accepted a resolution at its congress endorsing “a proletarian dictatorship of workers and peasants”. Left tendencies and groupings exist in almost every party in the International. The Spanish youth organization has declared itself for the Fourth International. The youth organizations of Poland, Belgium, France and the United States also move rapidly to the left on a number of very important questions. In Paris, the Right wing dominated completely. Undoubtedly if a congress were held now, there would be a different relation of forces.
The Polish Bund, we said above, did not really move toward the left. It reaffirmed, in reality a position it has had for some time. While it demands a break with reformism, it does not lend to clarity. It is confused on the questions of the struggle for power and the proletarian state. It deliberately confuses Stalinism with Bolshevism, as do all neo-Marxists. That is why it speaks against both, Communism (!) and Social Reformism. And in its place? It demands “Revolutionary Socialism”, “Marxian Socialism”. But Revolutionary Socialism, Marxian Socialism, is the quintessence of Bolshevism. The fundamentals of Marxism are contained in the decisions of the early congresses of the Communist International.
It is not as if we are beginning anew. The revolutionary movement has already passed through the war years. It has already experienced the betrayal of social democracy when it came to the support of imperialist capitalism with the outbreak of the war, up to the present day. And the “left wing” today has not expressed a single new thought. It has expressed only half truths and confusion. One does not need to investigate (!) the different ways and means to take power. Revolutionary means (!) in Fascist countries and the old ways in democratic countries can only prepare more defeats for the working class. You must say very openly and clearly that the road to power lies through the armed assault of the working class upon the whole structure of capitalism, to transform the social order. It means the destruction of the capitalist state and the establishment of the proletarian, dictatorship, which serves as the transitional power of the working class, in the erection of the classless society. This is fundamental. There is no other way!
And so it is with a whole series of questions: the Soviet system, the struggle in the trade unions, against the crisis, against war, the liberation of the colonial peoples, etc. We do not demand that the left wing groupings in the 2nd International at once accept a full communist program. We do point out, however, that when the Polish Bund declares at the Paris Congress that the working class must seek new ways and break with “Communism and reformism”, that it lends to confusion and not clarity.
 
Perspectives of the Fight
As the struggle develops, naturally, a greater clarity will be achieved. For the moment however, the struggle is still in its early stages. The numerous groups that exist all over the world, will begin to find their centers. There will be a great deal of back-sliding, no doubt. But the genuine left wing movement will also find its center and its path.
Such is the background to the present situation in the Socialist International and in the American party. The pressure of events is driving great sections of the socialist workers to the left. The moods of these workers drives many leaders to the left – some genuinely, the majority, as experience has shown, only to head off a real break with the past and to decapitate the movement.
Out of the Paris conference, the groupings and tendencies have become more active and seek one common level on the basis of a clarification of the issues involved. True revolutionaries will seek to help these left groupings and tendencies to find the proper road. The Bolshevik-Leninists will endeavor to help in the education of the workers. It will be necessary to demonstrate to them, that upon the basis of the struggles they are engaged in, only one possible outcome exists. Either a complete break with reformism and the 2nd International or else capitulation to it. On the basis of such a break, it will be impossible for these workers to go to Stalinism, which deserves the same fate as reformism. These forces now in the Socialist International must participate in the movement to reorganize the ranks of the international proletariat. In other words it must participate in the construction of the Fourth International.
The general background of the groupings in the American Socialist Party lies in the International Congress. On the basis of an understanding of the situation in the International, which grew out of world-shaping events, we shall be able to understand the situation in the American Party.
 







(Ed. Note – Albert Glotzer, the author of the following article, has just returned from the International Youth Conference held at Luxemburg, Belgium which he attended as the representative of the Spartacus Youth organizations of the United States.)





The international youth conference, called by the youth section of the Independent Socialist Party of Holland for the purpose of discussing the international situation and the tasks of the youth, was dispersed two hours after convening by the Dutch police, acting under the instructions of the Minister of Justice. On February 24th, noon, delegates representing independent socialist and communist youth organizations from over fifteen countries of Europe and America, gathered at Amsterdam, and in a body proceeded to the town of Laren, one hour away. The police entered the conference while it was in the stage of organizing itself, arrested the 19 foreign delegates and drove them away by bus to the Laren jail. There the delegates were divided into two groups, one remaining at the Laren jail and the bulk of the delegates transferred to the investigating prison at Amsterdam.
 
German Delegates Handed over to Hitler Police
Four German comrades who remained in the Laren jail were summarily handed over to the Hitler police by the mayor of the town, despite the active intervention of comrade Sneevilet of the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Holland and a member of the Dutch Parliament. The delegates transferred under heavy guard to Amsterdam (three Germans, two Norwegians, two Americans, one Frenchman, two Belgians one Swiss and one Pole), were deported to Belgium, after remaining for two days in prison where they were severely cross-examined, photographed and fingerprinted.
If the “democratic” Dutch regime thought that by this dastardly act they had thereby prevented the actually convening of the conference they were to be rudely disappointed. While in prison the confined comrades prepared for the reassembling of the deported delegates and the holding of a conference. Luxemburg was chosen as its meeting place. On Monday, February 26th, the deportations were effected and on Tuesday evening a plenary session was held by the deported delegates under illegal conditions at Luxemburg.
 
Conference Reorganized
The original conference was initiated by the Independent Socialist Party Youth of Holland. With the events in Holland, it became clear that the conference would have to be completely reorganized. The plenary session decided that the conference, while having its origin in Holland was actually a new conference, and resolved to hold it in the name of the Internationalist Communist League and the Socialist Workers Party of Germany. The plenum agreed upon an agenda for the conference and decided to issue a manifesto to the international working class movement denouncing the actions of the reactionary Dutch regime and calling upon all organizations to voice their protests.
On Wednesday, February 28th, the conference convened. The following organizations were represented by delegates:

The Youth Secretariat of the Internationalist Communist League, representing the youth sections of the I.C.L. which could not send delegates.
The American, French, Belgian, German and Swiss sections of the I.C.L.
The Socialist Youth Association of Germany (SAP).
The Workers Youth Association of Norway (NAP).
The Mot Dag group of Norway.
The Revolutionary Youth Association of Holland (RSP).
The Socialist Youth Association of Holland (OSP).
The Youth Group of the Communist League of Struggle, U.S.A.

By a transfer of mandates, the youth organization of the PUP of France, and the Roumanian Association of United Socialist Youth were represented. Holland had refused to admit the representatives of the Independent Communist Youth organization of Sweden, who had sent telegraphic greetings of solidarity from Copenhagen, and transferred their mandate to the Mot Dag group of Norway.
 
Reports of National Sections
With the opening of the conference it was found that while a smaller number of delegates were present, actually, all the organizations assembled in Holland were represented at Luxemburg. The first point on the agenda was a series of reports by the national sections on the status of their organizations. These reports showed that in almost all the countries present active and vital organizations and groups existed with a will to reorientate the proletarian youth movement.
The reports formed the introduction to the political discussion. The political discussion of the international situation and the tasks of the youth was the most important question of the conference. Here was expressed the opinions of the various organizations present on the basic question of what to do. In the course of the discussion apparent agreement was reached by the delegates on a series of principled questions such as the proletarian dictatorship, the soviet system, the armed struggle for power, the united front, etc.
But on the decisive question of what to do sharp differences expressed themselves between the delegation of the ICL and the left, centrist elements adhering to the London Bureau (now transferred to Amsterdam). The ICL declared that, following the fundamental agreement on a series of principled question, and following the general agreement as to the degeneration and collapse of social democracy and Stalinism, including their youth organizations, it was necessary to declare openly and without equivocation the need of creating the new international and the new youth international.
 
Proposals of S.A.P. Youth
The representatives of the SAP, elaborating on their thesis, presented the unique, and not entirely new, point of view, that it is necessary to win the broad masses of workers and worker youth to the support the and following such an event to then conference on principled questions declare and work for the new internationals. The comrades argued that while they agreed to the necessity of the new international, it was not the decisive question. They proceeded to divorce the question of the new international from the agitation for the principles of communism, as if such a separation was possible.
The SAP concluded their discussion with the proposal: to accept their thesis which did not contain the necessary declaration for the new international and the new youth International. Following the acceptance of this, to elect a buro, with a secretariat located at Stockholm which would have as its tasks the work of rallying the broad masses of youth around the banner of the principles contained in the thesis. Then, in order arrive at a concord with the ICL, they proposed an additional resolution proclaiming the necessity of the new youth international and to elect a buro located in Paris to work for the realization of aims of the resolution. Standpoint of I.C.L.
These proposals were unacceptable to the delegation of the I.C.L. which decided to reject the motions. To us it was inconceivable that the proposed Paris buro could carry on an intense activity for the new youth international without at the same time working and agitating for it on the basis of the principles of communism, which could not and should not be separated from the question of the new international. The existence of two buros of this character would only result in a dualism of work.
The Stockholm buro which would stand on the position that the social democracy and Stalinism were bankrupt, would carry on its work without telling the workers what to do. We demonstrated that to wait until mass national organizations were in existence before building the new international could lead to nowhere, and that it was inverted “internationalism”, since the reorganization and reassembling of the new organization of the working class could only be on the basis of the existence of the International movement. We therefore proposed that the conference come out openly and clearly for the new youth international, with one buro to work in this direction.
 
Agreement on Amended Thesis
After an intense and protracted discussion, agreement was reached between the two tendencies at the conference. The representative of the Socialist Youth Association (S.A.P.) proposed them to include in their thesis the clauses for the new youth international and the new international, to elect one buro with its secretariat at Stockholm, which would have the task of realizing the decisions of the conference in practice. Inasmuch as the thesis in general renders a correct characterization of the present world situation and a correct criticism of the 2nd and 3rd Internationals, we found it possible, with the acceptance of our proposals on the new international, to agree to the motions.
All the other organizations present – with the exception of the Norwegian Workers Party – accepted the theses. As a result the basis for the creation of two buros became non-existent. These decisions of course remain provisional, dependent upon the actions of the organizations represented at the conference.
 
Appeal to All Revolutionary Youth
With the above political basis laid, the conference proceeded to the more practical questions of the future. It was decided by the conference to extend invitations to all independent revolutionary youth organizations, including those organizations within the official internationals, who show leftward tendencies, to attach themselves to the decisions of the conference. The Buro, the conference decided, should consist of one member for every national section adhering to the decisions of the conference. Because of its international character the ICL is to be represented by three members.
It was further decided to create a secretariat of this buro, consisting of three members and made up of representatives of the Socialist Youth Association (SAP), the Independent Communist Youth of Sweden, and the Internationalist Communist League, with its center at Stockholm. This secretariat would have as its tasks the practical carrying through of the decisions of the conference and the buro.
Thus, the conference dispersed by the Dutch police, became a reality through the efforts of the ICL and the SAP. After a day of sharp and intensive discussion of a comradely character, we succeeded in overcoming the differences of the conference, and arriving at an agreement which makes possible for us to go a step forward. But it must be stated very clearly that the conference and its decisions while marking a tremendous step forward, is after all only the first step.
 
Great Tasks Ahead
The real work lies ahead. Everything depends upon how the buro and its secretariat proceeds to realize the conference decisions in life. This, after all, is decisive. In our opinion, the executive must emulate the activities of the International of Socialist Youth during [the war years when it] continued to carry the banner of internationalism and proletarian revolution. It must be an active body alive to the needs of the hour.
Because of the hurried character of the conference it was unable to discuss separately, nor to work out a concrete program of action on the war danger. Similarly with the question of Fascism and the struggle to win the mass of working youth. These are fundamental questions that have to be acted upon and solved by the leading body. It must begin at once with an international campaign to popularize the decisions of the conference, to win greater support for them, to initiate an international campaign against the danger of war and the Fascist reaction. It must work out a program of rallying the wide masses of proletarian youth. In a word the leading body must build a genuine Communist youth international.
The youth organizations of the Internationalist Communist League will do all in their power to further this work. The buro can rely upon our active initiative and support in this direction. We feel confident that an application of the decisions of the conference, a persistent and intense activity on the part of the buro and the sections adhering to the conference, will make possible the creation of a mass Communist youth international based on the principles of Marxism.
 



The most remarkable thing about Milovan Djilas’ book is that it was written in isolation under conditions of repression, harassment and imprisonment. Although it is obvious that he read voluminously in preparation of the work, his ideas emerging from extensive empirical observations and suggestive study, he was, unfortunately, unable to discuss or exchange his views in a community of co-thinkers or critics. Writing in a Titoist jail, he was unable to expand, elucidate or qualify his theory of Stalinist society as a new social order and the Stalinist ruling class as a new class. Many of his ideas stand subject to several interpretations and meanings, others are unclear, still others are wrong in their historical statement.
Though The New Class is certainly more than a political tract as some critics have labeled the book, it is not by any means a substantial theoretical work. Many of the observations are merely assertions stated in declarative sentences without discussion or proof; others, though important in themselves, are merely hints of important political and social questions that need study, elaboration and conclusion. For it is unquestionably true that Stalinist society, which Djilas calls throughout his book “Contemporary Communism” to indicate that he is not identifying it with the original theory of communism or socialism, has introduced a whole series of new social problems.
It would be wrong to base one’s criticism of Djilas on this score. Much of what he says has a verisimilitude of truth though not yet subject to verification on the basis of objective analysis. Or else, not enough thought has been given to such ideas as, for example, the modern trend to world unification, to merit an intelligent discussion.
The book is, above all, a valuable indictment of the post-Revolution Communist movement, just as Djilas is himself the living indictment of Stalinism and its new society, whether of the Russian type or its Yugoslavian variety. Writing the manuscript in jail and then smuggling it out so that it could be published in the United States required an enormous personal courage and dedication to what he calls “the idea of democratic socialism.”
Reactions to the book have naturally varied, though the praise in non-socialist circles has been uniform. The non-socialist critics, for the most part, have endorsed the criticism of Stalinist society as a reaffirmation of their own old opposition to socialism, failing to perceive the essence of Djilas’ book, namely, that we are dealing not with socialism or communism, but with a new class phenomenon which has to be treated on its own grounds. The New York Times review called The New Class one of the “most compelling and perhaps most important sociological documents of our time.” But then went on to miss the whole point of the book. The Herald Tribune called it a book of “vast significance that could shake the Communist world.” No doubt it could have such vast significance if it was read in the “Communist world.” The probability is that it won’t be. However, we are certain that the vast significance it would then have would be considerably different from what the Herald Tribune envisages. Here again, it is a case of not understanding, let alone seeing, what Djilas is really talking about.
Although his book is not very clear on a number of questions, such as his attitude toward Marxism (there are contradictory statements in the book, great praise mixed with some kind of criticism for what Marx could not or did not foresee in his time), and the degree of responsibility of Lenin for Stalinist development, Djilas still writes as a socialist. There is no indication that he has made his peace with capitalism. Quite the contrary. And if he remains a socialist, just what does the jubilance in the bourgeois world signify? Not much except that in Djilas’ description of the various phases of Stalinist society they feel some kind of moral uplift and strengthening of their weak faith in the capitalist structure.
 
THE APPEARANCE OF DJILAS’ BOOK IS of particular moment to our movement. His theory of the new class and the new society is, in substance and description, akin to our own. Large sections of it, its quintessential parts, read like a paraphrase of our theory of Bureaucratic Collectivism. This is naturally a source of satisfaction to us. It is also a commentary on the reception which our theory of Russian society has had in this country for the past fifteen years since it was first formulated and made public. Our theory of Russian society, elucidated long before the expansion of world Stalinism, recognized that we were dealing with a new social phenomenon never before seen in the world. We described it as a new class society. The ruling class, we said, was the collective bureaucracy which “owned” the state and through its ownership of the state became the collective owner of all property; that the working class was a subjugated class of a new type under hitherto unforeseen social relations and that, in sum, Russian society was a modern slave state.
Djilas arrived at his theory of the new class largely on the basis of practical experience and comparison to socialist theory. It was an empirical road he traveled to reach the conclusions of The New Class. In contrast, without the experience of living under the new system, we reached the concept of the new society theoretically and through polemical struggle with Trotsky. We were thus among the very first to destroy the myth of the inherent progressive nature of nationalized property in our rejection of the theory of the “degenerated workers’ state.”
The parallel in Djilas’ writing today to our own of fifteen years ago is striking. If he is unfamiliar with our theory and writings the similarity is all the more remarkable. Several key ideas of his theory to demonstrate this. For example:
It is the bureaucracy which formally uses, administers, and controls both nationalized and socialized property as well as the entire life of society. The role of the bureaucracy in society, i.e., monopolistic administration and control of national income and national goods, consigns it to a special privileged position. Social relations resemble State capitalism. The more so, because the carrying out of industrialization is effected not with the help of the capitalists but with the help of the State machine. In fact, this privileged class performs that function, using the State machine as a cover and as an instrument.
Ownership is nothing other than the right of profit and control. If one defines class benefits by this right, the Communist States have seen, in the final analysis, the origin of a new form of ownership or of a new ruling and exploiting class.
When Djilas says that these social relations resemble State capitalism, he does not mean that the new ruling class and the new society are State capitalist.
He adds:
The new class is anti-capitalistic and, consequently, logically dependent upon the working strata. The new class is supported by the proletarian struggle and the traditional faith of the proletariat in a socialist, Communist society where there is no brutal exploitation.
Here one can see the key to what is new in this society to distinguish it from the old. But there is much more to it.
This new class, the bureaucracy, or more accurately, the political bureaucracy, has all the characteristics of earlier ones as well as some new characteristics of its own. Its origin had its special characteristics also, even though in essence it was similar to the beginnings of other classes.
What of the composition of this class? Djilas writes:
Because this new class had not been formed as a part of the economic and social life before it came to power, it could only be created in an organization of a special type, distinguished by a special discipline based on identical philosophic and ideological views of its members.
The roots of this new class must be sought inside the once revolutionary party and as Trotsky pointed out, in the pre-revolutionary professional revolutionary turned bureaucrat. Djilas correctly says:
This is not to say that the new party and the new class are identical. The party, however, is the core of that class, and its base. It is very difficult, perhaps impossible, to define the limits of the new class and to identify its members. The new class may be said to be made up of those who have special privileges and economic preference because of the administrative monopoly they hold.
“Not every member of the party,” says Djilas, “is a member of the new class, any more than every artisan or member of the city party was a bourgeois.”
What happens in this society is that while revolutionary institutions of an earlier epoch exist in a formal sense and retain the old revolutionary names, they are no longer the social organizations they once were. Trade unions exist, but no longer as the economic organizations of the working class. They have become state institutions for the purposes of maintaining the proletariat in its state of economic servitude and to prevent any and every type of class protest or struggle. Soviets exist, but they are completely populated by the bureaucracy itself. Cooperatives exist, too, but they do not function as institutions of consumers. And the single party that exists under this system is the organized form of the bureaucracy and its collective expression in its grip on political and economic power.
 
ALTHOUGH THE SOCIALIST MOVEMENT never gave much thought to the problems following the displacement of a bourgeois social and political order by a working class society neither capitalist nor yet socialist, the problem of classes and class rule in the new order was raised by non-socialists. Marxists and socialists in general had been brought up on the concept that society can be organized either along capitalist or socialist roads. Obviously, the rise of Stalinist society required a new look at the problem, for this historical bypath that led Russia to a new class state and new ruling class demanded special study which very few gave to it, being content to dismiss the difficulty of analysis by referring to the phenomenon as “state capitalist,” “Communist” or “Leninist.”
In his Historical Materialism, N.I. Bucharin, victim of the new regime, took up the challenge of Robert Michels, author of Political Parties, that “socialists will conquer, but socialism never.” Michels claimed that the classless society was utopian; that socialism would establish a new class rule. Bucharin writing after the Russian Revolution, with experiences already in hand, replied to Michels:
We may state that in the society of the future there will be a colossal overproduction of organizers, which will nullify the stability of the ruling groups.
But the question of the transition period from capitalism to socialism, i.e., the period of the proletarian dictatorship, is far more difficult. The working class achieves victory, although it is not and cannot be a unified mass. It attains victory while the productive forces are going down and the great masses are materially insecure. There will inevitably result in a tendency to ‘degeneration,’ i.e., the excretion of a lead stratum in the form of a class-germ. This tendency will be retarded by two opposing tendencies first, by the growth of the productive forces; second by the abolition of the educational monopoly. The increasing reproduction of the technologists and of organizers in general, out of the working class itself, will undermine the possible new class alignment. The outcome of the struggle will depend upon which tendencies turn out to be the stronger.
The outcome has not been in doubt for a long, long time. The working class was “unified” from above by the “regime of the gendarmes.” An educational monopoly grew up in the new state. The growth of the productive forces did not prevent the rise of the new class power; neither did the increase of technologists or organizers, who became either part of or supporters of the new class power.
That decisive element which Bucharin did not mention, but perhaps took for granted, was the element of democracy. In absence of democracy the degeneration of the revolution was inevitable, and the degeneration began long before 1924. Christian Rakovsky, one of the outstanding European socialists of this century and another victim of the new regime wrote in the late Twenties that:
Under our very eyes, there has been formed, and is still being formed a large class of rulers which has its own interior groupings, multiplied by means of premeditated cooptation, direct or indirect (bureaucratic promotion, fictitious system of elections). The basic support of this original class is a sort, and original sort, of private property, namely, the possession of state power. The bureaucracy ‘possesses the state as private property,’ wrote Marx.
Even Trotsky, whose basic writings so wonderfully served the critics of the new society, but who could not bring himself to abandon his theory of the degenerated workers’ state, described the driving force of the bureaucracy, which he would not acknowledge was a new class, as “its privileges, power and revenues.”
In an introduction to the pamphlet edition of his debate with Earl Browder in 1950, Max Shachtman, writing even more fully than in earlier years, stated:
The distinctive birthmark of the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia is this: it made its first appearance when the revolutionary working class of that country was making its last appearance. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that Stalinism could begin its rise to power only because there no longer existed a proletariat in the classic sense of the term ...
This bureaucracy was not, however, a neutral reflector of the stagnation and distortion of the class or the remnants of the class that had led the great Russian revolution. It became an active and effective agency for maintaining the working classes, including demoralization and paralysis. Under no other condition could it have consolidated its position as the new ruling class in Russia and completed the work of expropriating the workers of all political power. In a society where the state owns all the means of production and distribution, those who are in absolute control of the political power are thereby and therewith likewise in absolute control of all economic and social, that is, all class power.
The triumph of the new class power as a totalitarian regime ended all forms of self-expression of the new immense working class, let alone the new peasants. Under the total bureaucratic regime there followed a total suppression of democracy. The institutions of the people, already heavily controlled and distorted before Stalin’s triumph were now completely obliterated as the institutions they were intended to be. All organizations became state organizations. The entire press became a state press.
 
DJILAS IS QUITE RIGHT WHEN he says that the “intellectual inheritance of the people” was confiscated by the new class. Nevertheless, total as the regime has become, there are chinks in the armor. How and when it will break through we cannot now foretell, but the Khrushchev revelations were themselves not merely the reflection of the inner struggle of the new rulers; they were in addition, a reflection of an enormous, seething discontent in the broad base of the society. A new, different working class exists in Russia. It was created by the enormous industrial drive of the new regime evolving into a larger and more potent social force than its predecessor. So far as Russia is concerned, as the main center of the new society and new class rule, this is explosive factor number one in the contradictions of the regime. And so far as Russia again is concerned, factor number two is the seething national minorities within and without the borders of the Great Russian Power.
In the Stalinist world, the great contradiction of its expansion, produces enormous national discontent and rebellion. The rebellion expresses itself, too, as a rebellion against a foreign overlord, but one should not forget that the struggle only conceals the internal discontent, but conceals it only in part. The “anti-Russian” feelings are joined to mass opposition to the new class rule.
Both for Russia as the great power, or the satellite regimes as the lesser powers, the issue of democracy remains paramount. Democracy is here meant not only for internal needs, but means national independence as well, since there can be no democracy in any country that is subjugated by a foreign ruler. The new exploiting class has learned little from the disasters of capitalist imperialism. This is an epoch of the destruction of all empires. Yet in the midst of the collapse of the old, the new class power seeks the creation of a new empire. Here it faces the active and conscious resistance of millions of people (Poland and Hungary).
The bureaucracy fears above all the socialist and radical populace; it fears ideas! The “free marketplace of ideas” would destroy the regime because it would put into motion all the formidable social forces seeking the end of the exploitative society and ruling class. Djilas is absolutely correct when he says that:
Persecution of democratic and socialist thought which is at variance with that of the ruling oligarchy is fiercer and more complete than persecution of the most reactionary followers of the former regime. This is understandable: the last named are less dangerous since they look to a past which has little likelihood of returning and reconquering.
He is also right when he says that it
... would be wrong to think that other forms of discrimination – race, caste national – are worse than ideological discrimination. They may seem more brutal to all outward appearances, but they are not as refined or complete. They aim at the activities of society, while ideological discrimination aims at society as a whole, and at every individual. Other types of discrimination may crush a human being physically, while ideological discrimination strikes at the very thing in the human being which is perhaps most peculiarly his own. Tyranny over the mind is the most complete and most brutal type of tyranny; every other tyranny begins and ends with it.
 
IF THE EXPERIENCES OF THE NEW class power has taught one imperishable lesson it is that in all social relations, the struggle for democracy must remain of paramount importance. There is no genuine social progress in our time except through an extension and broadening of democracy. There is, above all, no socialism without democracy. Socialism without democracy is a contradiction in terms. Here again, it is not enough to fight for democracy in the new world of Stalinist class society; it is just as important to carry on the democratic struggle throughout the world, in all countries, all societies and all institutions. This never-ceasing struggle for democracy would prepare the people as a whole against bureaucratic and totalitarian practices and institutions. All things considered in their proper proportions, the bureaucratization of a teamsters union, or the absence of democracy in any union organization, is only a small replica of the complex bureaucratization of a whole complex society.
Djilas quite correctly points to this democratic struggle and while his views of social democracy are not clear from his writing, this much is true: the labor and socialist world stands at one end of the polar division; on the other stands Stalinist totalitarianism seeking domination and adherence of the mass of people by a multiple and ingenious use of socialist phrases and ideals. The labor and socialist world movements have not yet reached that level of socialist consciousness and socialist democracy that belong to it. But in a world so evenly divided between the capitalist West and totalitarian Stalinism, all socialists belong in the movement of socialist democracy. Whatever the differences in that sector of world organization they are differences that are capable of being resolved in a democratic way in the struggle for a genuinely socialist and democratic society.
 



The rôle of the student in the class struggle has not always been answered with sufficient clarity, nor adequately dealt with in recent years. For the revolutionary youth movement which is concerned with the problem of the student, a correct solution and understanding of the question is indispensable.
It is necessary, in order to understand their relation to revolutionary movement, to define the position of the student under capitalist productive relations and to view this position historically. The students are not a separate class in society but in their transitory character make up a defined category. In speaking of this category we are concerned in the main with the advanced sections of the student and intellectual group who prepare themselves for their “future” as executors, technicians, managers and theorists for capitalism.
The higher the educational institutions, the more marked are the class lines. In the elementary and intermediate schools we will find the most numerous sections composed of proletarian children and youth. The children and youth of the petty-bourgeoisie are also great in numbers here, while the off-spring of the bourgeoisie who happen to find their way into the “public” educational institutions (the great mass of them are either privately tutored or attend their own institutions and academies) are in a small minority. It is when we look to the advanced school, the colleges and universities, that the pictures changes. The proletarian students are in the main eliminated – the “free” education of capitalism, proving to be far beyond their means. These students are in the main the representatives of the bourgeoisie and the petty-bourgeoisie. The proletarian university and college student, with exception of a few large cities, are few and far between. The schools are one of the main bulwarks of capitalist society. It is here that capitalism trains the youth in a capitalist ideology. The perpetuation of capitalism, the indisputable correctness of this system, its permanent character, the maintenance of law and order, together with respect for the ruling class, nationalism, militarism, all these and many more make up the food on which the intellectual stratum of capitalism is raised. These institutions turn out intellectual prostitutes and apologists for capitalism. They become the brains and the leaders of the system. Under imperialist capitalism the students are in the main a reactionary section of the population who in decisive class struggle play the role of enemies of the revolutionary movement.
At times the students have played revolutionary rôles with heroism and self-sacrifice. Such instances have occurred during the period of capitalism’s birth, or in countries of a backward development, where the system was yet in the process of development. Under such conditions, the students being an advanced section in a backward social system, saw in capitalism the saviors of their highest desires. They saw in capitalism the opportunities to rise above the mass, the enactment of the “liberties” which are so akin to their desires, and which would make possible the achievements of longings.
However, the moments such revolutionary situations reach a proletarian class character, the students participating therein desert the ranks. This was their role in 1905 in Russia. This Kamenev rightly remarks in his introduction to the Russian edition of Lenin’s pamphlet on the youth;
“The revolutionary student, with whom comrade Lenin had to deal in the early stages of the revolutionary movement, was to his mind a man originating from an alien class, a possible ally, an echo of the past, as one who had PASSED INTO THE LIMBO OF HISTORY.”
How much more is this true, in a period of advanced capitalism, when the system has entered on the road of decline, and when the proletarian revolution is today on the order of the day. The inability of the students to make any very audible protest to the inequalities of the system and its brutal exploitation, attests to the above characterization. Hardly a protest is recorded anywhere against the enforced and voluntary military training instituted in the schools. The students remain meaningly silent during the present mass unemployment and wage-cut drive against the working-class. The struggles of the working-class pass them by as if they did not exist.
There are however sections (the petty-bourgeois student) of the students, who during the time of acute revolutionary struggles, and faced with a collapse of the system, will be driven to the ranks of the working-class – but they will be few.
The task of the Communists in relation to the student is to recognize that in the main they are a reactionary section in society. When Lenin stated that. “The injustices and pin-pricks which the students have to suffer is but a drop in the ocean of oppression of the people”, he states in simple language their class-character and rôle. We must not forget that they are not a revolutionary grouping. With this in mind we will be able to understand way the 2nd Congress of the Y.C.I. was able to define the tasks of the Communist youth movement among the students as:

To weaken the forces of counter-revolution.
To tear a gap in the threatening sabotage front of the bourgeois professional intelligentsia.
To secure the scientific and technical forces necessary for carrying through the revolution and for Communist construction.

 



For some weeks now negotiations between the Railroad Executives and the “labor leaders” of the railroad workers have been under way for the specific purpose of instituting wage reductions for the industry as a whole. The committee of nine railroad presidents representing the leading roads in the country, adamant in the beginning against any kind of joint discussions with the leaders of the railroad unions over the question of wage-cuts, have finally agreed to such negotiations. It is quite understandable that, the Railroad Executives saw that it would be to their best interests to participate in such negotiations as a pretence, in which the labor officials take part as the “workers’ front” protesting such reductions or effecting concessions from the “captains” of the industry.
 
Labor Officials Betray Workers
The committee of nine presidents, on December 21, served formal notice of their intentions to reduce wages 15 per cent. The announcement is considered as official and to the labor leaders marks a basis for discussion revolving around “securities for the workers” in exchange for their acceptance of wage-cuts. The raising of the proposed reduction to 15 per cent from the original proposal of 10 per cent, was instigated by the union leaders themselves, the object being to arrange a basis for “bargaining”. What this actually means is that the officialdom of the railroad unions are prepared to accept the wage reductions of 10 per cent. Their proposal that the Railroad Executives add 5 per cent to the original plan is done with the aim of presenting the 10 per cent wage-cut as a victory of labor over capital and the triumph of worker-management cooperation. These fakers will then turn to the railroad workers and say: Witness the struggle we have put up for you. The Railroad Executives wished to reduce your wages 15 per cent. We would never stand for this; we could not betray you workers and so we finally convinced them to introduce only a 10 per cent wage-cut. In return the Railroad Executives promise not to continue lay-offs and keep those at work now on the job. That is how the situation stands today. The employers are pushing rapidly for wage reductions. The labor officials are agreeing but requesting in return the “distribution of employment on the widest scale possible.”
The railroad industry which is suffering from the effects of the crisis, only exhibits the decay of the capitalist system and the impossibility of “rejuvenation”. Their solution is the capitalist solution – further repressions against the workers. It is sought in increased unemployment, part-time work and vicious wage-cuts which spell further impoverishment of the workers in the industry. These efforts of the capitalists would be much more difficult were it not for the “splendid” support that it receives from the officialdom of the railway labor unions whose role is that of a check upon any signs of workers’ militancy and rebellion. Receiving now the endorsement of the government (an endorsement which was actually not needed – and the failure of which would not have prevented wage-cuts), the railroad industry proceeds with confidence and ruthlessness.
 
Workers Must Organize Resistance
The railroad workers, who have in the past fought some of the most militant struggles in the history of the American labor movement, find themselves at the present time in a weakened condition. In 1919 the labor unions went on record for “government ownership and democratic management of the roads”. They even favored independent political action of the workers, and showed an interest in a Labor party. Succumbing largely to the ideology of union-management cooperation, the B.&O. plan of company unionism, the railroad workers are today dispersed. Their forces are weakened, their leaders have betrayed them. They saw their unions smashed, experienced a loss of rights, and found their wages cut constantly.
This drive against the railroad workers while resulting in sporadic strike efforts from time to time, has been carried through in general without resistance on the part of the rank and file. But this situation cannot be expected to last. The offensive against the workers is finding a reaction in their ranks.
The railroad workers must cast aside their officialdom. If they are to effectively resist the present offensive which threatens their very existence they must begin now to organize a nation-wide strike movement against the wage-cut. With the central slogan of the six hour day and five day week without a reduction in pay, linked with the struggle for unemployment insurance, against the speed-up system, etc., the railroad workers have the possibilities to carry out an effective struggle. The needs of the situation demand this from the railroad workers. In this and developing struggles against the railroad barons is involved the very existence and development of militant unions in the railroad industry.
 



The year 1930 closed with indications of a prolongation of the crisis in American capitalism and the further unloading of the burden of this crisis upon the shoulders of the working class. This condition exists despite the repeated forecasts of the economists and business leaders to the effect that the revival would begin during the latter part of last year.
The months of November and December 1930 witnessed increasing declines in business activity and a growth of unemployment. December closed with an index figure of 75.7 for “business activity,” which marked a drop of two-tenths points from the November figure of 75.9. The significance of this figure, is that it is the lowest point reached since March 1908. These figures represent a survey of the basic and most important industries, numbering ten in all. Of the ten types, automobile and bituminous coal production alone, show an upward curve. But the rise of automobile and bituminous coal production is purely seasonal.
The month of January 1931, one in which a rise is to be expected because of its spring preparatory character, shows an unshifting position. Indices of steel and pig iron production dropped sharply during the first two weeks of the month. In addition new orders in steel are far below the expectations of the economists in spite of the expected seasonal rise and the advance in automobile production. Other factors pointing to the continuation of the crisis exist in the decline of freight loadings and the decrease in electric power production. It is with the above indications in mind that Benjamin Baker, editor of the Annalist, is prompted to remark in the issue of January 16, 1931, that “it may be that the comparative stability of the business index for the last two months of 1930 indicates that the bottom of the current depression has been fully reached, but it is not easy to be confident on this point.”
The irresistible force of the crisis has effectively answered the myth of unending prosperity and the super-power of American capitalism. The object of capitalism at this stage is to strive to emerge from the present crisis in a comparatively short period of time. Reams of paper are written to convey this propaganda to the masses of workers in order to quiet the growing dissatisfaction.
If past experiences are to be considered in evaluating the length of time that it will take to reach a stage of “normalcy”, then it is within reason to expect that an economic revival will not take place for at least another year and a half. In the table below, which appeared in the Annalist of January 16th (1930 review issue) figures appear showing the lowest point reached in the business index during past crises and the number of months required in reaching “normalcy.”



 


Bottom of
Depression


 


Length of
Recovery to
Nor’l (Mos.)




February 1885


77


17




June 1894


72


13




November 1896


78


15




March 1908


76


15




November 1914


81


10




March 1921


82


19



It will be noticed that the average length of recovery totalled almost 15 months. However, with the exception of March 1921, the figures speak of a period of the ascent of world capitalism. In the first crisis following the world war, and taking place in the period of the world decline of capitalism the greatest number of months required for a revival was reached. With the month of December closing at the lowest point, reached in twenty-two years and 6.3 points below the first post-war crisis of 1921, in addition to the factor of a decaying system, it is evident that a revival is a long way off.
In the field of foreign trade a decline of $2,737,780,000 from 1929 was recorded. The total exports declined 25 per cent, in value, and 20 percent, in quantity. European exports dropped 20 percent, below 1929, while the decline in areas exclusive of Europe declined 30 percent.
The coming year will witness the attempt of American capitalism to issue from the crisis by a two-fold policy of increased aggression in the field of foreign tirade and a continuation of the offensive against the American working-class. This is inevitable with the contraction of the world and home market and the growing competition of the imperialist powers in efforts to issue out of their difficulties. The tendencies in this direction are long existent; they are an integral part of imperialist capitalism, but in the present period of a [line missing] within the strongest imperialist country in the world, they will be accentuated many times. Already the United States is making aggressive efforts to defeat the British Empire in the struggle for winning the Latin American market. The same type of penetration is to be observed with regards to the Orient. The Young Plan, the War Debts, and similar instances of attempts at economic domination point to the efforts made in putting Europe completely on rations.
The efforts to emerge from the crisis by dominating the world market more completely can have nothing but catastrophic results for capitalism. In the struggle for supremacy the United States will meet terrific resistance from the other capitalist powers and vice-versa. We are living today in a period of the decline of world capitalism, a period which Lenin described as one of “wars and revolution”. Therefore the struggles for domination of the world market can have no other effect but that of weakening capitalism still further and preparing its eventual destruction. At home the burden of the crisis rests entirely upon the shoulders of the working class. Capitalism has proved again that it cannot and will not provide for the working class.
Every crisis in capitalism finds the working class suffering the burdens of such crises. The Standard Statistics Corporation estimates that during the first nine months of 1930 dividends increased more than a billion dollars over the year 1929. while wages during this same period declined over $8,800,000,000. The Annalist figures point to a drop in factory employment 81.2 for December as against 82.1 for November. It is also recorded that factory payrolls are at the lowest point since April 1922, declining to 72.2 for December from the November index of 73.5. The estimated decrease in wages for the entire year of 1930 is placed at a billion dollars a month! The whole tendency is toward further rationalization.
U.S. capitalism is making efforts to overcome the crisis by increasing the exploitation of the workers. This will be accompanied by continued unemployment, increase of the working hours, and nationwide wage-cuts. The table below taken from Labor’s News is illuminating in regards to the tendencies toward wide-spread wage-cutting.



 


April


May


June


July


Aug.


Sept.


Oct.


Nov.




Wage Increases


32


42


56


44


33


—


36


46




Wage Decreases


25


33


57


68


63


136


—


93



The above figures represent the number of business organizations that instituted either wage increases or wage cuts. The growing wage-cuts are easily obtained. The ratio of this table shows that for every 15 workers that receive wage increases. 85 workers experience wage cuts. Of additional importance is the fact that the granting of wage-increases was confined in the main to the organized workers, while the great mass of unskilled and unorganized workers suffered heavy losses.
In consideration of past experience, and the added difficulties, of a moribund capitalism the end of the crisis is far to seek. The effects of the policy of American capitalism can have but a two-fold effect. It will, on the one hand, accelerate the antagonisms of world imperialism and the struggles of the working class at home. The American working class has a long way to go to reach the stage of class consciousness, and a will to struggle. But that it is on that road and will continue to travel it, is indisputable. The coming year will witness no appreciable improvement in the present crisis. But the burden of that crisis will be placed more heavily upon the backs of not only the American working class but the world proletariat as well.
 



The hope of American capitalism in the Spring period to indicate definite signs of a return from the crisis appears shattered, now that this period has come and gone with but a scant rise and an immediate recession. The decline of industry reached the lowest point in the crisis, at the end of January, when the index stood at 74.5. While this is not the lowest position of industry in the economic history of the country, according to the Annalist (the year 1892, with an index of 72.0, is the lowest point) it marks the worst crisis experienced by United States capitalism since its appearance as an imperialist power.
 
Seasonal Rise Slight
The Spring seasonal upturn was a slight one. Increased activity was witnessed in most industries, but almost all without exception have again declined, with the prospect of a continuation of this decline with the coming slack of summer months. Thus the end of the first quarter finds the basic industries in depressed conditions, with a great instability in the other trades. The steel industry has declined steadily and at the time of this writing is working 48 and a half percent, of capacity. This present low in steel Indicates a similar condition among its chief customers, namely, automobile and railroad. Automobile production dropped to 68.0 at the close of April, which marked a decline of 17.9 points from the December index. Freight car loadings which stood at 80.0 at the end of December, rose slightly during the Spring period, and has now also begun a downward curve – at the end of March the index was at 77.0. Bituminous coal production suffered a drop of 5.9 since the beginning of the year, while drops are also recorded for electric power production and the entire metal industry over the same period.
The most illuminating picture of the depth of the crisis exists in the foreign trade balance, which serves as a barometer in estimating the present situation. A keynote of the crisis is sounded here. In the year 1930 a decline two and three-quarter billions of dollars was experienced in foreign trade. This decline continues at an identical pace. The figures given below represent the foreign trade for the first quarters of the years, 1929, 1930 and 1931. (N.Y. Times of April 26, 1931):–



Jan., Feb., March
Exports


  


Jan., Feb., March
Imports




1929 – $1,396,589,000


1929 – $1,122,156,000




1930 – $1,110,300,000


1930 – $   893,136,000




1931 – $   697,543,000


1931 – $   567,847,000



A recapitulation of these figures will show a decline in 1931 of $1,813,399,000 and $738,046,000, from the years 1929, and 1930, respectively. Without its penetration and domination in the sphere of world economy, the phenomenal growth of U.S. capitalism would be unthinkable. It came onlx as a result of its hegemony over international capitalism. Its very progress today depends upon its continued domination of world economy. The international crisis of capitalism however found its reaction in the United States; so connected is national economy with international economy.
It is precisely here that American capitalism make its most determined efforts to rise out of the crisis. It is of utmost importance to remember that the previous upward march of U.S. capitalism and its present strength lies primarily in its dominant position in the world market, and as this condition can only be maintained upon the continuation of that role, we will witness the chief attempts of U.S. capitalism to extricate itself from the crisis by an evermore intensified aggression in the field of foreign trade. Comrade Trotsky, in his criticism of the program of the Communist International for failure to consider the United States and its role in world capitalism, wrote in 1928, that:
“In a critical epoch the hegemony of the United States will prove even more complete, more open, more ruthless, than in a period of boom.”
The preparation for this policy is taking place now.
With ITS OWN two levers (the “international” lever and the “national” lever by which it maintains itself) capitalism is planning to issue from the crisis. At present the “national” lever, that of increasing the exploitation of its own working class, is being put to work, and is subjecting the American working class to increased misery and poverty. The slight rise during the Spring period liquidated no appreciable amount of the unemployed army, now numbering about 10 million. On the contrary the offensive against the working class is proceeding at an intensified scale. Wage Cuts Increased At present, under the leadership of the banks, the American capitalists are planning to institute a nation-wide campaign of wage cuts. But this “plan” to institute wage cuts is actually in effect today, and the tendency has been increasing since the second half of the year 1930. The following figures of the Standard Statistics Corporation indicate the process in this direction:



1930




 


No. of
Wage Cuts




1st Quarter


  25




2nd Quarter


  60




3rd Quarter


110




4th Quarter


335




Total


530



The available figures for 1931 shows that the first quarter of this year will prove higher than the entire year of 1930. In January of this year the Standard Statistics Corporation estimates 335 wage cuts, while the U.S. Dept. of Labor states that there were 340 decreases. In addition to wage cuts, the rise in productivity as against the rise in wages over the past ten years shows the declining position of the working class. The N.Y. Times, of April 26, 1931, points out that over a period of ten years the increase of productivity was 48.5 percent, as against an increase of 24.3 percent, in real wages, and that for the years 1927–29, the rise in the value of manufacturing stood at 9.1 percent, as against a 3.9 percent, in wages.
Thus the 1st quarter of 1931 passed. The crisis continues much to the amazement of the capitalist economic experts and leaders in industry who cannot see anything “fundamentally wrong with capitalism”. The coming year will see the offensive of capitalism increased on an international and national scale. For the organization of a counter-offensive the Communists must now prepare themselves.
 



The splendid revolutionary struggle of the Indian masses against the rule of British imperialism has suffered another betrayal by their leader, Gandhi. It is not the first time that the “little man” played this ignominious rôle. In 1922, when the struggle for independence reached proportions threatening to the Empire, Gandhi was again at the helm of the movement – and then, as now, he was there to call off the fight at the moment when the ferment in the masses reached a point too dangerous to the tottering rule of Great Britain.
While the bourgeois press speculates as to who will profit more through the pact signed by Lord Irwin and Gandhi on March 4, 1931, the betrayal is unmistakable fact. In clause Five of the pact, it states:
”Civil disobedience will be effectively discontinued and reciprocal action will be taken by the Government. By effective discontinuance of the civil disobedience movement is meant the effective discontinuance of all activities in furtherance thereof by whatever methods pursued and in particular the following:
(a) Organized defiance of the provisions of any law;
(b) Movement for non-payment of land revenue and other legal dues;
(c) Publication of news sheets in support of the civil disobedience movement;
(d) Attempt to influence civil or military servants or village officials against the government or to persuade them to resign their posts.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Gandhi adds, as if to make this more effective, “I shall strain every nerve to make the provisional peace a PERMANENT one.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
In the name of the Nationalist Party, the Mahatma calls off the civil disobedience movement, the defiance of the salt laws, non-payment of taxes, illegal assemblies, and mass picketing of factories and shops selling British goods. In return the Nationalist Party will be allowed to participate in the round-table conference to discuss Indian independence, and will have the right to continue the primitive manufacture of salt, which will however, continue to remain under the monopoly of the Empire.
The meaning of this truce is quite clear. It seeks to liquidate the revolutionary struggle and force into submission the rebellious masses. It leaves the proletariat and peasantry defenseless against the bitter exploitation of the British as well as their own bourgeoisie. In a word, it fulfills the wishes of the British imperialists and proves again that Gandhi is their loyal servant. He writes, on March 2, 1931, to Lord Irwin, “... I feel no hatred for the British, nor the least wish to harm their legitimate rights in this”. Legitimate rights! This can only mean the right of British imperialism to loot and exploit India at its will.
Britain’s fierce struggle against Indian independence is easily understood when it is realized that without India, there is no British Empire. This is the key to the question. What is necessary for the revolutionary proletariat of the world as well as for India, is to determine the rôle of Gandhi and the Nationalist Party. They represent the interests of the native bourgeois and petty-bourgeois classes and in the present struggle, as in all others, they reflect the deep fermentation in the masses. When the movement of the revolutionary workers and peasants becomes too threatening, they enact the rôle of traitors.
Gandhi’s policy of “non-violence” is a rejection of the revolutionary methods of struggle. It signifies capitulation to Great Britain and in essence expresses a deep fear of the proletariat. It is this small but highly developed Indian proletariat that can give leadership to the impoverished peasant masses in the revolution, and it is the proletariat alone that can successfully carry through its tasks. This is precisely what the native bourgeoisie, in the person of Gandhi, fears most. Gandhi expresses this clearly when he says: “It is dangerous to make use of the factory proletariat.”
The significance of the revolution lies in its mass character, and the will to power by the masses. The objective conditions are ripe for the seizure of power. There remains however, the burning question of leadership in this struggle. It is upon the solution of this problem that the success of the Indian revolution depends. At present it constitutes the greatest weakness of the revolution.
The native bourgeoisie and the petty-bourgeoisie have conclusively demonstrated that they cannot lead the revolution to a victorious conclusion. They fear the revolution, and more than that they fear the proletariat. Only the Communists organized into a revolutionary party, with a correct program, can achieve the victory of the revolution. They can achieve it only as a dictatorship of the proletariat and in no other way. There are the lessons of all revolutionary struggles under imperialist capitalism.
What is needed today in India, is a strong Communist party to give leadership to the Indian masses. It is necessary to put forth the strategic aim of the dictatorship of the proletariat immediately. Without it one of the main barriers in the road of the emancipation of India’s workers and peasants – that is, the barrier artificially erected by Roy and the Right wing on one hand, and its Stalinist caricature on the other – will remain in the way.
 



The future growth of the American section of the Left Opposition depends in a great measure upon our ability to win the youth to its banner. For this end we must understand correctly how to attract and secure their political and organizational support. The youth resolution, despite weaknesses of a minor character, correctly establishes our approach to this problem and a successful realization of its aim. On fundamental approach there is agreement. Our task at the present time is to set upon a practical solution to the problem of winning the youth to our banner.
At our first conference, over two and half years ago, we signalized our approach to this problem by asserting that the task of the youth members in our ranks, was to work as oppositionists in the general struggle of the Communist Left without concentrating on specific youth questions. We understood correctly that during those days our main task was the establishment of the Left Opposition in this country, to make known its position among the American Communists and to sink its roots as an organization. This continues to be our task on a much larger scale.
The exigencies of the first period of our existence have passed. Our problems remain basically the same – but that an organizational and political stabilization has taken place nobody can deny. The American Left Opposition is here to stay. Our problems today are broader. Our movement is much stronger and our foundation is a solid one.
An estimate of our membership will show that the youth make up one of its largest sections. They are a vital part of the organization, and have contributed a great share toward its growth. It is, however, necessary, in view of a changed situation, to organize the youth activity for our younger comrades who can now devote their attention to it. Our approach is based on the analysis that while hitherto our younger comrades were not in a position to devote their time and energy to youth activity – that period as changed and it is absolutely urgent that they participate in full force in youth work.
The general problems of a theoretical nature and political sphere find a unanimous opinion among all our comrades. This will help very much to facilitate matters in an organizational sense. But the most important problem is that of finding a form through which our young comrades can operate. In this pre-conference discussion it is necessary to consider various propositions. We submit here, the proposal for the organization of a series of youth clubs wherever possible throughout the country. We consider at this moment something tangible which can be realized: the organization of youth clubs, whose function it will be to win the Communist youth and young workers to our ideas and to our ranks. The work in such an organization must, consist in the main of education, social and sports. If properly understood and correctly organized this can successfully be carried through. It can serve as a basis for the advanced idea of a Communist Opposition youth movement. The proposal of Spartacus youth Clubs under the guidance of the organization, unified nationally through the efforts of our comrades appears to be at this moment the most logical step to take. In such organizations our young comrades must devote their main efforts.
 



The Krushchev “revelations” which undoubtedly provided a measure of legality to the dramatic outburst of discussions in the Stalinist movement of the world were merely symptomatic of the underlying pressures within it. Since the close of the war, the totalitarian vise of the system tightened on the vast populations of the Russian and satellite nations. In each of these countries, and particularly Russia, the depth of dissatisfaction must have been enormous to have produced the dangerous medium which Khrushchev chose to allay the feelings of the people, for he surely knew before hand that he had taken a calculated risk in his unprecedented attack on Stalin, the demigod of the new order.
The discussions that followed in all Stalinist parties and movements under its control and influence and the infinitely more significant revolts in Poland and Hungary revealed that if the world at large was unaware of the burgeoning crisis of Stalinism, the leadership of the Russian despotism was uneasily conscious of it. Khrushchev’s tactic was designed to mitigate an inevitable explosion even at a stiff cost. For his speech, if taken to its logical conclusion, was dangerous to the whole Stalinist system. The discussions which followed were only initial signs of the crisis.
Stalinist expansion, imperialist in aim and practice, has enormously increased the contradictions of the system. The significant economic advance of the Russian state has taken place on the basis of an unprecedented exploitation of the Russian masses, and since the war, of a similar exploitation of the masses of the satellite states. The severe economic exploitation at home and the ruthless economic exploitation of the satellite countries, joined to the dictatorial political systems, emphasized the greyness of life in the “new peoples’ democracies.” In a system so devoid of the simple democratic rights of the people and the rights of the individual, so devoid of the most elementary forms of democracy, the Khrushchev speech took the form of a catalyst in disturbing the three-decades-long inner-quiet of world Stalinism. The Russian leaders probably expected, and in a sense looked forward to, a “fundamental” discussion inside Russia and all other countries. What they did not calculate accurately, circumscribed as they are in their thinking by their totalitarian tradition, was the depth and extent of the dissatisfaction of the masses in and out of the Communist Parties, and the scope of the explosion.
Although that explosion which reached its height in the Polish and Hungarian revolts has been momentarily resolved, in the one by reluctant political compromise and in the other by the vicious military suppression through the Russian army, new and even more severe repercussions will be heard from the Russian domination of the nationally-suppressed satellite countries. The discussions of “basic questions” within the Communist Parties which seem to have run their course in most countries and which ended with the reassertion of the domination of the Stalinist leaderships has, notwithstanding all of that, opened up a new era for these parties. It is still the Stalinist system but with a difference. The element of doubt about the infallibility of the leadership and the eternal truth of its doctrine has been permanently installed within the movement; the desire for internal freedom, the right of discussion, and all of that, spills over into the broader desire for democracy. These questions will continue to press within the movement and produce further conflict. The door to these conflicts has been opened.
Of all the countries in which a discussion of Russia and Stalinism took place, none has reached proportions such as in America. Here, the leadership of the Communist Party fell apart. The brutal suppression of the Hungarian revolt, the openness of the Stalinist anti-Semitism, life in a bourgeois-democratic nation far distant from the borders of the dominant Russian state, are some of the causes which served to move the discussion further than elsewhere. The emergence of the Gates tendency and the struggle it undertook was the most expressive evidence of the collapse of the American Communist Party. Overnight, this once powerful organization, which held itself fairly strong in face of severe governmental prosecution and persecution, faced schismatic disintegration. The membership has disappeared in the hundreds and thousands, so that at its convention held in February, the party, which once dominated the radical movement in the United States, appeared as it really is: decimated, disunited and isolated from the main streams of American life, and most particularly, from the American labor movement.
While it has an independent validity on the basis of American historical developments, the discussion of socialist unification and regroupment in the United States, was brought to a head by the crisis of Stalinism here and abroad. In an important sense, though the movement is tiny in this country, the problem of socialist unification and regroupment is part of a world process in the struggle against Stalinism and capitalism. The crisis of Stalinism in this country and the discussion of unification and regroupment, had therefore, by its nature, to involve all socialist, dissident Stalinist and Stalinoidal groups. Even those who sought to avoid the problem by some ultimatistic declaration have found it impossible to escape the demands of the current political situation in the small and isolated radical movement.
Given the situation created by the Stalinist crisis in this country, what do we mean by saying that the question of unification and regroupment has an independent validity in the United States? The nature of the problem is illustrated by the fact that this country is the only major capitalist nation without a mass socialist party, and on another plane, even a labor party reflecting the elementary economic interests of the working class in a political manner. The socialist movements in this country are small, indeed, they are sects, largely isolated from the vast labor movement. The old socialist traditions that did exist in this country are no longer vivid. What does remain of them is hardly perceptible. Bourgeois politics continues to dominate the American labor movement and the working class.
American socialism which once developed strong roots in the nation was the first victim of the vastly-expanding economy and prosperity, of New Dealism and the long existing war economy. The socialist movement which is linked forever with the name of Eugene V. Debs, has not been able to reclaim its early glory primarily because of the objective factors of American social growth. The historical prosperity of the United States, resting on a series of peculiar but favorable conjunctures in the world economy and the unusually fortunate results of two world wars, produced a conservative working class disoriented as to its own needs and interests by the influence of bourgeois ideology.
During the economic crisis of the Thirties, this conservative political state of the working class was interrupted. Then, the working class demonstrated what it had in common with the working classes of all countries: militancy, the will to struggle, the desire for organization and the readiness to pass beyond mere economic battle to a defense and advance of its social position as the most important productive class in society. This promising development was halted by the war and post-war developments. Underneath the present quiet, however, are important social factors which promise, in the not too distant future, to alter the course in the social development of the American working class. A radicalization of the American working class appears on the horizon and the socialists of this country must first of all recognize its signs and then prepare for such a development.
 
THE POLITICAL COMMITTEE OF THE Independent Socialist League in its Memorandum on Our Perspective and Orientation in the Matter of Socialist Unity sought to give direction to this problem. In stating why it believed the next stage of development to be a political one, the Memorandum said:
The unification of the AFL and CIO has brought the American working class to its highest point in strength and made it the most numerous and powerful social movement in the country ... The unification of the labor movement in this way is an historic turning-point for the American working class. At the same time, an historic turning point is being recorded by another section of the working people, the Negroes in the South, in the irreversible movement for equality that embraces virtually all of them. Not only are the two movements historically linked but, despite the insignificant organizational ties between them at present, they are already linked politically and socially in the significance and consequences of their development.
Almost all socialists in the United States believe that the basic political development of the American working class will be reflected in the emergence of an independent labor party. Given the fact that the working people of this country have little or no independent political tradition, i.e., have no lasting, operating and effective independent political tradition, the creation of an independent labor party on the broad foundations of the labor movement, encompassing even broader millions of the population for whom the labor movement must learn to speak, would be the expression of a most radical political development of the American people, even though it would not yet be socialist. The task of socialists in this country is to work faithfully to assist in the creation of such a party, to establish their roots in it and to seek to influence its ideological development toward socialism. In our view, the future of American socialism is linked to this development of the American working class; Socialists must first of all be conscious of the problem and then do everything they can to realize these perspectives.
American socialists must learn to speak the language of the American people, to avoid the deadly trap of sectarian ultimatism and theoretical dogmatism which talks down to the working class and isolates them from the labor movement. They must be in the very center of the labor movement, working with and for the working class and assisting in the political education and experience of the masses. But before they can even do that elementary thing, socialists have to organize themselves effectively for the tasks that lie ahead in this country.
For many years the Stalinist movement dominated the radical working class; the Russian state commanded the allegiance of tens of thousands through the activities of the American Communist Party in its various formations and guises. But by the very fact that it constituted the ideological, political and organizational leadership of the radical movement, the American Communist Party, was the principal source of the ideological disorientation and confusion of the radicalized masses; more than anything else it was responsible for the distortion of the meaning and aim of socialism. Socialism became identified in the minds of other tens of thousands with Stalinism and Russian totalitarianism.
The increasing disappointment in reactionary Stalinism and, even more important than that, the mass opposition of the American people to it, became in effect an opposition to socialism itself. This is the tremendous burden of which socialists in this country must be relieved. It will not be an easy task in any case, but it is made even more difficult by the fact that while Stalinism in its crisis and the American Communist Party has lost its vitality and power, the ideology of Stalinism, which has perverted so much of socialist thought and practice, is not at all dead. It continues under various masquerades. Yet, no socialist regroupment is possible unless the movement is freed without reservation from Stalinist influence so that it can truly appear before the American working class as “an alternative pole of attraction to that constituted by Stalinism.”
Taking into account the objective conditions in this country, so roughly and generally drawn here, the real ideological and organizational development of the working class, any discussion of socialist unification and regroupment dictates to socialists the need for the creation of the broadest socialist movement with the broadest socialist program so that it may not only become more nearly attuned to the realities of American life, but also be in the best position to embrace all socialists within such a movement. The warnings against sectarianism and ultimatism with Friedrich Engels sent to the Socialist Labor Party near the end of the last century remain appropriate to this very day. American socialism contributed to its isolation from the working class by ideological and political programs beyond the comprehension or ability of the class to respond to them. A new start has to be made; it is imperative if the vacuum produced by the Stalinist crisis and the general crisis of socialism is to be filled with the hope of a socialist future. With this in mind, the Memorandum referred to above, stated:
Our decisions must facilitate, not in some unrealizable ideal of abstract sense, but in the sense of the maximum possible under the concrete circumstances, the advancement of our ideas of democratic socialism in the ranks of labor and Negro movements, and the corresponding growth of a socialist movement based on these broad mass movements and exercising and increasing influence among them. Any decision taken in the matter of socialist unity, or in relations with other groups, must serve this objective. Any decision, no matter what successes it seems to yield of a temporary or isolated nature, but which conflicts with this objective, which does not serve it, or which is not conceived and carried on in a way which is consciously subordinated to the attainment of the objective, is wrong.
The premise for this thinking has already been indicated in our references to the role of Stalinism and its influence in this country. The great issue of modern socialism is: totalitarianism or democracy. Stalinism, in all or any of its forms, is a cancerous growth and influence in the working class. It is not merely a political or organizational evil; it is above all a social evil that has served to distort and blacken the socialist ideal of human liberty in all its forms and has substituted a modern slavery for socialist freedom; it has created a contempt and distortion of the meaning of democracy and destroyed the integrity and freedom of the individual which is of the essence of socialism.
If socialist regroupment is to have any meaning at all and any promise, it can only take place under the banner of democratic socialism. No socialist movement in this country can hope to win favor with, not to speak of leadership of, the American working class, if it equivocates or refuses to speak out plainly on this question. It is not enough, and never was, for socialists to carry on the struggle for democracy in this country; they must champion democracy everywhere and support the democratic struggles of the people in all countries. That means in Asia as in Africa, in Europe of the East as well as of the West; it means to fight for democracy in China as in India, in Russia as in Algeria. It means to fight for the same rights of the exploited and oppressed of the Stalinist states as in any other country.
Any movement, any organization, and institution, any temporary coalition of people, whether it is for the purpose of working for socialist unification or the holding of permanent socialist forums, which refuses to take a clear position on this, or haggles over it, is guaranteed to stamp itself in advance either as Stalinist, Stalinoid, or under the influence of one or several of its ideas. The American working class has a healthy hatred of totalitarianism and no socialist can afford to be muddy-minded about it. Democratic socialism, by which is meant forthright opposition to totalitarianism everywhere, has to be the watchword on the banner of any hopeful socialist movement that must emerge in this country out of the ruins of the present.
 
THERE IS ANOTHER VITAL REASON why it is wrong to equivocate on this question. If it is true that there are thousands of disaffected, disoriented and disappointed former members of the Communist Party, of whom there must be a considerable number who have not permanently abandoned socialism, then it is the responsibility of those who do understand the problem to cooperate with such elements in developing the democratic socialist position. This cannot and will not be done by hiding the problem, confusing it, or distorting it in a fictitious allusion to unity. Nor will it be done by catering to the political prejudices of those who not yet have broken with the ideology of Stalinism.
When it is objected that this is an ultimatistic demand on certain groupings in the general socialist movement, the objection is an evasion of the problem. For example, all groups, ex-Stalinist, ex-Progressive Party, Socialist Workers Party, the Gates tendency, the Daily Worker, and others have denounced the Russian intervention in Hungary and have declared themselves to be, in one fashion or another, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism. To be sure, not all who say they are for democratic socialism mean the same thing by it. The test is not a complicated one: we are for democracy here; we are not less for democracy in Russia, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria and Rumania, as we are for all countries. For the ISL this is the crux of the question of socialist unification and regroupment and that’s why in its Memorandum it stated:
“For us to declare that collaboration with other groups requires their acceptance of all our theoretical positions, including our position on the nature of Stalinism and of Stalinist society, or that such acceptance is required for coexistence in one socialist organization, would be wrong, ultimatistic and contrary to our conception of the socialist unification that is now required. We make no such declaration and we reject it when made by anyone else. We regard the theoretical differences on the Russian question, on Stalinism, which were the main cause of the splits in the past, as ‘frozen’ for the present as regards the groups now discussing unity. We do not refrain from advancing our own theoretical position, but we do not make it, or the position of any other tendency, the pre-condition for unity. The pre-condition for unity is acceptance of the general principles of democratic socialism, agreement upon a democratic life for the united organization and support of the democratic struggle against the totalitarian Stalinism regime. This does not encompass the full position of the ISL, to whose tendency we reserve the democratic right of advocacy in a responsible and not disruptive way in a united socialist organization, which is the right of any other tendency as well. This viewpoint indicates that we do not regard or put forward the ISL as the basis of the reunification of the socialist movement, but do consider it as an indispensable element of the unity and as a tendency in it enjoying full equality with all others.”
If this is not the basis for a socialist unification, then the condition for regroupment would have to be posed on the narrowest ideological and programmatic grounds. To begin the discussion of regroupment on those grounds means to preclude its achievement in advance. Our view, since it proceeds from an analysis of the development of the American working class, the needs of socialism under American conditions, and on the basis of an abundant experience, holds that the ideological, theoretical and programmatic questions will be resolved under the conditions of a unified socialist movement, as the result of a process of development and a coalescence of socialist forces and not beforehand. For those who live by “finished programs,” for those who believe that everything ideologically and theoretically necessary has already been determined for all time, the above is certainly absurd. But then, they are not ready for socialist regroupment. They have everything they need; yes, and just about everything they want except political influence. And they will continue to live their well-satisfied sectarian lives in the eternal certainty that the masses will come to them because they have been proved correct all the time.
As we view the real situation in relation to the socialist organizations in the country we believe the best framework for socialist unification is the Socialist Party, or rather, that it can become that framework, provided it understands the enormous role it can play in the situation and responds to it intelligently and with agility. So far as the ISL is concerned, we are ready to unite with the SP under the broad conceptions stated above. The question of socialist unity in this country, chronologically at least, arose in the Socialist Party Convention of last year in the form of a resolution favoring unification of the SP with the Social-Democratic Federation and a resolution including the ISL in such a unification. This proposal for unification involving the ISL did not carry in the convention but almost a third of the delegates supported it. In response to the proposal made by advocates of unity with the ISL, the latter made it known that it favored such unity and defined the basis upon which it hoped to see it take place. In a resolution of the Political Committee of the ISL, printed in the November 5, 1956 issue of Labor Action, it said, among other things:

We are for such unity, as a step toward revitalizing a militant socialist movement in this country against both capitalism and Stalinism.
 
We are ready at any time to enter into discussion with representatives of the Socialist Party to explore the possibilities of such unity, without laying down any conditions in advance of such a discussion, programmatic or organizational ... Our attitude in favor of unity is not conditioned on any change in the program or leadership in the SP; what we have in view is not unification exclusively with the left wing or any other single section of the SP. We are in favor of unity with the SP as a whole as it is now.
 
The socialist unity we stand for is intended to further a lasting regroupment of socialist forces, and must be the antithesis of any kind of “raid” by one socialist group on another. We are for such an organizational merger as promises to lead to a stable and lasting coexistence of the merged forces on a healthy and mutually agreed basis ...
 
This statement is, therefore, not put forward as a temporary or conjunctural expedient, but as a statement of continuing policy for the Independent Socialist movement, to make clear that among the tenets of Independent Socialism is also this one: that we stand for socialist unity ...

This basic position of the ISL did not change with the actual unification of the SP and a section of the SDF. On the contrary, that unification made even more pertinent the position of the ISL, since it regards that development as only a part of the process of socialist regroupment in the United States. For the first time in a number of years a unification, rather than a split, has taken place between two adult socialist organizations.
It should be abundantly clear from the foregoing analysis which we have made of the problem of socialist unification and regroupment that the ISL is totally uninterested in the question of “capturing” the SP. Our general perspectives do not permit even thinking in such terms. Capturing the Socialist Party today will not only not create a mass socialist movement, but will militate against the prospects of unification and regroupment and defeat the perspectives which we do have vis-à-vis the future political development of the American working class. What we do want to see is the development of the SP-SDF into an:
“... effective, influential, broad democratic socialist movement in the best traditions of the Debs period ... Without for a moment abandoning our support of the principles and practices of democratic socialism, but rather by insisting upon these principles, we aim to build a socialist party which successfully takes up the challenge offered by the existence of great numbers of radicals who have already broken with Stalinism or are in the course of doing so, and seek a vigorous socialist organization which rejects sectarianism and aims at becoming a living movement ... the ISL favors unity with the SP as the organization which it is possible to build up as a serious pole of attraction to all radicals of yesterday, today and tomorrow, which offers a significant alternative to Stalinism in the struggle against capitalism and imperialism.”
 
AT ITS UNITY CONVENTION, the SP-SDF adopted a resolution Toward Socialist Organization which indicates an awareness of the problem. The resolution said in part:
This Unity Convention marks a first step in the rejuvenation of the socialist movement in the United States. But while socialist unity is vital, unless this historic meeting is followed by an intensive campaign to gather together all democratic socialists into our organization our present enthusiasm may be wasted.
Everything in this quotation is correct and wise. But we feel that the occupation of the new organization with this question has not been “intensive” enough, nor has it participated in the many discussions taking place within all organizations nearly enough in relation to the importance of the problem. The SP-SDF should be playing a leading part in the present process of clarification occurring in the many discussions which take place all over the country. That it hasn’t done so formally and officially is, of course, regrettable, but we are still in the period of discussion and one way or another, the new organization’s participation in this process is unavoidable.
In all the efforts of the ISL it has sought to prevent the discussion from being a mere removal of the conflict over ideology and program, for reasons already stated. As an example of what this can mean, are the references that emerge in all discussions over “left wing” and “right wing.” That these terms contribute to political confusion, certainly not to any clarity, is easily demonstrated by the fact that “left wing” is applied to Stalinism (read totalitarianism), to those who defend the Stalinist regimes or the “degenerated workers’ states,” and “right wing” to those who fight for democratic socialism.
No one best illustrates the futility of this approach to socialist unification and regroupment than the Socialist Workers Party. When it became aware that the discussions which were taking place between socialist organizations, these self-styled orthodox Trotskyist leaders acknowledged their existence and explained the basis for them in the events of the Twentieth Congress and the general world Stalinist Crisis. But for the SWP socialist unification and regroupment in the United States is predicated on support to the “defense of the Soviet Union.” So it was in the beginning. In the Fall of 1956, its International Socialist Review described the problem in part in this way:
Up to now, the Shachtmanites, who were once defenders of the Soviet Union, have commented on this development but have proved incapable of intervening actively and participating in the discussion that is now going on in the American radical movement about making a fresh start [ahem]. The reason for this is the refusal of the Shachtmanites to defend the Soviet Union. They thus exclude themselves at the ground level from serious consideration. Their position on the “Russian” question, as has been the case in the radical movement since 1917, determines the limits of their effectiveness in answering the “American” question. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
If you refuse to defend the Soviet Union you exclude yourself “at ground level” from any discussion of or participation in, regroupment. How ultimatistic; how sectarian! The ISL is not alone, however:
Similarly with the Socialist Party, unreasoning opposition to the Soviet Union, without discrimination between the good and bad, discredits what they have to say. What radical-minded worker cares to consider the opinions of Norman Thomas on this subject when you can get it straight from the State Department.
This is the way the SWP reacted in the beginning. In fact, it is not at all concerned with a broad regroupment of socialists that has any relationship to this country. Its perspective, in general, is the same today as it was twenty years ago. For although the discussion is “a most important one” it does not occur:
“... it must be emphasized in response to a wave of radicalization among the American workers ... Consequently it will largely be confined to the class-conscious vanguard, those who are already convinced socialists and supporters of the Soviet Union ... A thorough discussion of theoretical positions in this period of relative quiescence in America will help regroup the radical forces and build the revolutionary leadership needed for success when the next wave of mass radicalization brings with it the opportunity for action on a big scale.” (My emphasis – A.G.)
It might be said that this was written some months ago and that things have changed some since then. Surely, the SWP cannot be totally oblivious to life as it really is. But no. In the current issue of the ISR, the SWP, through its new political pundit, emphasizes these views in another form. Murray Weiss poses the question exclusively as a problem of theory and program. Says Weiss:
We think the circumstances call for a thorough discussion of program as the prelude to organizational steps leading toward actual regroupment. The question of program, in our opinion, is decisive ... The task of regroupment, in our view, does not consist of ignoring or watering down the programmatic differences between revolutionary Marxism on the one hand and Stalinism and Social Democracy on the other. On the contrary, the task is to regroup the radical workers around the program of revolutionary Marxism and thereby create the class-conscious vanguard that will enter the mainstream of the working class to bring militant socialist consciousness to its struggle.
Apart from the stale phrasemongering, the unyielding cliches that have really nothing to do with the problems in this country, Weiss equates revolutionary Marxism with the “defense of the Soviet Union.” This, indeed, is the unique contribution of the SWP. Most important, however, is that this kind of an approach to the question of socialist unification, is designed to prevent unification. For unification in the mind of the SWP means accepting the “finished program” of the SWP and joining it.
Weiss would of course build the new movement around the conceptions against which we warn. He is opposed to the ISL position because it implies, in the context of the world and American situation that social democracy, in the broadest sense of the term is progressive in relation to Stalinism and in relation to the present stage of development of the American working class, and, finally, he rejects the view of the ISL that no one interested in reconstructing a broad socialist movement in the United States can have a perspective of splitting the new movement.
The whole radical movement now knows from the public statement of its spokesman and its practical activity, that the SWP regards the present situation ripe for “raiding” all organizations in the name of its programmatic intransigence and purity, based upon the position of the need of all radicals to “defend the Soviet Union.” So that of all tendencies in the socialist movement, the SWP is least interested in socialist regroupment unless, of course, it takes place under the dogma of its “finished program.” The SWP hovers like a hawk over all groups waiting its chance to pick up a stray individual here and there.
 
WE DO NOT BELIEVE THAT this is the period of splits or raids; that any movement can even begin to make progress with such conceptions and practices. Either the unification of socialists will take place on a broad, general program of democratic socialism, free of the stigma of Stalinism and embrace many, many forces, or it will not take place at all. Socialist reunification based upon the SP-SDF, or SP-SDF and ISL alone will not be all-deciding, by any means. The hope of such unification lies in the promise that it holds out. That is why the Memorandum of the ISL summarizes its views in the following way:
“Our aim with regard to the Socialist Party must serve in turn our wider long-range aim with regard to the labor movement, as the most important of the mass movements in the country. The present period is a long interlude between the last radicalization wave and the one to come. In such a period it is not possible to think in terms of a genuinely powerful socialist movement numbering many tens of thousands and influencing many hundreds of thousands and more. But it is possible and necessary to utilize to the maximum all the possibilities now at hand to consolidate during this interlude the kind of socialist movement that will be best able to assist the working class in its further economic and political progress and be assisted in turn by the most conscious elements from its ranks who join and build the socialist wing of the labor movement.”
And finally:
The ISL has no grandiloquent illusions about the immediate possibilities for a powerful socialist movement. It is, however, anxious to do all in its power to utilize present concrete possibilities, no matter how modest, in conscious preparation for the much greater possibilities of the future. It is also in this sense that the ISL is prepared to unite with the Socialist Party and to pursue a course of building it up that will best advance the cause and influence of socialism in the labor movement, now and later. It is in the same sense that we refuse to support any movement which equivocates on the key question of the Stalinist regimes, for, among other reasons, it is precisely the identification of Stalinism with socialism in the minds of the American working class that has militated so strongly against the progress of socialism in this country.
April 25, 1957
 



Bibliographie des Oeuvres de Karl Marx
by Maximilien Rubel
279 pages, Marcel Rivière, Paris, 1956. Price: 1,800 French francs
A capital contribution to the study of Marxism has just been published in France: the first complete bibliography of Marx’s work, by Maximilien Rubel, an independent Marx scholar living in Paris.
It is a sad comment on the state of Marxism as a movement and as a science that this basic working instrument should be the first of its kind, in spite of the tremendous means at the disposal of powerful countries and movements claiming a monopoly over the administration of the Marxist heritage. The performance of this author, working in isolation and deprived of access to many important sources and documents, deserves respect, not only because of its intrinsic value, but as a political act: this man has accomplished single-handed a long overdue work which neither the Stalinist empire, nor the reformist mass parties, intellectually paralyzed each in their own way, have been able to complete.
The first attempt at establishing a bibliography of Marx’s writings goes back to 1920. It was compiled by Ernst Drahn, archivist of the German Social-Democratic Party. It was simply a list of titles in chronological order, and contained many omissions. The Chronology of Marx’s Life prepared by D. Riazanov, then director of the Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow, and published in 1934, conformed more closely to the standards of scientific research. Unfortunately, Riazanov was no longer present to supervise the publication of his work, having been arrested and deported in 1931.
The present bibliography lists more than 900 items under four headings: books and articles published during Marx’s lifetime or posthumously; correspondence, unpublished manuscripts; dubiosa. The titles are given in the original language and are followed by a French translation. The date and place of first publication are indicated; new editions are mentioned whenever they contain important commentaries. Translations into other languages are also listed. Most items have been briefly annotated, giving an indication of contents and of their historical background.
The work is completed by a bibliography of Engels (over 150 items) and an index of names.
 
IN THE VIEW OF ITS AUTHOR, this bibliography is to be the first step towards a systematic edition of Marx’s collected works. He therefore recalls, in his introduction, the history of the fate of Marx’s literary heritage.
At Marx’s death, Engels assumed the task of editing and publishing the manuscripts that Marx had left behind. Between 1884 and 1894 he thus published, among other works, the second and the third volume of Capital, the Origin of the Family, the Misery of Philosophy, the Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and the Theses on Feuerbach. A few months before his death, he wrote to a director of the German socialist party’s publishing house of his intent to publish a complete edition of Marx’s and his own collected works, but he was unfortunately unable to start this project.
In his testament, Engels named Eleanor Marx, Bernstein and Bebel as his and Marx’s literary executors. In fact, Bernstein and Kautsky became the real executors, but the battle over the question of revisionism soon made collaboration between them impossible. From Engels’ death to 1914, Marx’s and Engels’ work was not published according to a methodical plan. The main publications were Mehring’s four volumes Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle in 1902, containing little known writings of the period between 1841 and 1850, in particular Die Heilige Familie; Kautsky’s three volumes of the Theories of Surplus Value in 1905–1910; a manuscript on Max Stirner published by Bernstein in his review Dokumente des Sozialismus; various writings published in Die Neue Zeit, and the correspondence between Marx and Engels, four volumes of 1900 pages altogether published by Bernstein and Bebel.
The victory of the Russian revolution in October 1917 seemed to open new possibilities for assembling and publishing the collected works of the two founders of scientific socialism. For the first time a socialist government, led by Marxists, disposed of the means and of the determination needed to replace the scattered efforts of isolated scholars with a systematic edition. This work was undertaken by D. Riazanov, who had already published two volumes of Collected Writings of Marx and Engels 1852–1856 in 1920. In 1928, a bibliographical note in Lenin’s Collected Writings described Riazanov in the following terms:
Riazanov, D.B. (Born 1870). One of the earliest Russian social-democrats. Participated in the organization of the first workers’ circles in Odessa, soon after 1890. After five years of prison and three years of close surveillance, he emigrated. Attempted to conciliate the tendencies of the first Iskra, and of economism; was one of the founders of the Borba (Struggle) group. During the revolution of 1905, he participated in the organization of trade-unions in Odessa and in St. Petersburg. Had to emigrate again and was active in the Western socialist movement. The German social-democracy entrusted him with the study of the literary heritage of Marx and Engels and of the history of the First International; internationalist (centrist) during the war. Returned to Russia in 1917 and joined the Bolshevik Party; participated in the preparation of the October insurrection. R. is one of the organizers of the Communist Academy in Moscow and of the Marx-Engels Institute, of which he is the director. Member of the Executive Committee of the Soviets of the USSR.
The Soviet government granted Riazanov considerable funds, and in short time the most valuable and varied documents were collected at the Marx-Engels Institute. In 1925, the Institute negotiated an agreement with the German Social-Democratic Party and the Institute of Sociology in Frankfurt, directed by Carl Grünberg, for the publication of an edition of Marx’s and Engels’ collected works according to Riazanov’s plan. The complete edition was to include 40 volumes, and was divided in three sections: 17 volumes of philosophical, economic, historical and political writings other than Capital; 13 volumes of Marx’s economic writings, including the four volumes of Capital; 10 volumes including the complete correspondence of Marx and Engels. Two supplementary volumes would have included an index of names, of subjects and of works, as well as a detailed chronology of Marx’s life and works.
By 1930 a close collaborator of Riazanov was able to declare that “today the whole heritage of Marx and Engels is deciphered and typed.” Between 1926 and 1930, Riazanov published, in Russian and in German, 5 volumes of the Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe (MEGA), including three volumes of correspondence, as well as two volumes of the Marx-Engels Archiv, containing historical and critical documents by Russian scholars, including Riazanov, unpublished writings and correspondence by Marx and the plan of the MEGA.
In 1931 Riazanov was arrested, without any reason being publicly given, and deported to Saratov, where he seems to have died shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War.
In the course of the Stalinist counter-revolution, his work was first deformed, then destroyed. Under the supervision of the far less competent Adoratsky, seven more volumes were published from 1932 to 1935. These volumes fail to conform to the standards set by Riazanov; the introductions of the new editor are “timid ... devoid of any interest and scientific value.” In addition, Marx’s own work was censored. In volume XI of the new edition (Articles and Correspondence from 1856 to 1859), eleven articles published by Marx in the London Free Press under the title Secret Diplomatic History of the Eighteenth Century are missing. This detailed analysis of Russian foreign policy from Ivan Kalita to Peter the Great conflicted radically with the nationalist mythology resurrected by the Stalinist regime, aiming to justify the imperialist policy of the tsars as a justification of its own imperialist conquests. In 1935, all work on the MEGA was stopped by top-level decision. Various writings by Marx and Engels which should have been part of the MEGA appeared after 1935 without any relation to the complete edition. All references to Riazanov’s and his collaborator’s activity was eliminated from later publications; the volumes which had been published under Riazanov’s editorship were stamped in and disappeared from Russian and foreign libraries.
In 1947, Rubel wrote to the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute in Moscow to enquire about the fate of the MEGA, and was told that “the publication of the following volumes had been temporarily stopped.” It remains to be seen whether Stalin’s heirs, who so clamorously denounce the terror of his reign, will resume publication of the “temporarily” suspended edition, including the writings in which Marx condemns a policy that is not only Stalin’s but also their own.
The archives of German social-democracy were hurriedly sent abroad after the national-socialist regime had come to power; most of them are in the possession of the International Institute for Social History in Amsterdam. However, the Institute does not possess all of the materials that Riazanov was able to assemble in Moscow. Thus, no complete edition of Marx’s and Engels’ work will be possible as long as the archives of the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute in Moscow remain inaccessible to socialist scholars.
As Rubel remarks, the problem of a complete, historical and critical edition of Marx is very different today from what it was when Riazanov undertook the work thirty years ago. However, it does not seem insoluble: Rubel’s bibliography is the first step toward a new attempt in this direction.
 



Ecrits 1928–1940, Volume 1
by Leon Trotsky. Edited by Pierre Frank
369 pp, Marcel Rivière, Paris, 1955.
It is not often that the followers of Pablo in the Fourth International do something useful; the publication, under the editorship of Pierre Frank, of the first volume of Trotsky’s collected writings, from the period of his third exile to his death, is one of these rare surprises.
This edition of Trotsky’s collected works is not planned to be a definitive historical and critical edition, but a popular edition, designed not for scholars primarily but for a broader circle of readers in the labor movement. For this reason, it will not include the major works of this period which are for the most part easily available, at least in French (thus the History of the Russian Revolution, which was published by the Editions du Seuil in 1950 in two volumes [1], My Life, which was re-published by Gallimard late in 1954 with excellent commentaries by Rosmer [2], The Revolution Betrayed, which is fairly easily available second-hand, etc.). For the same reason, instead they have been gathered under broad headings, each related to a particular question or situation.
The present volume contains over thirty articles and documents written between 1929 and 1932; most of them were published in the Bulletin of the Opposition during 1929. The articles collected in the first chapters (Exile; Economic Problems of the Soviet Union; Socialism in One Country or Permanent Revolution; the Struggle of the Bolshevik-Leninists in the USSR) are mainly concerned with the internal problems of the Soviet Union. They explain the background of the Left Opposition’s struggle against the rising Stalinist counter-revolution between 1923 and 1928; some are critical studies of the first five years’ plan, of the agrarian policy of Stalin- Bukharin and of the relations between peasantry, working-class and party. The discussion of “socialism in one country” versus permanent revolution has been published in English as a preface to the American edition of the Permanent Revolution; it is followed by several articles and letters concerning the struggle of the Left Opposition in Russia.
The articles in the last chapters concern questions of international policy: the defense of the USSR in connection with the Chinese claims on the Manchurian railroad, the relations between Europe and America and the questions of European federation, the crisis in Austria and the policy of Austrian social-democracy, organizational and political problems of the International Left Opposition.
Trotsky’s articles dealing with the “third period” policy of the Communist International have not been included in this volume, excepting two on its application in China. The editor announced that most of them will be included in the second volume, in particular those concerning the political situation in France, Spain and Germany.
There are biographical notes – insufficient in many cases – and an index of names.
 
MANY OF THE WRITINGS in the present volume are striking in their timeliness. The articles on Austria and on the United States of Europe, for example, could have been written for today. The articles on the situation in Russia are timely in another way: they explain the genesis of the Stalinist bureaucratic regime, remaining true to the reactionary social force which it represents, in spite of the sudden changes in its policy and its “tone.” They also show the firm, principled basis of the Left Opposition’s struggle:
One must be politically light-minded to believe that the question is resolved ... because, instead of the old five years’ plan directed against “Trotskyism and the super-industrializers,” the same functionaries have now established a new five years’ plan based on the previously condemned principles of “super-industrialization” and directed, for the time being, against the right-wingers. We have so far always considered that all five years’ plans have a value only insofar as they are rooted in correct methods of directing the economy, and especially in a correct policy of the party and of the Communist International. What is therefore decisive for a Marxist is the principled basis of the party, and the political methods of the party, not the “concrete figures of the five years’ plan,” the fate of which still belongs entirely to the future.
In his polemics against the capitulators, Trotsky showed that the struggle of the Left Opposition had to be aimed at the power and at the very existence of the bureaucracy, not at one or the other of the latter’s policies. This political and social content of Trotskyism could only become clearer during Trotsky’s lifetime, as the bureaucracy consolidated itself as a ruling class.
The mistaken appraisal by Trotsky of the nature of the bureaucracy and of its long-range perspectives (much less excusable in his present-day “orthodox” followers) has been frequently used to obscure this fundamental meaning of his struggle, particularly by the Pablo-Deutscher school which has made this its specialty.
Thus, in a deplorable passage of the introduction to this volume, Pierre Frank explains how Mao Tse-tung has been recruited, if not yet to the Fourth International, then at least to the Pabloite ideology. It seems that Mao Tse-Tung is now applying the theory of the permanent revolution in China; Pierre Frank notes that no finer birthday-present for the 50th birthday of this theory could be imagined. The Chinese Stalinist regime, which had first proclaimed its intention to establish a regime of “new democracy,” and to proceed only later to the stage of a “socialist revolution,” has been forced, within five years of this statement, to engage in the “construction of socialism.”
The content of these terms, of course, is completely unrelated to the policies that were discussed in the communist movement in the 1920’s: the frame of reference of the regime is not that of the socialist movement, nor even that of the Stalinist movement in its beginnings. What subsists of the Marxist vocabulary in the jargon of the Chinese Stalinists, is a terminological cloak for two aspects of a policy inspired by class-interests deeply foreign and hostile to those of both working-class and peasantry.
Yet the crude, formalistic exploitation of this terminological confusion enables Pierre Frank to cover his capitulation to Stalinism by representing Mao Tse-tung as an involuntary Pabloite. If you can’t beat them, join them; if they won’t let you, pretend it’s them who are joining you.
In recent months, American policy as well as the Stalinist regime have entered a crisis. The “thaw” of the rival military and political blocs has provided the independent working-class movement with breathing-space; time has been gained, and the prospects for a reconstruction of the revolutionary movement look more favorable than they have for years.
Yet, at the same time, terminological sleight of hands based on formalistic analogies, political disorientation, confusion of all sorts, come fully into their own. While Mao Tse-tung becomes a Pabloite, Khrushchev becomes a Titoist and the Cominform is once more dissolved, while well-intentioned comrades (of the New Left among others) prepare to slaughter the fattened calf, urging us to forgive and forget.
More than ever, it is necessary to keep a clear political line, not to confuse general trends of social evolution with changes in policy, and not to lose sight of the aim of our struggle. In this, the example of Trotsky’s political thinking is no doubt one of the firmest and clearest. In a period of shifting policies, sudden “switches” and ideological confusion, let us remember that “the revolutionary party is the memory of the working-class. To learn not to forget the past in order to foresee the future, this is our first and most important task.”
* * *
Footnotes
1. Leon Trotsky, Histoire de la Révolution Russe, Vol. 1: Fevrier, 448 pp., Price: 600,– ffrs.; Vol. 2: Octobre, 640 pp., Price: 900,– ffrs. Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1950.
2. Leon Trotsky, Ma vie, Preface and appendix by A. Rosmer. 655 pp., Gallimard, 1954, Price; l,200.– ffrs.
 



From the “greatest Secretary of State I have ever known,” President Eisenhower obtained his latest “doctrine” for a solution of the Middle East crisis. No great departure in American foreign policy has emerged with this doctrine, since, like previous policies, it is an attempt to maintain the world leadership of the United States through essentially military predominance. Economic assistance promised to the Arab nations is subordinated to it. Actually, this new objective of containing Stalinist Russia is another variation of Dulles’ diplomacy, or what the current Progressive aptly calls “dangling one foot over the brink of war.” Under it the President may engage the nation in a military adventure if and when he feels that it is necessary, without discussion and without prior endorsement by Congress.
This doctrine, drawn to provide the means for engaging in war with Stalinist Russia, is, paradoxically, described as a great instrument of peace. “I don’t think,” said the Secretary, “anybody ever thought the Monroe Doctrine was a declaration of war. It was a declaration of peace, and that is what we are bringing here.” But the essence of the Eisenhower Doctrine is more accurately presented in the description Dulles gave of it in his testimony before the Senate Committee. There he said:
We would want to limit our activity to the minimum necessary to accomplish the objective, and if the objective could be accomplished by local action, certainly that would be all that would be undertaken. If it required action outside of the area, for example, to attack staging areas, lines of communication, and the like, then that would be done. I do not envisage the possibility that there would be, for example, an all-out attack on the Soviet Union unless it was quite apparent that what was happening was deliberately intended to be the beginning of the Third World War. In that event, we might have to act differently. Those are matters which inevitably have to be left to the judgment of the Commander-in-Chief.
Although we do not believe the danger of war to be as acute as it was several years ago (as a matter of fact, the danger of a new world conflict has receded considerably), the whole thinking of the Administration in the continuing world crisis revolves around “ultimate military solutions.” In general, American foreign policy is fundamentally undemocratic. It is undemocratic in its world perspectives as they relate to the aspirations and yearnings of the people of the world; it is undemocratic in relation to the people of the United States, since it ignores the interests of the people.
At the end of the Second World War, the ferment throughout the continental land masses containing millions upon millions of colonial peoples began. It has continued unabated. The achievement of colonial independence resolved only the first problems for the newly established nations. The problems of infinitely greater magnitude, those of economic and social reconstruction, the requirements of tremendous amounts of basic capital for growth – to these great problems, American foreign policy has been bankrupt and, above all, reactionary. The United States has not presented itself as the great spokesman of a new economic and political revolution in the colonial world, but rather as the heavy-handed defender of the old order, not the defender of the old colonial regimes, but the defender of feudal and private property rights where they conflict with the needs of the masses.
Among the Western allies, the United States appears as the provider of the goods of life, at a price: support of American position and policy in the world, regardless of the national bourgeois interests of these Allies.
It is a fact that American prestige in the world has never been lower. But it cannot be said that it wasn’t rightfully earned. The colonial peoples do not regard the United States as the advocate of their economic, social and political freedom, and American foreign policy has never been calculated to overcome these feelings of the people; on the contrary, it has enforced them. Where American policy has not been outwardly or directly motivated against the best interests of the new Asian states, it has been highly ambiguous. So reactionary or so ambiguous, that Supreme Court Justice Douglas, for example, has publicly deplored the whole substance of the visionless foreign policy of the nation.
 
THE TWO MOST SIGNIFICANT world events in recent times are the crisis in world Stalinism epitomized by the revolt in the satellite countries of Poland and Hungary, and the crisis in the Middle East. In both events, the policies of the State Department have been irresolute, fitful, and ambiguous. Improvization and expediency have characterized the Administration’s responses to these stupendous occurrences. However “daring” the declarations of Dulles may have sounded, in every instance they were reduced to glib moralizing and sanctimony, to which the Secretary is ever prone. As the Hungarian events have shown, bombast is a poor substitute for policy.
It might be asked: what could the United States have done in the face of the Hungarian events? Send troops into the country and risk the danger of a new world war? Obviously not. But American propaganda prior to the outbreak of the revolt was misleading to the people who eventually did the fighting. Propaganda broadcasts called for a revolt against the tyranny of Stalinism; the people were led to believe by indirection and implication that they would be aided in their struggle by the “democratic West.” Short of an over-all revolutionary world policy based upon the people of all countries, the aid which the country could have given to the Hungarian revolutionaries was indeed limited. But even this limited aid was not forthcoming. Moreover, as if to emphasize its bankruptcy, American treatment of the Hungarian refugee problem was once again reactionary. No bold, forthright and honest solution of the refugee problem has been, or will be, achieved. At home, the refugee problem is in the hands of our native Neanderthals, so that the tiny, resourceless country of Austria is left with the major share of the problem. Is it any wonder that anti-American feeling among the Hungarian refugees in Europe runs high? The refugees feel deceived. They feel that they were promised goods that were never delivered. The American attitude toward the Hungarian revolt on the one hand hailed the heroic struggle against the Russian colossus, and on the other, worried and wondered about the implications of the revolution as method, and the Workers Councils as instrument, of the rebellion.
In the Middle East, American foreign policy has one dominating motive force: oil. For the sake of oil the government has bribed half a continent. On behalf of oil, it has clashed with its Allies, condoned slavery, and embarked on a high policy of what amounts to financial bribery of the most miserable rulers in the world, the Arab chiefs of state. For the friendship of King Saud, the United States refused to subscribe to the anti-slavery covenant of the United Nations. For the purpose of dominating the area, it refused to join the Baghdad pact which it helped to initiate. It has denounced Israel and given support to Nasser’s regime in Egypt at a time when it appeared that the dictator was on his way out. It has turned its back on its chief NATO Allies, Great Britain and France, who joined the Israel invasion of the Sinai Peninsula, with their own ill-conceived and ill-fated, imperialist venture at Suez.
Then, in great haste the Administration has sought to repair this debacle by the elaboration of the Eisenhower Doctrine, in which it reassured these same Allies and sounded a warning to the Arabs about the implications of Russian aid to the area. The Eisenhower Doctrine, however, was ill received by the Arab. Nations. They rejected the Eisenhower-Dulles thesis of the Middle Eastern vacuum; they are hostile to the suggestion that their area of the world become the next battleground in the struggle of the powers. In almost all the Arab countries, the reaction to the doctrine has been vigorous enough to cause the State Department to put all its resources behind reassurances to the Arabs. One of the Department’s minor (or is it major?) efforts in this direction was the invitation to Saud to come to the United States to arrange for his next handout so that he might purchase more concubines, slaves, automobiles, and keep his armed and hired assassins loyal to him. Creating a schism in Arab ranks is no doubt also an objective inherent in the visit.
In all of this, the Administration has by-passed the UN. This omission has been so gross that Dulles and his Chief had to explain that really, nothing will actually be done without the UN, or that, in the end whatever commitments the United States makes in that area of the world, are in total conformity with the UN Charter! We are, in effect, says Dulles, carrying out the mandate of the UN in our Middle Eastern policy.
The endorsement of the Dulles-Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East may well give the Administration the assurance that the whole of Congress stands behind it in the “non-party” or “above-party” field of foreign affairs. It does not follow that this is true, even though overwhelmingly voted for. Congressional support was obtained for Administration policy, as it has been many times before, on the theory of crisis, an imminent threat to national sovereignty and the need for national unity. But what happens in the Congressional halls solves none of the problems in the Middle East, and certainly the “Doctrine” has solved nothing. It has merely expressed the Administration’s approach to the problems.
The paradox of this regime, if it is a paradox, is its reputation as a “peace” Administration. Up to now, it is true that war has not occurred and the danger of its outbreak is not imminent. The reasons for this lie in the concurrence of a number of large international events, not the least of which is the crisis of Stalinism. The mode of thinking of the Administration is, however, military. The economic aid program worked out by “The Team” is essentially subordinated to military exigencies. This is true for every part of the world, whether it be Europe, Asia or the Middle East. There is no such thing as “pure” economic aid as a part of American foreign policy, aid given on the premises of broad social programs of economic and political freedom. This business administration is utterly incapable of embarking on such a course, and therein lies its inability to neutralize or defeat Stalinism.
Stalinist Russia and world Stalinism have received terrible blows in recent years. That they have been considerably weakened by the contradictions of Stalinist expansion, and conflicts within the Stalinist orbit are now recognized by everyone. Yet the bourgeois world, under the tolerated leadership of the United States acts without vision.
Though the world was horrified at the cruel suppression of the Hungarian revolt by Stalinist Russia, the Kremlin yet makes progress in the trouble spots. The lingering imperialism of the Western powers still manages to neutralize the abhorrence of Stalinism in areas of the colonial world In other areas, it makes possible the advance of Stalinist imperialism. Already strained to the utmost by the demands made upon her by the satellite Stalinist states, Russia still finds it possible to intervene everywhere and most particularly at this moment in the Middle East.
The policies of Great Britain, France and Israel have made the Russian penetration of that area much simpler. Like a parasite, Russian totalitarianism thrives on the activities of Western imperialism, and appears as the champion of Arab independence, ready to assist these nations in their struggle for freedom, apparently without asking for any kind of quid pro quo. Its “disinterest” arises from the fact that the oil of the area is already in the hands of the West. With the expulsion of the West, Stalinist Russia could try to subject the Middle East to an exploitation it has not yet experienced. As an anti-capitalist nation, characterized by a new form of exploitation and oppression, Russia can and does appear as an advocate of freedom only because the capitalist West is incapable of shedding its economic imperialist interests in the Middle East.
The Middle East is thus the pawn in the great power struggle. The policies of Russia and the United States and their respective allies must and do overlook and override the basic interests of the cruelly exploited Arab masses and threatens these people with war. In this situation, the Arab rulers sit like tradesmen searching for the highest price in the market, for like the great powers, the needs and interests of their people are non-existent.
 



The long-heralded invasion of the German-occupied continent of Europe by the Allied armies began on June 5. Combined American, British and Canadian forces, on land, sea and air, opened their assault in the early hours of the morning on the northwestern coast of France between the harbors of Cherbourg and Le Havre. Early reports indicate that the first landings were successfully executed and that the Allied armies are seeking to spread out fanwise along other coastal defenses and to penetrate deep into the heart of France along the Seine valley leading to Paris.
The governmental and military leaders of the Allied countries are cautious in their early statements. They know, of course, that the real struggle lies ahead of them; that the tests will come when the German armies begin their own counter-offensives. The initial landings may or may not be main points of operations. It is clear that if the Allies meet feeble resistance and can advance at will, this area will become the main point of invasion. But there are likely to be other important invasion areas and feints to confuse the German defense.
A great deal of the struggle depends upon the initial speed with which the Allied armies take advantage of the present landings to widen and deepen their penetration of the German defenses. But the important observers are, we believe, quite correct in forecasting a long and difficult military struggle. We are in no position to make any startling forecasts about the military prospects of the present fight. The past almost five years of warfare has shown how tricky a business that is. The line of broken-down military experts is indeed long and there is hardly a single one of them that has not at least one prognostication to live down. But it is easy to see that the present invasion marks a new stage in the war, perhaps a final stage in the conflict in the European theater.
 
Political Aspects of War
As we have maintained from the very beginning of the conflict, the military aspects of the war are, in the last analysis, subordinate to the political. The question of war aims is indissolubly interlinked with the actual military conflict. What really stands out in the whole situation, although it is now overshadowed by the immensity of the invasion itself, is that while the military situation for the Allies has improved, their political relations have deteriorated. The basis for this political deterioration is due not merely to fundamental differences in aims, but to a fundamental weakness of all the capitalist powers, including the non-capitalist Russian power, to wage a war for genuine national liberation and true social, political and economic freedom.
The European continent today is occupied by German fascism. Fascism is the modern form of capitalist barbarism. It is the profit system based upon the destruction of the working class movements, the violation of all democratic rights for impoverished classes, the perpetuation of the profit system and the well-being of big business at the expense of all other sections of the population.
To effect its rule, German fascism has built its power on the flesh and blood of the masses of Europe and upon a propaganda system made to order for them by the other capitalist nations of the world.
Hitler came to power in Germany as a result of many factors: the infamous Versailles Treaty, which made it impossible for a capitalist Germany to surmount its economic difficulties; the refusal of the Anglo-French dominated League of Nations to accommodate the Weimar Republic; the monopoly of world markets, raw materials and colonies by the other powers; the betrayals of the working class political organizations (Social-Democratic and Communist); and the political, organizational and financial assistance given the Brown Shirts by German big business and the big capitalists of England, France and the United States.
In the opening days of the war, the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms devised by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill were believed to be political weapons against fascism. For, in the early days, the mobilization of the peoples for this war could not be effected except through picturing the war as a conflict with fascism, the aim of Which conflict was to destroy fascism throughout the world.
When the military situation was indeed difficult for the Allies, the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms were constantly referred to as a means of rallying mass enthusiasm for the war. But with each improvement of the Allied military situation, the references to the “doctrines” of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms became more and more infrequent; until at present they are hardly mentioned at all.
 
Fighting For Status Quo
The closer the Allies come to victory, the more is it revealed by the leading powers that they are, at one and the same time, fighting for a return to the miserable European and world pre-war status quo which led to the outbreak of the present war; a three or four-power domination of the world, a maintenance and bolstering of the rotten regimes which existed in Europe and which are now propped up by the Allied powers, and against any important social and political change which the masses of Europe desire and are, in actuality, fighting for.
Political policies of the Allies have been grist to Goebbels’ propaganda mill. Every time some Allied leader makes a pronouncement on what to do with Germany after the war, he only gives the fascist beasts a grip on life, a means by which to keep the German soldiers fighting and the masses working.
Vansittartism, the program for the annihilation of the German people, is the real aim of many of the Allied governments! Each time one of the adherents of the Vansisstartist theory speaks, the German fascists merely make a holiday of their remarks. Goebbels says to the Germans: Will you give up now to become slaves and worse, or will you fight on to the last to prevent it?
When Russia announces that it will take 10,000,000 Germans to Russia as slave labor, Goebbels merely repeats the announcement, certain that it will galvanize the nation to continue the hopeless struggle.
When Allied spokesmen announce plans for the dismemberment and occupation of the country, the fascist scoundrels repeat the plans. It is any wonder, then, that the barbarous Nazi regime is able to continue the war?
All they have to do is to quote Churchill’s speeches to the effect that the Atlantic Charter applies only to the Allies (and only to the big powers, to boot), that the British Empire means to hold its own; all they have to do is show the deals in North Africa with Darlan, the relations to Franco in Spain, to Vichy in France, in order to convince every last person in Germany that it is not a war against fascism, an ideological war, but simply a fight between the powers for control of the world and the defeat of Germany’s economic and military power, and, finally, dismemberment of the country.
 
No Progressive Program
The biggest weakness of the Allies is their inability to advance and fight for progressive programs and ideas.
There is as yet no definitive idea of what to do about Germany, except to destroy the country and its people.
There is no agreement about relations to the de Gaullist movement.
There is no agreement on what to do with Poland.
There is no agreement about how much Stalin is to get out of the war; what will be England’s share, or America’s.
But there is agreement between all of them to prevent the masses of Europe, the courageous and militant national revolutionary movements composed of active workers and peasants, from getting “out of hand,” to keep the masses from asserting their will in this situation. There is agreement between them on the necessity of preventing the workers of Europe from bringing about any social change leading, to an improvement on the conditions of the people on the continent.
While Roosevelt is silent a good deal of the time, he has made his attitude clear by his sharp antipathy to de Gaulle. Behind this antipathy is the fear that the French masses will be uncontrollable by de Gaulle or anyone else and that they may set up their own regime leading to a revolutionary political change in the country.
 
The Italian Lesson
This policy has been completely demonstrated in Italy, where no important steps were taken to permit the intervention of the Italian people in deciding their own fate, their own regime, their own social order.
Every report from Italy, every important observation made on that country, records that the Italian people want a change from the old order, they want an end to the monarchy, they want genuine freedom, immediate elections, free speech, free press, right to organize, a constituent assembly. But the steady liberation of the country from German military control has not led to a corresponding social political and economic liberation of the people.
Tory England is fighting to keep the corrupt, venal and fascist monarchy on the throne in Italy and to prevent any social change in the country. This policy is supported by Russia and the United States.
While America does not see eye to eye with Churchill on Spam, Churchill nevertheless announces, to the dismay of the liberals of the world and particularly of the Spanish people, who hate Franco, his support of that butcher. To balance off Franco, he also support the Stalinist Tito. He is able to do this because he has no fear that the Communists in Europe will do anything to change the face of Europe. Stalin has guaranteed that In addition, Churchill wants to keep in power in Greece the miserable monarchy of King George which England helped to foist on the Greek people, who want no part of the imported Rex from Denmark to rule over them.
On the other hand, Churchill supports de Gaulle. The reason behind this is England’s determination not to be cut off the continent by the United States or Russia, a determination to continue its old policy of a balance of power in Europe.
Stalin means to gobble up a great part of Poland. He already has the Baltic states and seeks control over the Balkans.
Thus Allied political policy is a bad edition of the policy of the Allies following the First Imperialist World War, it is power politics of the worst kind which can only guarantee a Third World War.
 
They Fear the Masses
We have often said that, if the Allies seriously meant to apply the principles of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, Hitler could not last in Europe. If the Allies separated the peoples of Europe from their murderous regimes, if they showed that they understand there is a difference between the fascist rulers and their subjected people they could unleash a wave of revolutionary struggle in Europe that would bring the war to a speedy close and a lasting defeat of fascism. But it is apparent that the Allies fear a revolutionary upsurge in Europe as much as Hitler does, They fear that such a revolutionary upsurge would bring about a real social and political change that would end the system of exploitation, poverty and war for all time. This is why they cannot really promote the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms. They are afraid of their own people, too.
But the European masses will not be downed. They have given unmistakable signs of movement. Their hatred of fascism is too intense to be stayed. Their hatred of unemployment, poverty and war is too great to be stemmed. They want a new life, they want genuine freedom, they want real security and peace. And they will fight for it. In fighting for these ideals, they will be fighting for the peoples of the whole world, for the peoples of Asia, of South America, of North America, of Africa.
The American workers, the great masses of our country, could do no greater service to themselves than support the peoples of Europe in their fight for freedom. The fight of the European masses, the European workers and peasants, is the fight of every American worker, poor farmer and oppressed and poor lower middle class.
 



I went down to the mass meeting called by the Brewster UAW Local 365 to see at first hand the temper of the workers who held the unique sit-in sit-down strike in protest against the sudden Navy Department cancellation of contracts which resulted in the closing down of the plant. The hall was packed to standing room, the crowd being variously estimated at from 3,500 to 5,000.
The thing which struck any visitor was the militant spirit of the workers. They came into the meeting feeling that they had done an excellent job, not only for themselves, but for the entire labor movement, because they understood that the cancellation of their contract and the closing of the Brewster plant was not an isolated event. More of the same was coming all over the country. That is why their fight was so important; it was a fight for every worker in war industry, because every one of them faces the same prospect.
These workers stayed in the plant and refused to budge until something tangible was done for them in the was of securing their present jobs, obtaining other jobs, or the kind of assistance which would not throw the burden of their unwanted unemployment on their own shoulders.
You could tell from their remarks and see from their faces that they came to this meeting to hear from their international and local leaders just what was accomplished for them. The gathering was a mass meeting with invited speakers, including Joseph Curran, Senator Murray of Montana, and Richard Frankensteen, head of the aircraft division of the UAW and in charge of the Brewster case. This fact alone precluded any possibility of a regular union meeting with participation from the rank and file. And so, they came and listened very attentively for the word that their fight was won and their jobs secured.
But they didn’t hear that word. They heard a lot of other things instead.
There was the mutual back-slapping by De Lorenzo and Frankensteen, by both of them of Senator Murray and finally some praise of the Brewster workers themselves for the fight they made, and for the leadership they had!
The most important part of the meeting was the report made by Frankensteen on his negotiations in Washington with the Navy Department, War Mobilization Director Byrnes and other assorted administrators at the Capital. There were many interesting things contained in Frankensteen’s report. For example, he related the absolute callousness of the Navy Department with regard to the problems of the workers and the effect of sudden unemployment upon them and their families. The Navy Department, Frankensteen said, not only misrepresented the state of production at Brewster and lied about production costs in New York as compared to other plants producing the same Corsair plane, but bluntly told him they were interested only in the “small stockholders” and had no concern whatever with the fate of the 12,500 Brewster workers.
 
What Washington Did
Well, what happened in Washington? Frankensteen found that the governmental leaders were upset by the Brewster affair. First of all, they were upset by the strategy of the unionists, who refused to leave the plant. Then they were galvanized into action by the union!
What did they do? Senator Murray’s committee met, on Memorial Day of all days, to consider what action could be taken to help the workers and the company to continue war production or reconvert to civilian production. But to date, nothing concrete has been accomplished. The Navy Department refused to budge; they would not even agree to produce another 250 planes to keep the plant going for another period and thus permit, perhaps, some time to reorganize affairs. The War Department likewise could in no way utilize the plant for anything.
What about production of consumer goods? Nothing much there either. Well, then, what remained?
Here is the point where the meeting suffered its real let-down. Here is the point where the Brewster workers suffered the real blow. Nothing could be promised them now. Frankensteen had to tell them, these courageous, militant, well-organized unionists, that it would be some time before they could get their jobs back! They should go and get their pay checks and seek jobs elsewhere; their seniority rights would be protected for another thirty days and then ...
Then, they might be rehired at lower wages! And what kind of work will they do? Nobody knows. Where will they get other jobs in New York, which is not a vital war production center? Nobody knows that either. Shall they move their families to other cities? Well, even here Frankensteen had already pointed out how practically impossible it was for 12,500 workers to take their belongings and families and hunt jobs in other cities.
 
They Got Promises
Frankensteen’s closing remarks, calling for discipline and unity, practically ended the meeting. The workers listened courteously enough to Senator Murray, who went on to blame the bunglers in Washington for their failure to plan for such things as the Brewster contract cancellation. But you could sense a new mood among the rank and file unionists. They passed the few resolutions introduced condemning the Navy’s action, calling for security of the worker in job cancellations, and so on. And then the announcement was made that since this was a mass meeting at which visitors and the press were present, no regular union meeting could be held. Here and there were voices asking for the floor, but they were told to wait for a regular union meeting the following week. The meeting then adjourned. How did the workers feel? It was impossible to speak to everyone present. But you could catch remarks here and there. They knew they really didn’t get anything except a few promises. They were proud of their fight; they knew they carried the ball for the whole labor movement. But it was clear that, having agreed to leave the plant and look toward the Administration for assistance, they had given up their front-line trenches. In exchange for what? So far as could be made out from everything that was said at the mass meeting, and everything that was written on the Brewster situation, for a handful of promises that have not yet materialized, and the likelihood is that they won’t.
The workers did not like it and their dissatisfaction was obvious. For the questions still remain: What are they to do? How are they to live?
 



Mayor LaGuardia of New York City pulled “another beaut” in connection with the dispute over the ten-cent fare for the city’s subway system. Little Butch’s scheme to get out from under the pressure of the big real estate interests and their drive for a higher fare is characteristic of the Mayor.
New York City periodically witnesses a struggle between the politicians and the business interests over increasing the nickel fare. The city-owned and operated transit lines run on a deficit. This is important depending on the point of view taken.
From the standpoint of good capitalist business, anything which does not yield a profit is bad – even though socially useful and of aid and benefit to the people. Front the viewpoint of the people of the city, the deficit is not too important, as long as the millions of workers get good service and cheap service.
The details of financing the subway are long indeed, and under examination would reveal that much of the trouble which exists today can be traced to the many years during which the service was privately owned and operated on the basis of a franchise from the city. The city was often not paid by the private interests, which showed this as a loss year after year, while it paid out dividends and fabulous salaries to its officials.
 
Big Business Behind Higher Fare
In any case, financing of the subway and transit system requires revenues in addition to fares and these have been met by real estate taxes. These taxes have not met the deficit because they were never high enough. But any kind of tax is too high for the real estate and business interests. We are not referring to the little landlord who has his one building. He is not decisive in this situation. When we speak of real estate interests, we refer to the big corporations which own hundreds of buildings, the banks, whose properties run into the millions of dollars and the skyscraper corporations.
They have been clamoring for a ten-cent fare in New York City for many years. The doubling, of the fare might greatly increase revenues that would more than cover any deficit. That’s just the point, overcoming the deficit by millions of dollars would lay the basis for another squeeze play on taxes. These interests, whose spokesman js the politician and corporation lawyer, Paul Windels, are fighting for just such an aim: raise costs on the people, lower the taxes on those able to pay and thus increase profits!
 
The Mayor’s Grand Slam
How does Mayor LaGuardia meet this of the big interests? By side-stepping their challenge and offering up a proposal even more dastardly than theirs. They at least are frank. They want an increased fare. Not LaGuardia. That means political defeat in New York. He dare not raise the fare, so he proposes a program which is the rankest piece of class legislation we have seen for a long time. The Mayor proposes to tax each tenant in the city on the basis of rent paid in order to cover the deficit. And this is what the Mayor’s plan looks like as a whole:

A two per cent tax on each apartment and house tenant in the city! This is to be paid monthly and collected by the landlord!
 
A two and a half per cent tax on every business man or manufacturer with an office, loft or plant. Also on monthly rental basis.
 
A two per cent monthly tax on every hotel and lodging resident.
 
Out of town commuters working in the city to pay forty cents monthly, to be taken out of their pay envelopes.
 
A one per cent tax on every mortgage holder on any money he gets as interest on property anywhere in the five boroughs.

There may be a few people in this listing capable of paying a small tax. But the vast majority of those covered by the Mayor’s so-called plan will be workers and those least able to pay. If the Mayor’s proposal is carried it will literally take food out of the mouths of the people.
 
Has His Tongue in His Cheek
In all of this discussion, the Mayor makes sure to avoid mention of the fact that real estate taxes, have been cut. They have been cut thirteen points in Manhattan, fourteen points in the Bronx, twelve points in Brooklyn, twenty points in Queens and, sixteen points in Richmond!
How does His Honor defend his gouge of the people? By citing how much cheaper the tax would be for the people as against the ten-cent fare.
Last year he was fighting against a living wage for transit workers ou the ground of the deficit. This year he is saving the people money with a tax plain which avoids the real issue.
Certainly as against the ten-cent fare, his tax plan is cheaper. But the answer to that is simple: Reject both plans, the bankers’ and real estate scheme for a ten-cent fare, add LaGuardia’s scheme for a tax on rents. Put the tax where it belongs: on the banks, which are amassing untold millions in profits, the big real estate corporations and profiteering brokers.
 



In his recent speech to Parliament, the Honorable Winston Churchill, His Majesty’s Prime Minister, declared that the war was no longer ideological. The most important thing, he added, was to win the war. And to win the war His Majesty’s government was prepared to work with anybody – Stalinist Russia; Stalin’s agent in Yugoslavia, Marshal Tito, alias Broz; fascist Badoglio in Italy, and that excellent representative of modern butchery, friend of the American Ambassador to Spain, the bloody handed General Franco.
Many people were excited by this speech of Mr. Churchill, but none more than the liberals. Why this is almost sacrilegious, they whined. Everyone knows, they said, that this is a war against fascism, for liberty, democracy and a new world for the common man. They even pointed to Churchill’s speeches early in the war, when it looked as though the British Empire would be torn apart by German fascist imperialism. Churchill then made long speeches about the “ideological character of the war.
 
Memories Are Not Too Short
Memories can be short, especially when it is convenient. But the war is not convenient. The masses of people feel the economic difficulties of life under war. They bear its heaviest burdens. More important than that, there is hardly a workers’ family that does not have one or more sons and relatives fighting in this “ideological” war, thinking that they are fighting for freedom. Many of them believed what Churchill said only a couple of years ago. They remember that he said many beautiful things when England was fighting alone. They remember, too, that he said more beautiful things, together with President Roosevelt, when they issued the Atlantic Charter and announced their devotion to the Four Freedoms.
How truly beautiful they sounded: freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of worship, freedom of organization; national independence for all nations and, lastly, freedom from fear. Fight this war, said he, and we shall have prosperity, security and peace for all time.
Now that the war has turned more favorable to the Allies, now that it is certain that Germany cannot win in Europe, Churchill speaks more frankly. Even President Roosevelt no longer says that this war will end war for all time; he now HOPES it will end war only for the next generation!
Because the war has turned favorable to England and the Allies, Churchill says little or nothing about early war aims. Why should he? He never intended them seriously. They were only”ideological” pleas to the people to support him and his regime in the war and to support the Allies in general.
 
Having obtained that support from the people, unenthusiastic as it is (especially in England, where the workers, the overwhelming majority of the people in that country, want a change from the old life to a new one, want a change from Toryism which Churchill represents), Churchill, representing the interests and views of capitalism and the capitalists of the Allied countries, speaks bluntly.
But is it true that the war is not ideological? In the sense that Churchill means it, yes.
In the sense that Churchill and the Allied powers have no intention whatsoever in bringing about any change in the capitalist system, yes.
In the sense that they have no intention of changing the old system of power politics, yes.
In the sense that they have no intention of altering the profit system, yes.
In the sense that they have no intention of genuinely improving the lot of the millions and millions of workers, poor peasants and farmers, and the poor middle class, yes.
 
Churchill’s Ideology
What Churchill plainly says is: don’t believe anything we ever said about the war. We are really and truly fighting to retain the status quo ante. We are for the old capitalist system of unemployment, poverty and misery for the overwhelming majority of the people. We are for the old capitalist, system of profits, well-being and enrichment for a few, for the great capitalists of our civilization.
We may agree to a few concessions after the war. We may build a few new homes, since the war destroyed so many. We may provide some nurseries to aid poor mothers. We may even increase unemployment allotments and social security, but we will never stand for a change in our rotten, brutal and vicious capitalist system of profits for a few and misery for the many.
Of one thing we are certain: Churchill will be fooled if he thinks the soldiers will return from the wars just to continue under the old state of affairs. He will find that promises will not be enough. The people will want a change and they will get it, Churchill notwithstanding. Reports from the front supply much evidence of this fact. Journalists who talk to the men of all armies sing the same refrain: the boys want a change. They’re not going to stand for unemployment and poverty.
 
What the People Want
But make no mistake about it. When Churchill says the war is not “ideological,” he means that in his mind, and the class he represents, the war does not mean what he said it did and that it is not fought for the things he once described. He means that the war is a fight over markets, colonies, profits. Simple and practical things!
Are these things ideological? Perhaps not in the sense that we are apt to think they are. But in a real sense they are ideological. They are the things which represent capitalist imperialism. They are the “ideological” interests of the capitalist class – not the people.
The war is ideological. It is a war in the interests of capitalism and the things capitalism stands for. When Churchill says it is not ideological he only means that it is not being fought for the things the people think it is fought for nor the things they want. It is not for peace, security and freedom.
 



In our article of last week we considered one aspect of the problem of post-war production and the prospect of unemployment. It was clearly evident that the danger of mass unemployment was acute. The problem is somewhat complicated by the fact that the war is really two in one. Even if the war should end in Europe, say within another year, there is still the war with Japan to be concluded. This situation is merely a guarantee that, only greater confusion will exist than now, while the war in Europe is still on.
Consider this: American industry has undergone a tremendous expansion since the war broke out in Europe. Production exceeded the most optimistic hopes of the capitalist economists, industrialists, government administrators. Raw materials were strictly controlled. Payrolls rose by many millions. All this production was for war purposes. Yet the most interesting thing about this vast expansion of industry and production is that while many billions of dollars were spent for war goods, the production of non-war good also broke all records.
Now the fact of the matter is that the war goods produced by the workers have been so vast that cutbacks are already taking place. They will take place with increasing speed as the months go by.
Last week we reported the announcement made by R.J. Thomas, president of the Auto Workers Union, to the effect that, by the end of 1944, 1,650,000 workers will be put of jobs in the following industries: munitions, aircraft, shipbuilding, steel and aluminum.
It is quite possible that immediately after the close of the war in Europe and the war in the Far East too, a period of continued production and employment will take place. The same thing happened after the last war. The post-war crash came, even though it was a year to a year and a half after the end of the war. There’s the rub. The big crash now may not come until a passage of time after the close of this war, but the prospects are more terrifying than they were twenty-five years ago.
There will be large-scale unemployment in this country even BEFORE a crash comes. This is guaranteed by the expansion of industry and the increase in the working population. The situation has reached the point where government and business economists regard an unemployed army of ten million as “normal”! These experts now say that if unemployment can be kept down to that figure we shall be doing well!
In our first article we cited certain figures to indicate the problem. They will stand repeating. There are today over ten million more workers than in 1940 and the national income (measure of production) is more than forty billion dollars greater. All of this production and employment was stimulated by the great demands of the war.
 
How Many Million?
If production in the first six months of the post-war period is maintained at the high peacetime level of 1940, there will be a minimum of 11,000,000 unemployed. According to Leo Cherne, economist, the end of the war will witness 12,000,000 workers laid off in war plants.
How can this be avoided? By transferring war production at its present level to peacetime civilian production. Concretely, it means American industry would have to, produce forty to fifty billion dollars’ worth of civilian goods more than was produced in 1940.
Where are the plants to produce these goods? They are right here in the country. They are owned now by the government, having been built for the sole purpose of producing the goods of war. To carry out the aims of the “liberals” and the labor leaders would mean that all these new plants, built and owned by the government, would have to be kept working, with government money, to produce the needs of life and to keep the overwhelming majority of the American workers on jobs.
Can it be done? Yes, with the program advocated by Labor Action. Turn the new plants which big business wants closed or turned over to it for a song, to the unions to operate. Let the plants produce goods under workers’ control. Let them produce consumer goods to provide for the needs of the people and to produce such a wealth of goods as can increase the standard of living of the masses of people to a much higher level.
This is exactly the kind of idea that capitalism fights. The interest of big business is solely in profits. They are not interested in high level production merely to keep factories going and workers employed. They are interested in production only insofar as it is profitable. No profits, no production. And they have made it abundantly clear already that they do not intend a vast production program unless is it profitable.
In the meantime, cutbacks have already resulted in more unemployment than anyone dared think a few months ago. While professional “pay-triots” and labor-baiters go on in their campaign against the workers, factories are closing down, or war contracts are cancelled. Brewster was one example, perhaps the first. Now there are others.
Where workers who become unemployed as a result of cutbacks do find other jobs, they are at a lower rate of pay. The New York Post survey, made of large war firms in the New York area, shows that workers laid off because of cutbacks get new jobs at an average pay cut of $20 weekly.
These wage cuts take place now, in the very midst of the war, and there is no prospect of any relief from these conditions for thousands and thousands of workers. The cost of living continues upward. Wages are frozen. Cutbacks are beginning and unemployment rears its head. These are a grave danger to the American workers.
 



Everybody knows that the recent congressional action extending the life of the OPA in a new bill was legislative enactment of a measure in the interests of big business against the consumers. The adoption of a slightly modified version of the Bankhead bill now permits the textile companies to raise prices – an action which will cost consumers an estimated additional $150,000,000 a year.
This bill was passed despite the opposition of labor, the President and his supporters in Congress. Yet the bill was not vetoed and it became law. The added income resulting from higher prices will not go to the cotton farmers. It will go to manufacturers, who get all the gravy in such situations.
 
CIO News Comments
The lessons to be drawn from this affair are many, but they are not understood and correctly indicated by the CIO News, which reported this in one of its recent issues. This is what its Washington report says:
“One of the strongest arguments for CIO’s wage case and for labor political action was furnished – at considerable expense to the workers – in the enforced raising of cotton textile prices this week.”
There is hardly a worker in the country who needs strong arguments in favor of wage increases, which is the “CIO’s wage case.” So far, so good. What is the actual situation in the country? There is a wage freeze! President Roosevelt is primarily responsible for it, since it is incorporated in his seven-point program, of which the wage freeze is the only one to be carried into effect!
How is the wage freeze carried out? Through the war stabilization program under the direction of James Byrnes, Roosevelt’s assistant. The specific instrument employed to measure wage increases or the denial of them is the Little Steel formula. The Little Steel formula is one of the most vicious obstacles to wage increases. And the War Labor Board, which acts on the matter of wages, operates on this “principle” to deny wage raises to the hundreds of thousands of workers who need them and who have requested them.
 
Roosevelt’s War Program
All of this is part qf Roosevelt’s home front war machinery. The War Labor Board, stacked against labor, operating under the Little Steel formula, was set up by Roosevelt. The War Stabilization Board, under Byrnes, was set up by Roosevelt. These are his creations, and the wages of labor have been frozen by his acts.
Roosevelt’s defenders, however, say that his whole program was defeated by Congress and that is why there is no “equality of sacrifice.” But the obvious answer to that is, if Congress rejected six-sevenths of Roosevelt’s program, why did the President carry through the remaining provision, which has hurt the workers of the country?
Sure, Congress is reactionary and anti-labor. What, then, does this make of Roosevelt’s program? We shall soon indicate the answer.
The CIO News is absolutely correct in saying that what has happened took place “at considerable expense to the workers.” But the Bankhead amendment, which was incorporated in the congressional bill extending the life of the OPA, was signed by Roosevelt (with criticism!). This is what is really important.
The CIO case for higher wages needed no additional evidence. All the evidence for higher wages, is present in the high cost of living and the fact that there is a wide discrepancy between wages and living costs. But here are additional facts: the demands of the textile workers, rubber workers, mine workers, auto workers were all rejected by Roosevelt’s, boards and executives! Now the steel case is before the WLB. This is an election year and anything can happen. But in the meantime, the workers go without necessary wage increases and their living standards decline.
 
What Kind of Action?
What about labor political action? We agree, these conditions ar the “strongest arguments ... for labor political action.” How does the CIO News interpret this? It means by labor political action, the setting up of bodies, like the Political Action Committee, to support capitalist candidates of either the Republican or Democratic Parties. In the case of the presidential elections they are actively campaigning for the fourth term. The sum and substance of the CIO “labor” political action is to become a tail-end to one of the boss parties.
You would think that their story, referred to above, would indicate the necessity for really “independent” political action, yet we find that in spite of all the damaging evidence against both parties and their banner-bearers, from Roosevelt to the most unimportant congressman, the CIO leaders are playing a game calculated to defeat the best interests of labor.
The political policy of the CIO means support to Roosevelt, his party and the leaders of that party. They include not only the liberal wing of Wallace et al., but the reactionaries and Bourbon poll-taxers from the South. Hillman and his aides, many of them hired directly from the list of Democratic unemployed politicians, are working day and night to tie labor to the party of Roosevelt, Byrd, Rankin, O’Daniel, Kelly, Farley, Hauge, Flynn, Byrnes, etc.
Yes, the whole situation in the country dictates the necessity for labor political action, but it dictates the necessity for “independent” action. It dictates the necessity for labor to organize its own political party, to run its own candidates and to develop its own program which seeks to advance the interests of labor against those of big business. Roosevelt’s program is a program designed to aid big business. If you don’t believe that just compare the attitude of the Administration toward wage increases on the one hand, and the huge war profits that industry is getting out of the war effort on the other.
Can labor build its own party? With the great union movement it can be done. The Political Action Committee has raised and will spend almost a million dollars for a campaign to support capitalist candidates. Such energy, organization and finances applied to the task of building a political organization of the. workers, a Labor Party, would yield phenomenal results, This is a prime task of the American labor movement.
 



The closing down of the Brewster plant focused the attention of the whole country to the problem of cutbacks and unemployment resulting from the change in the war situation. Brewster revealed the state of mind of the Administration, a whole layer of bureaucrats, and the government and private economists to the problem of continuous production and employment.
Nothing was prepared for when the Navy Department announced, without prior warning, that it was cancelling all contracts with the Brewster company, even though Roosevelt and his Administration have talked for many years about “plans.” Every emergency would be taken care of, they were told, by insight, foresight and plain love which the New Deal has for the “common people.” Yet, when the first opportunity came for something to be done, the Administration was completely bankrupt.
The men at Brewster’s had good instinct. They called a sit-in sit-down strike for their jobs. It was not only a strike against the Navy Department order, the company and the Administration; it was also a strike against the whole capitalist way of operating industry: USE THE WORKER AS LONG AS YOU NEED HIM AND CAN PROFIT FROM HIS LABOR! THROW HIM OUT OF HIS JOB WHEN YOU DON’T NEED HIM AND CAN’T PROFIT FROM HIS LABOR!
All the forces of so-called “law and order” which are so anxious to avoid “anarchy” in Europe (by which they mean, to suppress the independent action of the people) stood aghast at the Brewster affair. Not at the fact that workers were thrown out of their jobs, but at the fact that it was a sit-in sit-down strike for jobs! What if every worker should do that when the cutbacks really start on a large scale? How would we cope with it, thought the bureaucrats of government and industry.
What They Promised at Brewster
They promised the Brewster workers everything if they would only take their pay and leave the plant. The President promised that new contracts would be forthcoming and jobs would be provided for the men. Byrnes began to investigate the possibility for immediately allocating new contracts to the company. On the other hand, the Navy Department washed its hands of the whole affair, saying it was only interested in the dividends of the stockholders.
The Army wouldn’t accept the buck passed to it by the Navy, saying it had all the airplane facilities it needed. The union leadership, international (Frankensteen) and local (De Lorenzo), was just as bankrupt in offering and fighting for a program that could really aid the workers.
And the Brewster workers? What of them? The majority are still out of jobs, according to the report of the United States Employment Service. New York is a surplus labor area. Nothing was done for them and nothing is planned for them.
As a matter of fact, the whole manpower situation is a muddle and no one can make heads or tails out of reports from Washington. They are completely contradictory and apparently false. Paul V. McNutt, chairman of the War Manpower Commission, has announced that the country is faced with a labor shortage of 200,000. But the same Manpower Commission estimates unemployment in munitions industries alone as 500,000 (it has also declared it to be 600,000).
The truth is that the change in the war fortunes of the Allies has caused a lot of “replanning” in this country. While it is difficult to make any forecasts about how the fighting will go, one thing is certain, the defeat of Germany would have a drastic effect on production and employment at home.
 
The Prospect of Unemployment
Government economists estimate that four out of every ten war workers will be jobless on the morrow of Germany’s defeat. That would mean that within a year following there would be five million unemployed in the country.
Charles E. Wilson, vice-chairman of the War Production Board, and Joseph P. Keenan of the same board said that this body “estimated that upward of thirty-five per cent of our war facilities” would be released in the above event. Others estimate the cutback in production at fifty per cent. In either case unemployment would range from five to ten million.
If not all of these unemployed would be searching for new jobs, it is necessary to remember that with the war in Europe concluded, at least two million soldiers will be released to join those hunting for work.
The above-mentioned Keenan reported that there were twelve million more workers today than in 1940. At that time 46,000,000 had jobs producing goods and services totalling $97,000,000,000. Yet there were from eight and a half to nine million unemployed. Today fifty-five million are at work producing goods and services estimated at $140,000,000,000.
Leo Cherne, an economist who stands high in the eye of business interests, has just written a book in which he writes that, with the present labor force, and production after the war maintained at the level of 1940 (the highest peacetime year in American history) unemployment would reach the high number of 19,000,000.
In order to avoid this mass army of unemployed, Mr. Cherne states that the present industrial plant has to be maintained, and production of civilian goods raised by forty to fifty billion dollars above the level of 1940.
What is involved in all these predictions, which are undoubtedly sound? First, national planning of production to keep the workers in jobs and to provide goods necessary for the people to raise their standard of living. Second, to maintain all the new and improved industries built by the government with money paid in by the people. That is, to keep these plants from being idle, or turned over to the private operation of the big corporations and monopolies, whole sole interest, in these plants is the profits to be obtained.
But it is exactly here that the government and industry are bankrupt. They are afraid of planned production. They cannot adopt a program in the interest of the people because they are first interested in production for profit instead of use.
 
Here Is a Program for Labor
The Workers Party and Labor Action have a program designed to aid the workers, to prevent mass unemployment and to raise the standard of living. That program calls for:

Government planning to guarantee the highest national production and income, a year-around job and a minimum annual wage to all, and a rising standard of living.
 
Conscription all war industries! Nationalize the banks, big industrial monopolies and transportation systems.
 
No handing over of government-built and owned plants and facilities to private ownership.
 
For a two hundred and fifty billion dollar five-year program to provide decent housing for all; extensive public works, rural electrification and modernization.
 
For a guaranteed $5,000 annual income to workers’ families, made possible by a planned rise in the total national income and a thirty-hour maximum work week.

Ask yourselves, fellow workers, what does the Administration offer to meet the threatening situation of unemployment and insecurity? Up to, now it has been silent. Oh yes, it has issued the Baruch report, the gist of which is that the government must get out of business and permit private industry the full opportunity to develop “free enterprise.” (Good old Hoover doctrine, too!)
And the industrialists, the Sixty Families, the bankers and merchants, these gentlemen of profit and a minimum for all, what do-they offer? “Free enterprise!” It is impossible to raise production, they say; it is impossible to raise the standard of living.
 
No Hope in Capitalist Politics
All of them are bankrupt when it comes to planning for the people. In contrast, the program of Labor Action and the Workers Party is reasonable and realizable. But, if you want to understand the meaning of our proposal for independent political action by labor and an independent Labor Party, this problem is an excellent illustration. The fact is that neither, the Democratic nor the Republican Parties are ready, willing or able to champion a program for the mass of people which is advocated by Labor Action and the Workers Party.
Such a workers’ program can be championed only by a party of labor which challenges the political rule of the capitalists and their parties.
The Republican Party convention only again demonstrated that it stands on the side of profit, “free enterprise” and unemployment.
The Democratic Party, which will gather shortly, will also demonstrate that it too is a party of capitalism, of as much “free enterprise” as the Republicans, of as much profit (recall what has happened in this war economy) and unemployment. It can match any figures of the Republican Party.
The fight for the above program of the Workers Party and Labor Action is really a fight to live. That’s the kind of program labor will need.
We shall return to this subject in the next issue to show just how vital it is.
 



The proletariat and its revolutionary vanguard have lived through a long period of catastrophic developments and defeats since the Russian working class seized state power in 1917. Coming in the midst of the chaos of the First World War, the October Revolution served as the spark to ignite the world revolutionary movement. The revolt of the German masses brought about a paralysis of the war regime and directly hastened the end of the imperialist bloodbath. Europe was shaken by the convulsions of enormous class battles; power was achieved or almost won in Italy, Hungary, Germany, Austria. Enormous struggles broke out in almost every country on the Continent. Its reverberations were felt in England, in the United States and the whole of Asia.
The Russian workers had shown the way; the soviet system earned the admiration of the most oppressed peoples of the world. The prospect of a new life of freedom, security and peace appeared real – not in the distant future, but within the grasp of every worker, peasant and exploited colonial subject in the world. The First World War was a gigantic propeller of social struggle. It revealed the deep contradictions of capitalism, the inability of the ruling classes to solve their problems except by the most violent and destructive means based upon the subjugation of the peoples of the world and competing powers.
The war, which resulted in a provisional victory for the Allies, ended as the great Marxists had forecast: in class upheavals. Looking back at that period one cannot but express amazement at the depth of the capitalist crisis, the disintegration and bewilderment of the bourgeoisie, and the nearness of a new stage in world development, workers’ rule replacing bourgeois democracy and imperialism.
 
The Russian Experience
All the objective factors for social and political change were unquestionably present. They were present in the economic collapse of capitalism, in the disintegration of the political rule of the bourgeoisie and in the will to struggle of the proletariat. Yet the working class succeeded in only one country, one of the most backward in the world. In can thus be seen that, in addition to the objective factors of collapse, an additional factor is necessary to guarantee the victory of the forces of socialism. That factor is the vanguard party of the working class, the revolutionary organization armed with theory, program, experience, tradition, and finally, with the support, not only of the proletariat, but of all the exploited classes.
A revolution could have occurred in Russia in the absence of such a cohesive, experienced and organized party, but the new state power of the workers could not have survived the vicissitudes of the civil war, the famine and foreign intervention without Lenin’s Bolshevik Party. The proof of this is easy to find. Revolutionary attempts at power were made in many countries in the period between 1917 and 1920–21. In every other case but Russia, these attempts ended in bloody defeats. The basic reason for the defeats lay in the absence of a vanguard party, or in the profound errors in policy and judgment of the small vanguard parties which did exist.
If it is said that in some of these cases defeat was due, not to the absence of the revolutionary party, but to treachery committed by the Second International and the trade union movements which it controlled, that is merely displaying the other side of the coin. Such treachery within the ranks of the working class could have been neutralized, overcome and decisively defeated only by a strong, alert and conscious revolutionary party of the workers competing with social reformism and opportunism.
No matter what inferences may be drawn from the enormously rich history of the immediate post-war period, it is impossible to gainsay Lenin’s acute observation that there is no hopeless situation for capitalism. Capitalism can and has repeatedly emerged from crises which seemingly marked its demise only because the “gravedigger” was either absent, weak, confused or pursued totally wrong perspectives.
 
What Gave Capitalism New Power?
Once capitalism survived the immediate post-war revolutionary situation it obtained a new lease on life. This was particularly true after its stupefying victory in Germany in 1923. This survival brought with it a whole train of consequences for the working class and its revolutionary organizations which are yet before us. A study then, of the development of the early Communist International is of immediate importance to the movement of today for reasons which we shall try to make clear in this article.
First, let us briefly sketch the broad lines of development since the Russian Revolution. Anyone who wishes to understand the present decade cannot do so without thoroughly absorbing the lessons of the past twenty-five years. The outstanding feature of the last two and a half decades is not the crisis of capitalism. That concept was thoroughly established by Lenin and Trotsky and the theoreticians of the Comintern under their leadership. All that is required in addition is merely the elucidation of the present factors of decline which are fundamentally identical to those outlined in the Second Congress of the Communist International held in 1920.
The outstanding feature of the present period is a crisis of leadership inside the working class movement, and a crisis of organization of the working class in general.
If we examine the period between the two wars, the above is incontestable. This period was characterized by tremendous class conflicts. These were not merely every-day struggles of the masses for an improvement of their lot under capitalism; these were also great class battles for power! Enumerate them and the proof is obvious.
Since the German defeat in 1923 there have been the Vienna uprising, the British general strike, the Chinese Revolution, the rise of fascism to power in Germany, the civil war in Spain and the great struggle in France. A victory in any one of these situations would have altered the world situation and opened up a new epoch in which the workers’ struggle for power on an international scale would be assured early victory. But in each instance, at every turning point, the proletariat suffered severe defeats. In each instance ind at every turning point, the responsibility for the defeats rested almost entirely upon the two international organizations of the workers: the Communist International and the Labor and Socialist International, the former by its commission of theoretical, political and organizational errors, the latter by the same, and both by the direct assistance they have rendered to the bourgeoisie to maintain it in power.
 
Revolutionary Perspectives Remain
These defeats cannot be understood at all without understanding at the same time that the principal cause for the second series of post-war defeats was to be found in the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the Communist International. The demise of the Second International had already appeared in the First World War and in so far as the revolutionary vanguard was concerned, it cannot be said that it had any faith or belief that the organization of MacDonald, Hillquit, Vandervelde, Bauer, Wels & Co. would become a force for progress in the period between 1918 and the Second World War. On the other hand, in the case of the Comintern, we had an organization which grew out of the struggle with reformism, the October Revolution and the counter-revolution. It was an organization born in struggle against opportunism, revisionism and ultra-leftism. Its degeneration following the death of Lenin and the defeat of the Russian and International Left Opposition was catastrophic, with consequences no one was able to foretell.
The Stalinist counter-revolution in Russia eliminated one of the greatest factors in the advance of the international working class. Henceforth, the influence of Russia and the Comintern was conservative, anti-Marxist, counter-revolutionary. The great clarification of the working class and the growth of its internationalism and revolutionary spirit was the signal accomplishment of Lenin. In achieving that for a time, Lenin carried on a merciless struggle for many years against social reformism and opportunism. Now, in the name of Marx and Lenin, Stalin has contributed more evil than the whole Second International in all its lifetime.
A quick observation of the state of the workers’ movement will reveal its plight. The year 1944, in the midst of the Second World War, finds the international working class disorganized or unorganized, leaderless and misled, without a vanguard organization, without a proletarian theory, program, goal. Look at the four corners of the earth and the picture becomes clearer; but so do the tasks of the small Marxist propaganda groups which have survived the ravages of bourgeois, reformist and Stalinist counter-revolution.
This brief picture of the state of the working class movement can be stated in another way. There is not a single Marxist mass party in any country in the world today. There is no all-embracing, unifying, authoritative, revolutionary international. Thus, from the point of view of the organization of the revolutionary vanguard, which is indispensable to the “winning of the majority,” the workers’ movement exists in one of the worst periods it has ever experienced since the dissolution of the First International.
But there is this enormous difference and it is this difference which gives no warrant to pessimism, cynicism or an outright departure from the ranks of the working class to make peace with capitalism: international capitalism is in an agonizing contradiction, in an objectively hopeless position. It reveals uncloseable fissures; the sickness of death. The war has further revealed that there is no firm or lasting solution for capitalism – not in fascism, bourgeois democracy, quasi-democracy, reformism, etc. No matter how many times capitalism survives shocks, disturbances and crises, they return with greater force and intensity to sap its worn-out foundations.
What are these disturbances, shocks and crises? They are manifestations of class struggle! This, capitalism can never eliminate whether it has a fascist political regime, bourgeois democracy, or even when it receives incalculable aid from Stalinism.
 
Reviving a Dangerous Theory
With this cursory analysis, let us consider then what are the real problems of the Marxists in the immediate future period. There may be some objection to the emphasis given to the defeats which the workers have suffered and to the deplorable state of the workers’ movement. But it is far better to tell the truth than to deceive oneself, for nothing is worse in the revolutionary movement than self-deception. From the truth it is possible to learn; it is possible to understand, to correct errors, to adopt correct policies and in general to become clearly oriented in a correct direction. Any other attitude can only result in a continuation of the present state of affairs. Any other analysis would be what Trotsky so accurately and vividly described as “tub-thumping.” The revolutionary vanguard movement does not need self-agitation; it needs Marxist analysis.
There is another still more dangerous aspect to the concepts of those who shun the truth with cries of “pessimism.” Behind their “optimism” is false theory, false politics, false practice and mystical consolation.
The most dangerous of these concepts is the “theory” that the experiences of the past twenty-five years of defeat show that they are due to the existence of parties and an international. Parties degenerate. It is the degeneration of parties which caused the counter-revolution in Russia and the international defeats of the working class. The workers in Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, France, China, and everywhere else would have been much better off and more secure in their struggles if they had no parties. The spontaneous struggle of the masses offers a much more hopeful guarantee for the victory of socialism than a working class organized and led through its vanguard Marxist party. With a few “original” twists, the theory of spontaneity of the masses is reintroduced into the workers’ movement as the force which can guarantee socialism.
There is a variation of this view which is fundamentally just as dangerous. It is the view that the struggle for power is spontaneous (thus establishing a partial truth), that the workers can take power without a party; it cannot keep that power without an organized party with a program, a tradition, a capital of experiences. But that party can be constructed and become the leader of the masses in the revolution (also a partial truth).
Neither of these concepts grants the necessity for the prior existence of a party, for the development of its theoretical level, for the working out of its experiences, for the hammering out of its tradition and for the winning of the majority of the workers, and the masses as a whole. They are thus Blanquist and putschist in essence. Since, in the view of the writer, the organization of a vanguard party and a vanguard international is crucial to the future of the working class and indispensable in any prospect of a victory for the masses, I should like to concern myself with this question for a moment.
Once Again – Role of the Party
The role of a party was in dispute from the beginning of the first organized movements of the proletariat. The dispute over the role of the party was most acute and had its greatest international significance in the early years of the Russian movement, before the 1905 revolution. Revisionist views now expressed on the same question are hardly original. But that is not their worst fault. The present-day views are not even fully thought out; their generalities do not even allow for a good argument, let alone an illuminating and forthright discussion. Let us then put the question positively.
Bourgeois society “organizes” the classes. The productive system certainly gathers the proletariat together in “socialized” production. It exploits great masses simultaneously and the masses learn what their economic position is from the mass production system itself. But just how much does it learn? Does it learn socialism from its economic position? Does it learn the need for working class political parties because it works collectively? Does it understand the need for theory, for a program, for strategy and tactics in the class struggle against capitalist imperialism? Posing these questions readily indicates the obvious answers.
In examining these questions forty years ago, Lenin effectively demonstrated that the working class can, by its position in production, acquire economic, i.e., trade union consciousness. Lenin wrote:
... But there is a difference between spontaneity and spontaneity ... the “spontaneous element,” in essence, represents nothing more nor less than consciousness in an embryonic form ... Taken by themselves, these strikes were simply trade union struggles, but not yet social-democratic struggles. They testified to the awakening antagonisms between workers and employers, but the workers were not and could not be conscious of the irreconcilable antagonism of their interests to the whole of the modern political and social system, i.e., it was not yet social-democratic consciousness.
We said that there could not yet be social-democratic consciousness among the workers. This consciousness could only be brought to them from without. The history of all countries shows that the working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade union consciousness, i.e., it may itself realize the necessity for combining in unions, for fighting against employers and for striving to compel the government to pass necessary labor legislation, etc. The theory of socialism, however, grew out of the philosophic, historical and economic theories that were elaborated by the educated representatives of the propertied classes, the intellectuals. According to their social status, the founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx and Engels, themselves belonged to the bourgeois intelligentsia. (Lenin, What Is to Be Done, pp. 52f., Selected Works. Emphasis in original. – A.G.)
Objection may be raised: Why, that is old stuff. Lenin was writing many, many years ago. Look at what has happened since then; there have been panics, two internationals, decades of propaganda for socialism, agitation for struggle, many attempts at a seizure of state power, etc. The workers have since been educated many times; they have not forgotten their lessons; they know what socialism is, etc.
Such objections are only partially correct. Lenin is cited, however, to show the origin of his own position and the type of the struggle which he waged against the advocates of spontaneity. But since the objections are only true in part, they are consequently wrong. For example, is it true in the United States? Has the American working class been educated politically – at any time in its organized existence? Has it a socialist experience, an acquaintance with its general ideas, let alone its theory? The answer is clearly, No! Is it true of the hundreds of millions of semi-colonial and colonial peoples? Obviously not. While socialist organization and ideas have exerted tremendous influence in Europe, the revolutionary Leninist movement did not at any time win a working class majority. Does this mean that the working class has to be socialist before it can abolish capitalism and lay the foundations for socialism? No, it does not mean this, but it does mean that it must move beyond trade unionism, beyond economic struggle to political struggle, and for this the vanguard Marxist party is indispensable.
 
The Main Task Is Clear
The proletariat is at the mercy of an organized, educated, experienced and conscious ruling class. It seems silly to even consider this point. Study Germany, the rise and fall of the workers’ movement there, and you will note with what perspicacity and cunning the German ruling class more than once saved its black soul and conquered over the best organized, most educated and experienced working class in the capitalist world. It is necessary to understand Lenin’s thought on this question to see the profound concepts which lie behind an apparently simple theory.
Naturally since Lenin’s time much has happened. Struggle is piled upon struggle, experience upon experience, mistake upon mistake, a few small victories, a great many defeats. The modern class struggle expressed itself for some years as a conflict between two organized classes; more recently between an organized bourgeoisie and a disorganized working class. How do we look upon the question of organization, of a party in the present conjuncture of events? Just read what Trotsky wrote only a few years ago:
The role of the subjective factor [the party – A.G.] in a period of slow, organic development can remain quite a subordinate one. Then diverse proverbs of gradualism arise, as: “slow but sure,” and “one must not kick against the pricks,” and so forth, which epitomize all the tactical wisdom of an organic epoch that abhorred “leaping over stages.” But as soon as the objective prerequisites have matured, the key to the whole historical process passes Into the hands of the subjective factor, that is, the party. Opportunism which consciously or unconsciously thrives upon the inspiration of the past epoch, always tends to underestimate the role of the subjective factor, that is, the importance of the party and of revolutionary leadership ... In all these cases, as well as in others of lesser importance, the opportunistic tendency evinced itself in the adoption of a course that relied solely upon the “masses,” and therefore completely scorned the question of the “tops” of the revolutionary leadership. Such an attitude, which is false in general, operates with positively fatal effect in the imperialist epoch. (Trotsky, The Third International After Lenin, page 84. Emphasis mine – A.G.)
The Second Congress of the Comintern, in arguing against the syndicalists, et al., stated the problem briefly but most graphically when it wrote in its resolution on the role of the party:
They do not see that the working class without an independent proletarian party is like a body without a head.
If I were to state briefly what the main task of the vanguard groups the world over are in the present period I would say: building the revolutionary Marxist party.
In my next article I shall deal more fully with the present period of capitalist decline to illustrate how profoundly revolutionary it is and what enormous perspectives lie on the horizon for the international working class. The above references to the party and its role are deemed necessary even though we seem to have traveled far beyond a stage where elementary, fundamental questions require discussion. But the confusion of the working class is immense. This confusion finds a tremendous echo inside the small Marxist movement. Clarity, therefore, becomes essential before any important forward steps are made.
The tasks ahead are made easier by objective factors of capitalist decline. It is not as though we are at the first beginnings of class economic and political organization. We build upon a theoretical foundation laid down for us by Marx and Engels, a theoretical tradition continued by Lenin and Trotsky. Among the great but now scattered foundation stones is a long history of proletarian organization, struggle, propaganda, agitation summarized in a vast experience. It is with this that we shall concern ourselves in the next article.
 







The Charter’s Still Alive in Poland, Frankie?
“2. They desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned.”
And How Does This Apply to Greece, Winnie?
“3. ... They respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live; and they wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them.” – From the Atlantic Charter.





One does not need additional confirmation than the evidence furnished in the last month that the Atlantic Charter in the hands of imperialists is a worthless document. The differences that exist among the Allies arise from national interests which force each of them along separate roads even though they fight a common war against a common enemy.
Part of Italy has been “liberated” for more than a year. Within that year, the united action of the Allies toward that country was calculated to prevent the independence of the nation – freedom of the people to select their own government, to speak freely, to assemble freely, to organize and to write freely. Government was and is in the hands of the Allied Control Commission; supervision is exercised, over all affairs of the country by Allied representatives, while the Bonomi government, twice constructed, remains little else but a pawn of the Allies.
This was nowhere so graphically portrayed as in the period between the fall of the first Bonomi government and the establishment of another under the same Premier. When Bonomi resigned, the six legal parties which formed the first Coalition government nominated Count Carlo Sforza to be Premier or Foreign Minister. Sforza, a confused and inconsistent liberal, has a world-wide reputation as an anti-fascist, based on his opposition to Mussolini over a period of more than twenty years.
Press reports indicated that Sforza was ready to select a new cabinet or to participate in one. It developed, however, that the Italians did not reckon with the British ruling class. The British vetoed Sforza in a manner completely identical to the way Hitler conducted himself with his satellite nations. Churchill and Eden intervened publicly and insolently to say that Sforza was “unreliable” and not acceptable to them either as Prime Minister or as head of foreign affairs.
The British Broadcasting Company, an official agency of the government, states: “Sforza is not considered a reliable man in London and would not make for good Anglo-Italian relations.”
Sir Noel Charles, British Ambassador to Italy and a power in Rome, told a deputation representing the official parties in the country that Sforza “Would not be welcomed” in Britain.
The dismay caused in Italy by these declarations was quickly followed by explanations by British Foreign Secretary Eden, speaking in the name of his government. Eden denied that his country wished to determine the character and personnel of the governments in the “liberated” countries. The New York Times reported his position in the following way:
“The Foreign Secretary denied any doctrinaire interferences in the affairs of other countries, asserting that the threefold aim of British foreign policy was to win the war, preserve the grand alliance and, as far as possible, give the people of the liberated lands a chance to choose their governments freely.”
“As far as possible” has meant no freedom to the people to choose their own governments. Look at the record: The British insist that power “in Greece must rest in the hands of an imported King and a reactionary collaborationist ruling class against the people. They stand behind the Pierlot government in Belgium, which is the representative of Belgian collaborationist big business class. In Italy too they stand solidly against any assertion by the Italian people of their democratic rights.
Sforza is unreliable, says Eden. He disrupted the old cabinet of Bonomi, adds the Foreign Minister, and therefore is unacceptable to the British.
Bonomi says that Eden is misinformed. Sforza was not unreliable and he did not disrupt the cabinet. Bonomi insisted that he arid Sforza are old friends arid he hopes this little British intervention in the life of Italy will not destroy this friendship. Sforza on his part agrees with Bonomi and then, like a spineless liberal, announces his retirement from active participation in Italian politics, meanwhile exhorting the Italian people to support British and American “democracy” in order to save Italy!
Thus did the British save the day for themselves. Obviously the British fear Sforza because he is anti-monarchist i.e., a determined enemy of the House of Savoy and might, if in power, destroy the kingly “rulers” of Italy. Sforza himself revealed that one of the conditions laid down by Churchill before agreeing to the Count’s departure for Italy was that he announce his support of the House of Savoy and cease from any struggle against it. A commentary on Sforza himself is revealed in the fact that he agreed to go to Italy and refrain from any struggle against the King. The American State Department was a party to this piece of skullduggery.
“The largest part of the two-hour conversation with Mr. Churchill in London on October 11, 1943,” said the Count, “was employed mainly to put strong pressure on me so that I might be induced to accept King Victor Emmanuel III regardless of his heavy responsibilities with fascism, with the war against Britain and with the consequent calamitous defeat ... The incident to which the attitude of the British government is due ... is connected only with my beliefs and deeds on matters of domestic politics; deeds I have no reason to disavow.”
The British claim that this right to pass on Italian government representative’s was given to the Allies in the armistice signed by Italy, a right which all the Allied powers have exercised. No wonder this armistice was never made public – it is reported to be harsher even than the peace signed between Russia and Finland, and Russia and Romania.
The outstanding fact to be remembered about Italy is that the Italian people want democratic rights which they have not yet achieved after a year of “liberation.” They want peace and bread. The peasants want land.
Economic conditions in Italy are frightful. The country faces starvation and destitution: The Italian people will not long stand for this kind of situation. American labor has a duty to them: support their every effort for freedom and economic security.
 



At the time of going to press, President Roosevelt made an announcement that he had presented the nominations for the new millionaires club known as the State Department. Spitting in the face of those who excused these reactionary nominations on the ground that they were really not those of the President but of some reactionaries and ill-advisers, Roosevelt emphatically notified the Senate and the House that if his nominees were rejected he would send them right back again.
In face of this determination of the President to get his nominations passed on, the liberal opposition among senators and representatives crumpled and the nominees were duly confirmed.
*
Those blood-curdling shrieks you’ve been hearing in recent weeks come from the camp of the assorted liberals who were unceremoniously outraged by the Great White Father’s selections for the reorganized State Department. These gentlemen from in-between were indignant enough when Roosevelt, the great American liberal, the indispensable man, only just elected President as the savior and protector of mankind, slapped his beneficiaries across the mouth by nominating as Secretary of State, Edward R. Stettinius. The latter is a graduate of Wall Street under the tutelage of the House of Morgan and erstwhile president of another liberal institution, the U.S. Steel Corporation.
 
Just a Slip
The President just made a slip, wasn’t in his right mind at the moment. Anyway since he, and not Stettinius will set the tone to foreign policy, we’ve nothing much to worry about, said the in-between gentlemen. But to their great consternation, that man in the White House proceeded to nominate as Under-Secretary of State, Joseph C. Grew, former Ambassador to Japan, related to the House of Morgan, a conservative who thinks kindly of the Japanese Mikado who should, he believes be retained on the throne after the war.
As Assistant Secretaries, the “indispensable man” nominated William C. Clayton, cotton king, who did business with Hitler, Tojo, and anybody else who could give him profit (in the midst of the war, too); Nelson Rockefeller (’nuff said), and the poet, Archibald MacLeish, who moves from left to right and vice-versa according to the economic index and the numbers of unemployed.
“A millionaire’s club,” shouted the liberals with PM in the van. Some evil influences have reached Roosevelt, came one explanation. The big business interests have won out because Roosevelt doesn’t really know what he did, since he relies on vicious advisers. But how can you really attack the Great White Father? Makes you feel kind of silly after the support given him for the fourth term, doesn’t it? But the liberals have a way out, however.
In the December 17 issue of PM, its labor editor and ex-Communist, James Wechsler, concluded that not everything was lost in the fight over Roosevelt’s nominations. The liberals made a great fight in and out of the Senate and the House. They made Roosevelt take noticed And even if the only “liberal” he nominated (MacLeish) was defeated, their battle would show the President that the liberals will fight for their cause. He will not repeat such a mistake again! Most important, adds Wechsler, the men nominated will be under the public eye and therefore they will not act rashly in anything they do! The liberal gaze is certainly a withering one. God save the mark!
 
Stalin’s Boys Embrace the Millionaires
But if you want the pure, true, unadulterated reactionary point of view, you have to go to – no, not the Chicago Tribune, Hearst Press, New York News – but the Daily Worker. It stands four-square behind the President’s nominations. Not because these men do not “bring their faults with them, but they will function under the President ...”
The Communists, in their complete (!) devotion to President Roosevelt, the ex-”war-monger and imperialist,” now turned “world’s greatest benefactor next to Stalin,” accept everything he does.
No they don’t believe that Roosevelt was ill-advised, or did hot know what he was doing. Roosevelt nominated a team, don’t you see. “We need not state our own feelings,” says the Daily Worker, “on the past record of some of these men. It would be easy to object to them as individuals. But they have been presented to the country as a team, dedicated to the NEW policies of the United States and NOT THE OLD ONES.” (Emphasis in original.)
How can you possibly object to the nominations of big business, U.S. Steel, General Motors, Girdler, Weir, presented as a team? Is it reasonable? Is it cricket? After all, not all the capitalists are bad – only a few like Sewell Avery. But the big job is to win over capital, big business, U.S. Steel, General Motors, Girdler Weir, Crawford, Thompson, Winthrop, Wilson, etc., ad nauseam to labor. They will learn to love labor if you give them a chance – if labor always surrenders to them! So the Daily (Wrecker) Worker, yells, yea team! Support the President. Never question him unless ... unless he has a fall-out with Stalin!
 



It takes a great deal of patience and fortitude to follow the thinking of some labor leaders on the War Labor Board and the Little Steel Formula. It is no secret, of course, that Labor Action is unalterably opposed to the War Labor Board, the Little Steel Formula and the No-Strike Pledge which has bound labor’s hands and made possible the maintenance of a wage freeze robbing workers of their wages.
We are not alone on at least two counts of the above position. Nearly all of the labor leaders feel as sharply as we do about the wage freeze and the activities of the WLB. Their trouble is that they do not see or, more correctly, they refuse to see that the maintenance of the one-sided no-strike pledge, for which they are responsible, is what has made possible the wage freeze and the WLB,
 
Murray’s Position
However, taking them at their word, we cannot help but conclude that the minds of these labor leaders operate in a most peculiar and disastrous way for the workers. Last week we showed this to be true in the case of Phil Murray, president of the CIO. We quoted at length from Murray’s speech to the CIO convention in which he castigated the WLB for maintaining the wage freeze and refusing to budge on the question of revising the Little Steel Formula, at a time when all facts showed it to be out of line and a means of cheating the workers.
Murray cited chapter and verse to show that the figures of the WLB justifying their refusal to grant overall, general wage increases were false; that these figures were at least 15 per cent below the real figures; and most important of all, by the Board’s own figures, a nation-wide increase of 30 per cent in the Little Steel Formula was indicated. Murray’s position, like that of the rest of the labor leaders, was unassailable.
But what did this leader of millions of workers then conclude? Mustn’t quit the WLB, mustn’t break the political alliance with Roosevelt, who is the person first of all responsible for this situation, and mustn’t, of course, break the no-strike pledge, which is, finally, responsible for the whole situation.
 
R.J. Thomas in a Whirl
Now, take the case of R.J. Thomas, president of he largest union in the world, the United Automobile Workers, which decided at its last convention to take a referendum of the membership on the no-strike pledge. Asserting his agreement with Murray’s criticism of the public members of the Board, especially Mr. Taylor, whom the President of the CIO held responsible for the Little Steel Formula. Thomas said in effect:
I am even more critical of the WLB than Murray. I apologize for my membership on the WLB, having joined the board “under the false pretense” that the Board would give an even break to labor. Labor has not received fair treatment.
Then, after declaring how hard he worked for the re-election of Roosevelt, Thomas stated: “Here is an issue which I think the President himself must move on and move quickly. We cannot go out to the workers much longer and sell them on the idea that the President is the greatest man in the World unless the President moves to equalize conditions of all classes of society.” Just read that over again. The President must move quickly on the matter of wages. Why? Is it because the workers need higher wages in order to live? We are sure Thomas believes that. But the reason he gives is that he “cannot go out to the workers much longer and sell them on the idea that the President is the greatest man in the world unless the President moves to equalize conditions of all classes of society.” Who told Thomas, to go out and sell the workers the President?
Why didn’t Thomas go out and tell the workers the truth, namely, that the President is responsible for the wage freeze, for the Little Steel Formula and for the War Labor Board? Why didn’t Thomas quit playing boss politics in supporting and working for a capitalist political party and a capitalist candidate?
Why didn’t Thomas spend some of his time and energy working for a party of labor and for labor candidates?
Why didn’t Thomas try working for a program for labor that would defend and advance the interests of the workers?
Why didn’t Thomas try thinking like a worker and a genuine labor leader rather than thinking like a capitalist politically and acting like a capitalist agent in reality? Why doesn’t he stop thinking of getting a capitalist President to act like a socialist?
Then the issues would have been clear cut. Instead, Murray, Thomas, Hillman, Green and others worked like Trojans for Roosevelt, without even a promissory note. They gave everything toward Roosevelt’s campaign, just as they have supported him through thick and thin all these years while labor was getting it in the neck – all for nothing except endless insults.
Well, now, you would think that Thomas, after halving unburdened himself on the WLB, would sit down satisfied with having made the record. No, the man must needs talk on. And we get this:
He is critical of public members Davis and Taylor and referred to Davis, the chairman of the WLB, as “a weak, worn-out old man.” But then he declared that the CIO had made a mistake when it did not send telegrams of congratulations to the three public members of the WLB who submitted their resignations to the President.
Let us rest here with this repetition: Thomas thought the CIO made a mistake in not sending a congratulatory telegram to the three men on a board (for which he apologized serving on), who were mainly responsible for refusing to recommend a revision of the Little Steel Formula, who were mainly responsible for labor’s run-a-round, who remained adamant in their refusal to grant wage increases, and who consistently maintained the wage freeze. ’Nuff said, we think.
 







Third. They respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live; they wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them. – From the Atlantic Charter of Roosevelt and Churchill.





The absolute meaninglessness of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, when advocated by capitalist-imperialist powers was never so firmly demonstrated as in the case of Italy and Belgium. The case of Belgium is hardly unique, except in the speed with which events have piled up in that country to demonstrate the complete and wide gulf which separates the mass of people from the usurpers who rule the country today.
The background of the Belgian events is similar to that of other countries which have lived for years under the yoke of German fascism. The struggle against the foreign oppressor was carried on by the people who remained at home. That is to say, those who made up the Resistance Movement were workers of every description, middle class elements and poor peasants. They were the political parties of the workers, trade unions cooperative and fraternal societies. These were the people who, with arms in hand, braved the Gestapo, the murderers’ courts and the concentration camps to fight the fascist beasts.
This Belgian ruling class, the capitalists, monopolists, financiers and the King’s followers were, by and large, collaborators with the Germans. The industrialists and financiers stayed behind to do business with Hitler at a profit. As in all other capitalist countries which the Germans Occupied, the capitalist class were the collaborators; the workers, the fighters.
It is no small wonder then why the mass of people in Belgium have just risen against the government of Prime Minister Hubert Pierlot. Pierlot headed a pre-war government. He and his aides have been out of Belgium during the years of German occupation. He and his aides returned when the Germans were driven out by the combined struggle of the Allied soldiers and the Belgian workers in the armed resistance forces.
 
Conditions in Belgium
The situation in Belgium is acute for the people. They have little enough food, clothing or shelter. They live in great privation. But they might be willing to understand this situation in the midst of the war; and willing to accept such conditions if they knew that this was true for everyone else in the country. But they know that the Belgian rulers – the monopolists – live well, and that they lived well under the Germans as they now do under the Allies.
And now? Now that the Germans have been driven out, the Belgian people want to punish those whom they regard as traitors. But the government of Pierlot says “No.” Even worse, the government, having decided not to do anything about the German collaborators, turns its attention and guns against the people, against the Resistance Movement! The first important act of the Pierlot government was to demand that the resistance forces turn their arms over to the government and in effect dissolve themselves. The reasons are obvious. The government of Pierlot, which in no way represents the Belgian people, is afraid of the masses, afraid that the demands of the masses may win out if they have the force. And the first thing this government of the Belgian capitalists wants is to disarm the people. The masses demonstrated against the order disarming the Resistance Movement. Their demonstration was fired upon by the hired troops of the government. Several workers were killed and others wounded. The unions of Belgium called strikes against the government, demanding that Pierlot resign. Pierlot the hireling of Belgian imperialism, called upon British troops to guard his cabinet and Parliament against the people. And while these troops stood guard he won a vote of confidence from a Parliament that no more represents the people than does he.
The workers of Belgium, in addition to their opposition to the order of disarmament, demand other things. According to the New York Times of November 29: “The strikers demanded wages adjusted to the cost of living, revised working hours, food, coal and the punishment of the collaborators.” Unreasonable, these workers, aren’t they? The Times goes on:
“Today’s marchers were street car conductors and motormen, postmen, railwaymen, shop clerks and telephone operators. Bitter cries were raised against the government for its alleged failure to oust ‘traitors’ from the public services. More bitter were the demands for bread, butter and coal.”
 
Who Is Guilty?
The main culprit in this whole situation is the Société Générale de Belgique, the biggest monopolistic combine in the country. All the directors of this company, with the exception of one, remained in the country to work with the Germans. As one writer put it: “During the war one group in Belgium grew wealthy and ate well.” This was the Belgian capitalists, personified by Sociéte Générale. It profited from the Germans in Belgium and from the United Nations in the Congo. And now it wants to go on profiting from the exploitation of the Belgian workers without assistance from the Germans – as if nothing had changed.
 



It is now known the world over that British and American soldiers were employed by the Pierlot government in Belgium to defend his regime against the Belgian people. With the backing of Allied power and internal support from a Socialist Party (which has nothing in common with socialism), Pierlot’s big business cabinet survived its first crisis and received a vote of confidence from the pre-war Parliament.
 
Who Fought the Nazis
The Belgian masses kept alive the struggle against the occupation, braving arrests, torture, death, concentration camps slave labor and unbearable living conditions. The Belgian ruling class, one reporter wrote, “grew wealthy and ate well.”
Now, the Belgian people want to settle accounts with the business men who collaborated with the Nazis. They want to pay them off for the profits they reaped by exploiting Belgian labor with the aid of the Gestapo. They want to pay them off for the wining and dining they carried on with the Germans. They also want an immediate improvement in their living conditions, increased pay, revised working hours and conditions of labor, and an end to the black market which crushes them. On all of these accounts, the Pierlot government stands with the big business collaborators against the Belgian people. They want a sharp change in the social existence.
Thus you have a situation where a government in exile returns to its country with one aim: to continue where it left off four years ago as a government representing, not the interests of the masses, but the interests of Belgian capitalism. Pierlot is directly linked to Société Générale de Belgique, one of the most powerful cartels in Europe. Here is a list of some of the interesting things about this monopolistic combine revealed by Blair Bolles in PM:

All its board of directors, except one, remained in Belgium under German occupation to do business with Hitler and to profit from it.
 
At the same time that this cartel did business with Hitler at home, its subsidiary firms in the African Congo did business with the Allies, principally the United States.
 
Société Générale conducted operations in Belgium to “suit German needs.” Tubize, a rayon-making subsidiary of Société, “divided its ownership between the Société Générale and Fabelta, which has a close relationship with the German Zellwolle Ring.
 
Société transferred control of its subsidiary, Ougrée-Marihaye, to a firm called Confinindus, at whose head is Baron de Launeit. The latter made a deal with the German, Otto Wolf, “to integrate the Ougrée-Marihaye firm with Wolf Industries during the war and to pool export projects after the war.”
 
“The steel-making firm of Arbed in which Société Générale holds twenty-five per cent of the capital shares, was fully integrated with German industry during the occupation. Heiman-Kreuzer, the head of Arbed, was leader of the Luxembourg Reich Association.”
 
Another steel-making firm named Hadir, in which the above cartel had a financial interest, “was renamed Differdinger Stahlwerke during the occupation and became part of the German Stahlwerke Gemeinschaft.”

Société Générale controls sixteen principal banks in Belgium and through this control has interests in 350 branches in Belgium, three in France, nine in Holland, eighteen in Luxemburg and two in Germany. It also has connections in banking in Spain, Austria, Bulgaria and Romania. The same firm controls a quarter of the coal output in Belgium, shares in the production of all iron and steel, has controlling interest in the second largest glass producing plant, dominates Union Chémique Belge and has an influence in the holding company that controls the chief shipping lines.
Like all big monopolistic firms it has business interests in many parts of Europe. It is linked with the capitalist rulers in Germany, France, England etc. Thus, when the question of their profits are involved they are able to make deals with any power, Axis or Allied, and no matter which way the military events go in the war, they stand to gain, to continue production and to continue to get their profits.
This tremendous industrial firm has direct representatives in the government of Pierlot. That is why this government refuses to do anything about such collaborators, for these men represent capitalism in Belgium.
The government is a capitalist government. The Allies are capitalist nations and the ruling governments in the Allied nations support the capitalist government of Belgium. What unites them is the common bond of profits. And in the interest of profit, anything goes against the people. And why shouldn’t they support Belgian capitalists? Don’t British representatives sit on the board of directors of the International Bank of Settlements which is controlled by Germany? The English do it because they make a “handsome profit” from the bank on its investments. Isn’t the president of this bank an American? Isn’t Switzerland a clearing house where Allied firms do business with German firms?
 



On November 16, the Russian Embassy published its Information Bulletin containing an article by Col. A. Galin, in which the author lists six basic principles of that nation’s foreign policy, which, he contends, have been followed consistently for twenty-years of its existence. The six basic principles are summarized in this way:

Peaceful relations with all states, irrespective of their political systems.
 
Economic and political co-operation with all slates on the basis of sovereign equality and independence of the contracting parties and the co-existence of two systems.
 
Alliance with any state with the purpose of protecting both partners from acts of aggression.
 
Categorical renunciation of imperialistic expansion at the cost of other nations.
 
Non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States.
 
Strengthening of the coalition of freedom-loving nations in the fight against fascist aggressors.

The program described by Col. Galin is NOT the “consistent” foreign policy which that country has followed for “twenty-seven years.” Workers’ Russia under Lenin and Trotsky followed a foreign policy that was totally different from that which is followed by Stalin’s Russia. After the Russian Revolution the country followed a foreign policy whose aim was to promote the interests of the workers all over the world. Workers’ Russia renounced all imperialist possessions of the Czar. Certainly, Workers’ Russia made alliances with capitalist-imperialist nations. Stalin’s Russia does the same, but with these differences:
 
It’s Not a Consistent Policy!
Under Lenin and Trotsky, it was made clear that any alliance which Russia made was usually forced upon her by adverse circumstances. But Lenin always made clear to the Russian people and the masses of the world that such alliances did not mean that the workers of other countries must accept the rule of their capitalist-imperialists, or that those countries suddenly ceased being imperialists and had become “peaceful,” “freedom-loving” nations. On the contrary, Lenin continued to call upon the oppressed of the world to overthrow their rulers and establish real freedom, security and democracy.
The foreign policy of Russia certainly changed since Stalin destroyed the workers’ state and established the rule of the bureaucrats. Examples? There are many.

After Hitler came to power, in 1933, Litvinov became the Russian spokesman for collective security of the “democratic” capitalist countries and Russia against Germany. That was one policy.
 
When Hitler continued to expand and threaten war against the Allies while they were unprepared and impotent, Russia began to play ball with him. She gave Germany the go-sign to begin the war by signing a pact which became known the world over as the Hitler-Stalin pact. Russia and Germany became great friends. Foreign Minister Molotov then said that “fascism is a matter of personal taste.” Russo-German friendship was “sealed in blood.” They jointly invaded Poland and divided up the country. That was another stage in Stalinist Russian foreign policy.
 
When Hitler reached the Atlantic Ocean, only to falter in his invasion of England and turn on Russia, drawing her into the war against her will and in spite of her pact with the Nazis, a new foreign policy was adopted. Russia now became an integral part of the United Nations. She was welcomed with open arms by Britain’s Churchill at a time when that country stood alone in the war against Germany.
 

New Alliance, New Line
It must be remembered too, that up to the fateful day when the Wehrmacht crossed the Russian borders, the Stalinists all over the world blamed Great Britain and the United States for the war, exonerating Hitler from all responsibility. It was a time too, when Churchill and Roosevelt were called “war-mongers and imperialists.”
The new foreign policy changed all that. Now Germany was responsible for the war; Churchill and Roosevelt were great peace-loving benefactors of humanity.
This, then is but a brief illustration of the “consistent” Russian foreign policy which it has followed for “twenty-seven years.”
Now let us relate Russia’s stated war aims to the facts:

“Peaceful relations with all states irrespective of their political systems.” Examples: The war on Finland; the war on Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Finland ceded large territories to Russia. Eisthonia, Latvia and Lithuania have been incorporated into the borders of Russia.
 
“Categorical renunciation of imperialist expansion at the cost of other nations.” See, again, Poland, Finland, the Baltic states, Rumania and Hungary.
 
“Non-Intervention in the internal affairs of other states.” See Iran, Poland, Jugoslavia, etc.

When Russian foreign policy is examined concretely it is easy to see that it does not differ essentially from the foreign policy of the capitalist powers with empires to defend and territories to seize.
 



The American Labor Party of New York is now wracked by a sharp internal struggle which threatens its very existence. For some years, the Communist Party in this country has sought to take over the ALP and to use it for its own purposes. Thus we have observed a long struggle between: the present conservative leadership of Dubinsky-Counts-Rose and the even more reactionary group led by the American representatives of Joseph Stalin.
This struggle over control of the ALP has been joined by Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America and head of the CIO Political Action Committee. Hillman formed a bloc with the Communist Party for the purpose of taking over the ALP and reducing it to a pro-Roosevelt bargaining agency, bargaining with the Democratic Party machine in the State of New York.
 
Hillman Enters the Melee
It is obvious that Hillman could not accomplish this task without concealing his main purpose behind supposedly “progressive” measures. The “progressive” measures he employs in this struggle is the demand that the American Labor Party should be reorganized on the basis of the trade union movement and that the direction of the party should be turned over to the AFL and the CIO unions in New York! This, he argues, would take the ALP out of the hands of its present liberal-labor leadership and transform the party from an individual membership organization to one based upon the powerful unions in the state.
On the face of it the Hillman proposal (previously made by the Stalinist-controlled unions in New York) appears to be a thoroughly progressive measure and a reflection of the progressive demand for an Independent Labor Party. For it is obvious that the great political need of American labor is the organization of its own party, an independent party of labor based upon the trade unions. This does not mean the exclusion of other elements, but the strength of such a party would derive primarily from that powerful base of the mass unions in the country, which would, in turn, give it a driving power great enough to threaten the political monopoly of big business, expressed through its Democratic and Republican Parties.
Hillman’s “plan” has gathered a little strength because of the utterly stupid and reactionary opposition waged against it by the Dubinsky-Counts-Rose leadership. They oppose the Hillman proposal on completely incorrect premises and thus play into his hands. They are against a real party of labor based on the trade unions on the absolutely laughable grounds that a party based upon the mass unions would “narrow” its base! Secondary reasons for opposing a Labor Party based on the trade unions are that it would not conform to the election laws of the state and would exclude many “progressive and liberal” elements who are not of the trade unions.
 
All This Is Nonsense
All of these reasons are nonsense. A Labor Party based on the trade union movement would be the broadest kind of party with a mass following and would make possible the creation of a more democratic political party. Such a powerful Labor Party would have the effect of drawing into its ranks thousands upon thousands of “liberals and progressives.” The existence of such a party could not possibly violate election laws any more than the present ALP set-up violates them.
Many people do not understand this fight because both wings in the ALP are ardent supporters of Roosevelt and a fourth term. Yet there is a difference between the two factions. The Dubinsky-Counts-Rose group would retain the ALP as an independent third party – not a genuine Labor Party – whereas the Stalinist-Hillman combination would destroy the ALP and turn it into an appendage of the Roosevelt machine of the Democratic Party. A victory of the Dubinsky group would still make it possible to fight for the transformation of the ALP into a genuine Labor Party, whereas a victory of the Communist Party-Hillman group would mean the virtual death of the party.
How is it possible, some may ask, to declare that Hillman would. destroy the American Labor Party when he makes a proposal which admittedly would strengthen the organization? This is the heart of the problem.
 
The Heart of the Problem
The most important fact about the present dispute is that the proposal for transforming the ALP into a party based on the trade unions comes from the person, and the faction allied with him, who is the most avowed opponent of a Labor Party!
Hillman is against a Labor Party! The Communist Party is against a Labor Party. Hillman and the Stalinists have done everything in their power to prevent the formation of local and state Labor Parties, or even conferences and meetings organized for the purpose of considering steps toward the formation of such parties!
Hillman and his Communist Party allies have utilized the CIO Political Action Committee, organized to hogtie American labor to Roosevelt’s machine and for a fourth term, to prevent genuine independent politics by labor, and the formation of a genuine Labor Party.
Hillman does not belong to the ALP, and the union which he heads long ago withdrew from the party. In the last gubernatorial election in New York, he and the Stalinists supported the regular Democratic ticket against the ALP-Democratic coalition ticket.
These facts clearly establish that Hillman and the Communist Party are championing the plan for trade union control of the ALP for the sole and foul purpose of liquidating it. This has concrete meaning when it is remembered that in the counties of New York City the CIO unions are dominated mainly by Communist Party leaders or followers. To turn the party over to these elements would mean the abolition of the ALP.
 
Struggle over Candidates
Thus the fight over the Hillman proposal led naturally to a struggle over candidates for the ALP primaries. Hillman proposed a slate of candidates made up of his followers plus out-and-out Stalinists and their fellow-travelers. For a time it looked as if the “right wing” would give up the ghost without a fight. But pressure from the outside helped to galvanize the Dubjnsky-Counts-Rose faction and they are now out to win the primaries from the Hillman-Communist alliance. They rejected the Hillman slate of candidates and committeemen and publicly announced their determination to defeat that combination.
The decision of the Dubinsky faction to carry the fight to Hillman and his group does not set aside the significance of the fight over the Hillman proposal. One of the reasons this leadership of the ALP has fallen into this difficult situation is precisely because the ALP was not organized on the basis of the trade unions of the state and is not a genuine independent Labor Party, representing the interests of the working class against the Republican and Democratic Parties. Several months ago, when Labor Action first commented editorially on its opposition to the Hillman proposal it said:
“... the present ALP is a distinct labor political organization. That it does not pursue the course of political independence in campaigns is unquestionably true. Our criticism of the ALP is precisely on the ground that it has failed to use its great power to extend the independent character of the party for genuine independent labor political action against the rotten political machines of the Republican and Democratic Parties. In other words, it has been playing cheap capitalist machine politics.”
It is necessary to add to this that the ALP can never become a genuine Labor Party until and unless it is based on the trade unions. But how can the ALP do this and still avoid the pitfalls of the Hillman-Communist plan? By one simple measure:
All unions that stand unequivocally for independent labor political action, i.e., for an independent Labor Party, become part of the American Labor Party. Such a measure should close the door to the Stalinist-controlled unions, to Hillman and to the union he controls. It would bar any union which is opposed to independent political action and a Labor Party.
On the other hand, the influx of unions into the ALP on the basis of support to an Independent Labor Party would enormously strengthen the organization and transform it into a genuine Labor Party, which it is not at the present time.
The fight for this kind of party means not only a struggle against the Hillman-Stalinist combine, but also against the Dubinsky-Counts-Rose group, which likewise stands in the way of a genuine Labor Party. It is necessary to emphasize again, however, that the difference between the two is clear: a victory for the Hillman-Stalinist faction means the virtual death of the ALP. A victory for the present leadership leaves the possibility of transforming the ALP into a real Independent Labor Party. This is of enormous importance for the future-political development of. the American working class.
 



The American working class has the reputation of being one of the most militant in the world. This reputation is not unearned, for the history of labor in this country is replete with events of glorious working class struggle for improvement of its economic position.
But the militancy of American labor has been limited by the fact that its actions revolved primarily around struggles for immediate demands such as working hours, conditions of labor, and wages. It was not until the crisis of 1929, and the subsequent evils of unemployment, that the demands of labor acquired a social importance far beyond those put forward at the turn of the century and following.
There is an important lesson in this fact. The present-day demands of the American working class are not dissimilar from those of an earlier epoch, but these same demands have a new significance today. For example, wages, working hours and conditions of labor continue to be points of dispute between the capitalists and the workers. Wh then, do the demands of the present period have a greater significance than they had forty, fifty and more years ago?
The reasons are not difficult to determine. The economic demands of the workers in a period of the upward growth of American capitalism were easily met, after great resistance, by the bosses because of constantly expanding American industry and production, and the consequent enrlchment of the capitalist class, Even though the ruling economic class fought desperately against granting concessions to labor, their eventual capitulation to the workers did not mean any actual surrender of their riches. On the contrary, the economic history of the country shows that the continual expansion of industry enabled big business in this country to grant wage increases, a reduction in working hours and an improvement in working conditions, at the same time increasing their own profits.
Thus, actually, the workers never received a higher share of the increasing total production of industry. The improvements which labor won after desperate struggles declined in relation to the increasing productivity of the individual worker and the working class as a whole. On the side of the capitalists, however, their profits and wealth continually rose, decade after decade.
But we are living in a new epoch of capitalist society, a period of world disintegration and decline, a decay which afflicts the United States in the same way as the other capitalist nations of Europe are affected.
The crisis of the ’Thirties illustrated the depth of the decline of this period. Almost ten years of New Dealism showed that it was impossible for capitalism to emerge from its crisis and return to a state called “normalcy.” It took an abnormal and wealth-destroying phenomenon like the global war to overcome unemployment and to start the wheels of production operating in earnest.
The normalcy of present-day economic prosperity, however, is completely artificial since it is based solely on the requirements of war and of a military machine of huge proportions. What capitalism was unable to do in peacetime, namely, provide employment and sustenance to the mass of people, it does in war by government intervention and direction of economy.
 
Government Stepped In to Stay
This is something new for capitalism, new on the scale on which it operates today. In reality, however, this kind of government intervention already began in 1933 and lasted until the war broke out. It is certain now, and it is admitted by the capitalists, their professors and politicians, that even in the post-war period, and even in victory, the best that can be hoped for is the same kind of “normalcy” that existed under the peacetime New Deal.
Economic demands of the workers, therefore, now assume a political importance they did not have before. Every demand made by the workers now becomes the extreme concern of the government and its many agencies. This is due not only to the war; everyone will remember that it was true during the New Deal days! You do not merely ask your boss for a raise; your demands are referred to the government and its agencies. Collective bargaining today is not solely a relationship between boss and workers, but between these two and the government.
Whatever the post-war prospects will be, and they are not at all promising for the overwhelming majority of the workers in this country, increasing governmental intervention and interference in the day-to-day life of the people is a certainty. For this very reason, a new stage of political development has come upon the country.
 
But What Is the Government?
The government, however, is not an abstract thing. It is made up of people, it represents certain ideas, it develops certain practices. The government summarizes and reflects the class politics in this country. It is capitalist politics, dominated by two capitalist political parties which are completely under the control of the big business-monopolistic capitalists. The government is capitalist and serves the fundamental interests of capital.
No matter how impartial these parties pretend to be, it is common knowledge that on those matters which are really important, the big capitalists decide the policies and the candidates.
There is no vital distinction between the Republicans and Democrats. Usually, their differences are merely election fights for power. The fact that one party has some “liberals” in it is not important because it can always be shown that the other party has its share of the same kind of “liberals.”
The Republicans have their Wall Street manipulators. But so do the Democrats. The Republicans have Colonel McCormick, Senator Nye, General MacArthur, Governor Bricker, Girdler, Weir and Pew. But the Democrats have Dies, Byrd, Rankin,’ Tydings, Connally, Stettinius and Wilson. And while the Democrats have a Wallace, the Republicans have a Willkie.
Examine the long history of these two capitalist political parties and it is easy to understand why they have been called “tweedledee and tweedledum.”
Long years of miseducation, the power of the press, which is big business itself and desperately hates labor, capitalist control of the air and all channels of information, have diverted the attention of the people from the real source of evil. Thus for decades the workers of this country have been voting for political parties dedicated to the cause of capital against labor. Small-time politicians and demagogues have made a living by pretending to represent labor and its interests, only to betray the workers on the morrow of an election.
 
Labor’s Political Backwardness
The truth is that the labor movement, which has had such a brilliant history of economic struggles, is politically backward. An additional reason for this has been the extremely reactionary political policies of the officialdoms of the union movements. The American Federation of Labor, for years the only important union movement, had a policy, which Gompers introduced, of “reward your friends and punish your enemies.” This merely meant that at election time you voted against a candidate who HAD NOT lived up to his “promises” and for another who WOULD NOT live up to his “promises.” The American labor movement carried out this disastrous policy for decades with the net result that, at every important period, labor received one blow after another from the professional politicians acting for their capitalist masters.
The birth of the ClO in a desperate struggle against the most vicious monopolistic mass production industries of American capitalism gave hope that the labor movement would finally turn away from the game of capitalist politics. Shortly after its organization, it formed Labor’s Nonpartisan Committee, which promised to embark on the road of independent political action. But this was short-lived.
At other times in the history of this country there have been movements of the same kind and even attempts at the formation of an independent Labor Party to represent the workers on the political field. These never developed into mass labor parties representing the whole-working class of the country. But the desires of the workers, first of all, the more advanced elements, have never been entirely squelched. Periodically, the movement for independent labor political action gains ground and makes itself heard.
 
A New Period Is Here
We are now entering a new period of labor struggle for its own political party and for genuine independent political action. Thousands of workers are sick to the stomach from the long years of double-dealing and double-crossing which they have received from the capitalist Democratic and Republican Parties. They are beginning to reason: IN MY ECONOMIC STRUGGLE AGAINST THE BOSS, I WOULD NEVER SELECT HIM OR HIS CRONIES TO REPRESENT ME. WHY, THEN, SHOULD I VOTE FOR HIS SERVANTS TO REPRESENT ME IN THE POLITICAL FIELD?
Those advanced workers who see this terrible contradiction in labor’s conduct understand it only too well; NO union would select a corporation president, or any company official, to represent and fight for the union’s wage demands. Yet on the political field the union officialdoms advise their members to vote for the same company officials, or their choices, to represent them at the head of the government, in Congress, in State Legislatures, or the judiciary.
What American labor desperately needs is a party of its own, an independent Labor Party, with labor candidates, to fight for power against the capitalist political parties.
Can this really be done?
YES, BY THE UNION MOVEMENT
We think it is really an easy job, provided the labor unions of this country decide to do it. The workers of this country are the overwhelming majority of the population. The union movement, over thirteen million strong, it is the largest in the world. If it acts immediately for the organization of an independent Labor Party, such a party can be established virtually over night. It can challenge the power of big business on the political field as well as on the economic. It can throw out of office, in one fell swoop, the Smiths, Coxes, Johnsons, O’Daniels, Martins, Tafts, Hoffmans, Dies, and other representatives of one section or another of big business. It can march into political power!
Would such a party solve everything?
No, but it would be a great step forward in the emancipation of all who labor and toil in poverty for the enrichment of a few. That first step has to be taken.
There are signs of a great stirring among the ranks of labor. The labor leaders are finding it more and more difficult to call upon the rank and file to support a gang of rotten professional politicians. They are beginning to talk tongue in cheek.
Many resolutions for independent labor political action have been introduced at union conventions. These were accompanied by still other resolutions for the immediate organization of an independent labor party. In Michigan, the Commonwealth Federation was formed, marking a greet step forward. If the beginning made in Michigan should really result in a party of labor, it will have- tremendous influence upon the future course of the workers.
Yes, the American workers have a glorious, inspiring and militant tradition of economic struggles. Their political development needs to keep pace with it. Independent labor political action and the erection of-an independent Labor Party are absolutely necessary to the future well-being of the labor movement. Without such political action, the labor movement will suffer serious defeats in the coming years. It cannot permit this; it must not permit it.
 



The First of May, 1944, is not only labor’s holiday, it is also the fourth anniversary of the Workers Party of the United States and of Labor Action. At a time when the political movement of the workers of the world is in a disorganized and beaten state as-a result of betrayals arising from within the broad; labor movement and the victories of fascism and reaction, the Workers Party and Labor Action are truly beacon lights of hope for the American as well as the international working class and all exploited peoples. There is little argument about the miserable state of capitalist society the world over. The war portrays in the sharpest form the utter decay of this social order which is incapable of existing under conditions of peace, or of supplying the necessities of life for all the people;
Thus; international capitalism is a spectacle of riches piled up on one side in the; hands of the monopolistic capitalist classes of the powerful nations, and immense poverty for the overwhelming majority of the peoples in all countries of Europe, and America, an the many millions of colonial subjects of imperialism.
In the United States there is an apparent picture of prosperity for all the classes. But this is purely superficial. Actually, in the midst of the war economy and the absence of unemployment, the same picture of immense wealth, war profits and well-being is found on one side in the hands of the American capitalists, while the overwhelming majority of the workers and exploited await the post-war period with dread. One does not heed to wait for the post-war period, however, to assess the position of the working people. They barely make ends meet during the very course of the war.
The war itself, in addition to baring the incurable sickness of capitalism as a system of wars and poverty, forces the main burdens of production and prosecution of the conflict upon the shoulders of the workers and the millions of poor. Poor conditions of labor, speed-up; deterioration of living conditions, and the general decline of the living standards of the people are merely the concrete manifestations of the terrible exploitation of the masses.
The end of the war will demonstrate that while the capitalist classes of the world, especially in this country, have piled up enormous reserves for the leaner days, the workers of the world, and in this country too, will have little to turn to but the specter of unemployment, relief, gigantic WPA’s, and the like.
The Workers Party has endeavored to explain these things to American labor, to educate it to understand its lot under capitalism and to win .it to socialism as the only hope of freedom, and security for all of mankind. Real social security and plenty for all will come with the abolition of the capitalist system of exploitation, the operation of industry by a workers’ state and the production of the needs of life for use rather than profit.
The Workers Party is dedicated to this cause of transforming the social order of capitalism into a new order for the betterment of the whole human race, i.e., socialism.
The test of our kind of a party is different from that applied to the big capitalist parties. They are measured solely by their wealth, the lies they tell, and the promises they give. The Workers Party, as an organization representing the best interests of labor and all who toil and are poor, can be measured only by the manner in which it represents these interests.
Size alone is pretty unimportant in relation to principle. And the Workers Party prides itself because in the four years of its independent existence it has conducted itself in ah exemplary way, defending the interests of labor and carrying on the struggle against the capitalist system for a new and better society.
 
Background of the Workers Party
The Workers Party arose in the course of a sharp internal struggle in the Socialist Workers Party (Cannonites). That was four years ago. The issue which separate us from that organization was on the attitude to be taken on Russia’s invasion of Finland and Poland, and subsequently, what position should be taken on Russia’s role in the imperialist war.
We contended that the first Russian invasion of Finland was an act which violated the principles of socialist internationalism and therefore was calculated to do the workers of the world the greatest harm. The Stalinist invasion of Finland, and the subsequent division of Poland in alliance with Hitler Germany, did not advance the interests of the workers of Russia, nor of the workers in the invaded countries, but merely strengthened the bureaucratic Stalinist regime at home, and increased “the power, territories and revenue” of that regime!
We could not agree either with Trotsky or the majority of the leadership of the SWP in their condemnation of the invasions and the contradictory support they gave, in turn, to the invaders. To justify this untenable position, they asserted that Russia remained a workers’ state, although a degenerated one, and in these conflicts, the workers of the world must support this “degenerated” state. Although not all of us were yet clear on the characterization to give the Russian state, we were certain that the position taken by Trotsky and the Cannonites on the concrete questions, was wrong.
It was obvious, however, that the old party needed a thorough discussion and re-evaluation of its Russian position. It was also possible to avert a split, but this latter was contingent upon a free discussion of the disputes in the party. Such a free discussion and re-evaluation of the Russian question was manifestly impossible in a party bureaucratically governed under the leadership of Cannon and his faction.
Our demands for a guaranteed free and democratic discussion and defense of minority rights (as a matter of fact, the relationship of forces was extremely close; with the youth organization we had a majority) were not met. Even the suggestion of Trotsky that our demand for a paper be granted, thus insuring our democratic rights, was refused. The split was then inevitable, since the majority leadership regarded the discussion of vital political questions as a luxury. They still persist in this bureaucratic attitude.
Had a split been averted at that precise moment, February 1940, it undoubtedly would have occurred later. The entry of the United States into the war and the invasion of Russia by Hitler were turning points in the international situation and on both questions the Cannonites responded in characteristic fashion. The Socialist Workers Party was virtually the only party in the movement for a new, Fourth International, which remained officially silent on America’s participation in the war. On Russia’s new role in the war, it adhered to a worn-out formula: “Defense of the Soviet Union.”
With our departure, all discussion in their ranks ceased. They observed Russian developments with the ideas of a decade ago. With the most important bases of their position shattered by the impact of events, they continued to justify their position by declaring Stalin’s Russia to be a “degenerated workers’ state,” to falsely separate the Stalinist regime from the Red Army, and to read into the world situation facts which weren’t these.
Clarity Through Discussion
Our party continued to discuss the Russian question in the best traditions of a democratic workers’ movement – and not only the Russian question, but all other problems of intense interest to the labor movement. Thus, we fortified our views on Finland and Poland by our conclusions on the character of the Russian state, namely, that it was not a workers’ state, but a new type of state, never before seen in history. Though arising out of a workers’ revolution, it had become a bureaucratic collectivist state, in which the working class was actually enslaved, its organizations destroyed and one in which the bureaucracy held complete sway over the destinies of the people.
With this clarity on a most important question for the workers of the world, we have been able to understand the developments of the war and Russia’s role in it and have found it no different in any essential way from that of the other powers.
In the same fundamental way, our party discussed and analyzed the meaning of America’s entry into the war. We believed and we said that the character of the war did not change; it remained a capitalist-imperialist war over territory, markets, raw materials and profit. Every new stage in the war has merely confirmed what we stated publicly.
 
The WP in the War Crisis
The responsibilities of the Workers Party in this crucial period of world history was clear to us. First and foremost was to tell the workers the truth! And this We have done. At home our course was clear:
To defend the basic interests of the masses, to help them in their fight against the profiteers, to assert their economic and political rights and to fight for them, to oppose placing the main burdens of the war upon the shoulders of the people and placing them where they belong – on the shoulders of America’s bloated, profiteering monopolistic capitalist class.
In the four years of our existence we have carried on the battle for wage increases, for an improvement of the economic conditions of the workers and the people as a whole, for the democratic rights of. the masses. Moreover, we have pointed out to labor the grave dangers which confront it in the post-war period; the dangers, of unemployment, hunger and widespread poverty. We have defended all the struggles of the workers in their fights for their rights NOW.
The Workers Party and Labor Action have demonstrated the completely fraudulent character of price control, where the only thing really controlled has been the wages of all who labor.
We have demonstrated beyond the shadow of a doubt that the President’s so-called seven-point program has in reality been a one-point program of wage-freezing.
Long before the official labor movement began its attack on the Little Steel formula and the WLB, we had already warned against these sinister things and called for the abolition of the formula and the need for labor’s representatives to get off a board stacked against labor.
We have advocated an improvement of the living standards of the masses against the concerted Administration-big business drive to destroy the hard-won gains of labor.
Together with large sections of the union movement, we have advocated the rescinding of the no-strike pledge as a means of freeing labor from the stranglehold of a one-sided promise which has given big business the signal to begin a nation-wide offensive against unionism and the economic position of labor.
The Workers Party and Labor Action carried on a magnificent campaign against all (NAM, union officials and the Communist Party) who sought to reintroduce the speed-up and piecework system through the none-too-attractive title of incentive pay.
 
Drawing the Political Conclusion
But most important of all, the Workers Party and Labor Action, while recognizing the absolute importance of this program, have shown how all of this leads to an unavoidable conclusion for American labor, i.e., a political conclusion. All of these economic demands and struggles have to be fortified against big business on the political field. Here is where the great power of the capitalists is to be found. They have their political parties in the form of the Republicans and Democrats. Only labor is without a big political party of its own which would represent it and fight for its interests.
What labor needs to supplement its economic struggles is independent labor political action. What labor needs now is an independent Labor Party. It has the manpower for it. It has the funds; it has the capacity for the job. It needs only the will, the understanding and the determination to go forward. Such a party would not only shatter the political monopoly of big business and the capitalists in general, but it would give the American workers a party of their own to fight for their demands and make a bid for political power.
This, then, is part of the history and program of the Workers Party and of the paper, Labor Action. We have not stood on the side calmly to observe the passage of events and the struggles of American labor with the cry: “Now is not the time to do anything; now is the time to preserve ourselves. When the workers get moving we will not stand in their way” (as some contemporaries have done).
The Workers Party stands side by side with the workers in the day-to-day fight for life itself. Ours is a party of, for and by labor. Just as sure as the sun will rise, we will, by virtue of our principles, our program and our activities, become the socialist party of the American masses, the party of the future!
 



The existence of the War Labor Board, from the point of view of the workers, becomes more dangerous with each passing day. There is hardly an organized worker who does not realize that the WLB exists for the primary purpose of preventing long overdue wage increases to be granted to millions of workers all over the country and in all industrial occupations.
At least one-third of all workers have not had a wage increase since the war began. Other millions have received only token increases which did not keep pace with the rise in the cost of living or even with the Little Steel formula.
The outstanding fact about the rise in the cost of living is that it has gone way beyond the increase in wages permitted by the formula. This is not merely asserted by the representatives of labor. It is acknowledged by the WLB itself in its own reports. Nevertheless, the WLB has held fast in its refusal to grant wage increases on the ground that it cannot do so as long as the President’s wage stabilization law is in effect.
In other words, the WLB shifts all responsibility to the President and his directors of economic stabilization. But neither the President nor his aides have taken a single step to change the law and alter the Little Steel formula. Oh, yes, many hints were thrown out during the election campaign that Roosevelt was seriously considering a revision in the formula and was prepared to change even before November 5. President Murray of the CIO even staked his life on this in an effort to head off the rebellious rank and file of the United Automobile Workers Union when they sought to rescind the no-strike pledge. But it is clear now that the Administration was again playing hide-and-seek with millions of American workers.
 
The Cost of Living Issue
When the issue of the rise in the. cost of living first arose, when the labor representatives presented irrefutable proof that the cost of living had risen so high that wage increases were absolutely necessary, the President had the WLB appoint a five-man committee to present its findings in the matter. Shortly after that, the WLB committee and the labor representatives brought in their respective reports. While the WLB report showed a cost of living increase of 23-plus per cent, the labor report showed that actually the rise had been 45-plus per cent.
The dispute in the WLB over the respective figures of the two reports ended in a rout of the special five-man committee appointed by Chair-man Davis of the board. Their report could not stand the light of day. They omitted many aspects of the cost of living which are vital to the life of the average worker and his family. The report omitted to state, for example, that those items in which the rise was greatest were precisely the categories for which the worker spent most of his salary: food, clothing, etc. It failed to consider deterioration of goods, which actually raised their costs to the worker and his family. It did not break down the areas of the country which showed that in the biggest industrial centers of the country, where the majority of the workers were concentrated, the cost of living had risen higher than in other non-industrial areas.
The net result of the dispute between the employer-public report and that of labor was that the whole question of wage increases was postponed until after the elections and is now again postponed.
 
More WLB Obstruction
Additional evidence that the main reason for the existence of the WLB is to prevent granting the workers their justified wage increased was the. refusal of the WLB to send any recommendations to the President on its findings resulting from the materials contained in the two reports. This cowardly evasion on the part of the board led to a division between the AFL and CIO representatives.
George Meany, head of the AFL delegation, took the position that it was no longer possible for the labor representatives to consider any individual wage cases before the board until and unless the Little Steel formula was revised. At first it appeared that the labor representatives were united on this question. But as it turned out the CIO refused to go along with the AFL because it had cases coming up before the board. It had hoped to gain something out of the hearings on those cases, especially the one relating to the United Steel Workers, who were scheduled to convene at the end of November. But, again, the WLB refused to act on their demands, leaving the CIO representatives in the lurch once more.
In the last few days we have had an extension of this division between the labor representatives. The WLB has suddenly finished its report to the President and proposed that the labor representatives go along with it – even though the board had no recommendations to make as a result of its investigations. The AFL representatives refused again, reasserting their demand for a revision of the formula. The CIO representatives, however, recorded their pleasure that the latest board report was better than previous ones in its admission that the rise in the cost of living was closer to 30 per cent than 23.5 per cent.
This should have been the signal for the entire labor movement to intensify its campaign for revision or abolition of the Little Steel formula. Instead, we have a division of the labor forces, one section sticking to its guns for revision, the other welcoming the “change” in the board report.
 
AFL Position for Increases
In the AFL fight there is posed the whole question of post-war unemployment and wages, showing that postponement of wage increases means possibly to allow them when there is widespread unemployment resulting from cutbacks. This is under the best circumstances. Actually the opposite is more likely.
Meany outlined his position, saying:
“What this means, in effect, is to continue the wage freeze and when plants are shutting down by thousands all over the country and when mass unemployment is an accomplished fact we should increase wage rates thirty per cent over our present rates.
“This suggestion is so ridiculous that it scarcely needs comment. The tendency of employers would be to reduce rather than to maintain or raise wage rates.”
Of course, this is substantially the position of the CIO, but its fight is weakened by half-hearted struggle resulting from its political alliance with Roosevelt.
 



In recent days, some of the papers in the country reported on the testimony given, by Senator W. Lee (Pappy) O’Daniel before the Senate Campaign Expenditures Committee. That no wider publicity was given to this testimony by the yellow press is easily understandable. There is a great lesson for labor in the disclosures of the Senate committee about politics, propaganda and big business.
Pappy O’Daniel is an ignorant rogue, a reactionary, labor-baiting, two-bit politician from the state of Texas. He’s a singer of ditties and a player of the banjo. But that isn’t why he was selected to run for office. That’s only the way he runs his campaigns. He was selected to run for office by the reactionary big business forces who run the Democratic Party in Texas because he is the perfect flunkey, the best kind of office boy the profiteers could find. With a good press, good propaganda agents, with plenty of money, O’Daniel swept several elections. Big business put him into office and big business gets its returns – and plenty.
Since being a governor of his state and now a senator, O’Daniel has used his office for these principal reasons: to organize all reactionary forces in an effort to curb the labor movement; to hamstring the unions; to force them into courts, knowing that most unions do not have funds for extensive litigation; and to bar labor from organizing workers by all kinds of legal restrictions passed in state legislatures by other reactionaries mobilized by this Bourbon from the South.
When the Christian American Association began its campaign in several Southern states to legislate out of existence the trade unions it was learned that Pappy O’Daniel was one of the prime movers of the organization. He used his political office and his big business support to push this anti-union movement forward. Everyone knew who was behind this anti-union legislation and everyone who understood the struggles of the workers knew that Pappy O’Daniel was a nobody who became a somebody only because there were powerful forces backing him, namely, some of the big monopolies and corporations of the North and the South. Make no mistake about it, it isn’t only Southern corporations who stand behind O’Daniel. The Northern corporations and monopolies are there too. As a matter of fact, big business in the North controls industry – in the South. Wall Street stretches its fingers into that part of the country just as it does everywhere else.
O’Daniel’s campaign against the New Deal and Roosevelt arises not because he thinks Roosevelt is a “socialist.” It is not because he believes Roosevelt is fighting “capitalism,” or “free enterprise.” He knows this isn’t true. But he feels that Roosevelt plays ball too much with labor, makes a concession here and there when it isn’t necessary. What the big business forces behind O’Daniel object to is playing ball at all with labor. They believe they are powerful enough to resist any of the demands made by the great union movement. They want to smash the labor movement by direct and brutal methods. They are against smothering it to death with honeyed words – which takes a longer period of time.
That is why they conceived of the Lee O’Daniel News, a paper devoted to fighting the New Deal and Roosevelt and fostering the reactionary policies that interest them. And who could tell, maybe the biscuit-eating Pappy might turn out to be a pretty good second-hand man-on-horseback. You don’t believe that? Well, just take a look at the men and-the companies Which back his foul rag:

Republican Senator E.H. Moore of Oklahoma. A senator! So what? Well, it just happens that Mr. Moore is a wealthy oil man who, besides being in the business of making huge profits is also in the business of fighting: unionism. He gave $25,000.
 
Next, H.R. Cullen, another wealthy oil man who comes from Texas. He too gave $25,000.

These two men contributed almost half of the $109,000 raised by Pappy to put out his paper!
Who else is on the list?

Marrs McLean, GOP treasurer in Texas, a wealthy oil man, gave $2,500; $1,000 came from Lamar Fleming, Jr., of the Anderson-Clayton cotton firm owned by Will Clayton; Surplus Property Administrator in the Roosevelt government.
 
Another $2,500 came from Representative Richard M. Kleberg, owner of the King Ranch and lobbyist against the OPA in behalf of the rich cattle producers.
 
J.M. McCauley, a New York produce dealer, campaigner against price controls, contributed $1,000. He raised $12,000 among business associates to fight price control, too.
 
Thomas R. Armstrong, vice-president of a New York oil company and a big rancher, gave O’Daniel $2,500.
 
J.S. Birdwell, owner of the Birdwell Oil Co., gave $1,000.
 
R.J. Morgan, assistant to the chairman of the C.&O. Railroad Co., Contributed $1,000.
 
Kay Kimball, a big milling plant owner, gave $2,500.
 
The H.E. Butt Grocery Co. gave $1,000; the Mission Provision Co. gave $1,250; C. Starace & Bros, contributed $1,000, and among other contributors are the Anderson & Son Dairy Co. of Wheeling, West Va.; William Randolph Archer, director of the South Texas Feed Co.; J.M. Bennett, director of the National Bank of Commerce, San Antonio, and A.M. Veder, secretary-treasurer of the San Antonio Coca-Cola Co., etc.
 
In addition, Maco Stewart, president of the Stewart Title & Guarantee Co., of Galveston, contributed $2,500.

As a matter of record, $80,000 of the $109,000 O’Daniel reported he had raised through contributions, came from wealthy business interests in denominations of $1,000 or more.
 
The Seeds of Fascism
This fact alone shows that his movement and his paper are not supported by “the people.” They are supported by big business interests who will always organize and finance anti-labor agitation and organization.
There is the real lesson in the Pappy O’Daniel affair. We have always said that if you want to know how the reactionaries, the labor-baiters, the semi-fascists and the real fascists come into existence, carry on their work and finance themselves, the Pappy O’Daniel affair is an example. Big business is behind them. It was behind fascism in Italy; it was behind fascism in Germany. It has backed every anti-labor, reactionary and fascist movement that ever came into existence.
There is a warning to labor in this case. It is: on guard, against all these reactionaries, semi-fascists and outright fascists. Organize labor defense against them. Labor has the power, the numbers, the ideas and the will to defeat fascism wherever it raises its head.
 



The political situation in Iran is reaching a climax; with the reported resignation of the government of Premier Said. Not all the facts are at hand since the first attacks against Iran. These were made in the Russian press when the Said government decided that it would postpone, the whole question of oil concessions (to any country) until after the war. But certain developments are unquestionably clear.
1. The Russian demand for concessions in northern Iranian oil fields were made in the same imperialist fashion, that Great Britain and the United States had earlier made proposals for concessions in the oil fields on the Afghanistan and Baluchistan borders.
2. Premier Said’s government had previously rejected the British and American proposals under pressure from nationalist elements. The latter demanded that the oil resources of the country be exploited by native. forces and that profits from these developments be retained in the country.
3. When faced with the Russian demands for similar concessions in the northern fields, Premier Said obviously had no other alternative than to reject the requests for concessions until after the war. If he had done otherwise, Great. Britain and the United States would have regarded the action as discriminatory and compelled similar concessions in other parts of the country.
 
Russia Organizes Actions
3. As soon as the government of Premier Said rejected the Russian proposal with the counter-action of postponement, the Russian press opened up a vicious campaign against it, reminiscent of the propaganda methods of all imperialists. The Russians proceeded to attack the Premier himself, charging him and his cabinet with being pro-fascist, anti-Russian, anti-Allies. (Said was formerly Iranian Ambassador to Russia and was regarded as friendly to Stalin’s government.) GPU-inspired demonstrations broke out in the country, especially in those cities situated in the norhtern oil fields. The Red Army blockaded the city of Tabriz.
Newspapers, fearful of Russian occupation of the whole country (she now occupies part of the north), attacked Said. If not directly bribed, some of these papers were, undoubtedly, succumbing to the pressure of a powerful “neighbor.”
4. Izvestia, official Russian newspaper, accused Iran of favoring Great Britain and America over Russia in the oil dispute, citing the fact that America has troops in the country, even though it has no treaty with it.
5. More recently, the Russians inspired a demonstration in Teheran, the capital of Iran, to demand the Premier’s resignation.
6. While Stalin’s regime has not made official its attitude, and no editorial opinions were expressed, the Russian press did feature a statement by Sergei I. Kavtardzes, Vice-Commissar of Foreign Affairs, the gist of which was that the Russian government could no longer cooperate with Mr. Said’s government.
 
All the Trappings of Imperialism
Isn’t the whole imperialist pattern clear? Russia makes a demand on Iran. Iran postpones action until after the war. Stalin’s agents foment anti-governmental actions. Other elements in the country, fearful of complete occupation, denounce the government for “worsening” relations with a giant neighbor. Internal “disorder” is created by the mere insinuation of threats by a powerful neighbor. Throughout it all, the demands of the powerful aggressor are labeled as aid to the weaker and defenseless country. No, Russia is not to blame for “worsening” relations with Iran by her demands – Iran is blamed for “worsening” relations with Russia because she rejected the latter’s proposals!
Then what happens? The government of Premier Said is forced to resign. A new government will take its place but it will be one friendly to Stalin – that is, it will accede to Russian demands. Suppose the government was not changed? Suppose it had remained adamant in its refusal to grant oil concessions? In that event, it is clear, Russia would have TAKEN the oil deposits. That was already established in the Red Army blockade of Tabriz.
How does this differ from the imperialism of the capitalist powers? In no single important way. That is the way England, Germany, the United States, France, Italy and all the other nations, which seized territories and resources of other countries, did it. One does not need a long memory to recall the South American revolutions fomented by American imperialist interests to realize the real significance of the Russian action in Iran.
It is characteristic of imperialism when it does commit an act of aggrandizement to declare that it is doing it in order to aid the country being raped; it is civilizing it, industrializing it, preventing internal strife, raising the standard of living of the backward country. The mere declaration of these intentions serves to emphasize the lies.
Let us see how the Daily Worker, Stalin’s voice in this country, describes the “new” imperialism of Stalin. It takes to task those who criticize Russia’s conduct toward Iran as imperialist. All the critics are, according to the new foreign expert, Joseph Starobin, anti-Russian. Listen to this apologist for Stalinist imperialism and see if you can detect a single important difference between his literary tripe and those of all other imperialist apologists: Writing in the Daily Worker of November 11, he says:
 
Daily Worker Speww Its Views
“;... The main criticism has run along the lines of charging the USSR with imperialism because it desires to develop the valuable oil deposits of neighboring Iran ... The Soviet Union is the last country open to charges of imperialism in Persia. It was the Soviet government that denounced Czarist extraterritoriality privileges in Iran, and turned back to its people all Czarist concessions. No individual, and no company in the Soviet Union can possibly profit from the Iran concessions. Bear that in mind.
“In other words, the Soviet desire to develop Iranian oil fields is on a completely different level from the ordinary, garden-variety of oil company operations in foreign lands ...
“My own judgment is, without a detailed study of the matter, that the USSR would like very much to see the northern part of Iran developed into a modern industrial area.
“It would mean a progressive trend in that country, a certain security for the Soviet flank on the Caspian, and of course redound to the benefit of the people of Iran, since the concessions would be generously paid for.”
Comparison to the workers’ government of Lenin and Trotsky cannot hold water. The workers’ state of Russia, before Stalin came to power, did, it is true, renounce all concessions which the Czarist government had forced from weaker countries. But what has happened is that Stalin is re-employing the methods of Czarism. He has already incorporated into the Russian state Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and parts of Finland, countries which were granted their independence under Lenin. He is angling for other parts of Europe with the aim of incorporating them inside of Russian frontiers. And now, in Iran, he is attempting to obtain concessions in oil which the Czar once forced from Persia and which were surrendered after the workers took power!
Who Will Profit from the Oil?
Who will profit from these concessions? Starobin says no individuals and no companies. No, that, is not true. Russia is no longer a workers’ state. It is a bureaucratic collectivist state in which the bureaucrats, numbering many millions, who own the state and through the state the nationalized industries and collectivized agriculture, will and do profit from such ventures as Iran.
The bureaucracy is a specially privileged class whose standard, of living and share of the wealth of Russia is ten, twenty, a hundred times greater than that of the workers and peasants. No private companies will gain from the Iran adventure but the above class will.
From the point of view of Iran and the Iranian people, it makes no difference who profits from the exploitation of its resources, whether it be American capitalist enterprises or Russian state enterprises and a bureaucratic class. The Iranians will lose – not the Iranian ruling class, who will get benefits – but the people as a whole. And Starobin is a liar when he says. that the people itself will profit from whatever payments Russia makes to Iran for these concessions.
Whenever imperialists get ready to steal the resources of a country they make sure to emphasize that the people, whose resources they rob, will get the benefit of it. And now Russia, which has not succeeded in fully industrializing itself and which has a colossal task of rebuilding almost the whole of its European area, is going to industrialize Iran! The joke is a grim one.
And, “it would mean a progressive trend in the country, a certain security for the Soviet flank n the Caspian.” Now we get it. Russia, you see, is threatened from the Caspian Sea, an inland body of water thousands of miles removed from any great power which possibly could, if it would, attack her! Or maybe Russia is afraid of an attack from Iran? Or Afghanistan, or Egypt?
Imperialists are always seizing territories, occupying others, obtaining spheres of influence in still others in order to ... protect themselves from some small, ineffectual nation that could not muster a regiment fully armed and trained to fight.
The whole game is given away by the Daily Worker. Russia is pursuing an imperialist policy in Iran. Taking advantage of its military power, of its rivals’ preoccupation with the war, she is pushing her demands to the full. She will undoubtedly be completely successful, unless American-British intervention forces some compromise. But that event would not change a thing about Russia’s role in the Iranian affair.
 



When Hitler came to power in Germany and set up the fascist state, many people thought that a new social order had come to Germany. The capitalists, so it was said, were now curbed and completely under the control of the Nazi regime. The market was ended, profits were wiped out, production was carried on in the interests of the state. But when the facts about German economy leaked out and the whole story of Hitler’s rise to power became known, it was clear that what happened in. Germany was something altogether different from what many thought.
It became clear that the revolutionary socialists, the Marxists, were right: fascism was not a new social order, but a new type of political rule of capitalism, arising on the basis of a severe social crisis in the country, the aim of which was to save capitalism and the profit system under the domination of the big monopolies and trusts.
In addition to that, it is now known that the forces behind Hitler, those who gave him financial, moral and physical support, were the German capitalists, the steel, iron, coal and chemical producers. Hitler had carried out their program of preparation for war in order to gain for Germany what other capitalist nations had: markets, raw materials, land for expansion, etc. The aims of German capitalism are essentially the same as those of all other capitalist countries.
But in the case of Japan, many legends were built up during the course of the war. Some of them would have you believe that Japan is a backward, uncivilised country, inhabited by “monkey-people.” It never occurs to the paid propagandists who write these things of Japan that they do not square with the tremendous military forces of that country which could never have bean built up without a highly developed industry and skilled labor. No, Japan is an advanced capitalist country, even though it has many strange traditions to those who live in the Western world. Japan just happened to have developed her capitalism later than other countries and, in order to expand, she, too, went to war against those countries to take what they had taken long ago.
This fact was given prominence in one of Drew Pearson’s columns of recent date. Pearson spoke of the conflict between the military and the industrialists, likening it to the struggle between the Army and Navy with the WPB in this country. Says Pearson:
“Three months before Pearl Harbor, Japan formed the ‘New Economic Structure.’ Most foreigners thought this a plan for military rule over business. It was the reverse!
“NES, created September 1, 1941, worked well during the easy victories at Pearl Harbor and thereafter. But when Japan began to lose in the Solomons in the fall of 1942 and as shipping was decimated by our subs, the Jap economic structure buckled ... Tojo ... demanded powers to deal with the crisis. The cartels resisted ... He was so slow getting control of industry, his methods were resented by the ‘National Socialists’ and left wing of his military-fascists. Some, headed by Seigo Nakano, urged nationalization of all industry.
“Tojo made a new attempt to strengthen his grip on. economy. Calling a special Diet session, he formed a Munitions Ministry, headed it, placed all war production under it. But Tojo’s power didn’t last long. Big business moved in and forced business men into the cabinet. They cancelled the Army’s Industrial power ... Premier Koiso, who replaced him, played with the cartels. Business took over all Army, Navy arsenals.”
Look behind the mask of propaganda and lies that are told in this war and you will find, no matter what the country, that this is a gigantic struggle between the capitalist powers for land, raw material, markets, cheap labor, in a word, for PROFITS!
 



The fight against the War Labor Board is coming to a head with the new attacks made upon it by the AFL and CIO, now meeting in their annual conventions. In official statements made public last week the two labor organizations opened up a barrage on the board for its adamant refusal to recommend a revision of the Little Steel formula.
Several things stand out sharply. First, wages of the workers as a whole are low and have not kept pace with the rising cost of living. Second, the WLB has refused to concern itself with the acute living problems of the majority of the workers and has constituted itself as a force to guarantee the profits of big business while reducing the living standards of the mass of American people. Third, the labor leaders, fully cognizant of these facts, and sharp in their criticism of the board – criticisms which actually belong to the President and his directors of wage stabilization – refuse to take the necessary steps which could end this disgraceful situation.
The WLB refused to certify contracts arrived at jointly by the unions and companies. It has delayed handling cases where there were disagreements between the unions and the companies. No matter what the type of case, the WLB stood like granite in its refusal to grant labor its just demands.
In face of some severe criticism, it merely shrugged its shoulders, admitted the justification of labor’s demands and then placed all responsibility for its refusal to act on the shoulders of the President and his directors, claiming that the board could, do nothing so long as the Little Steel formula and the wage freeze existed.
Labor took the board up on this position. It presented figures and material to show that the cost of living had far surpassed the levels agreed to in the Little Steel formula. In response to this pressure by labor, the President directed the board to appoint a committee to investigate the rising cost of living. This committee horsed around for a long while and then produced a report which was completely refuted by the labor members of the WLB and countered by the latter’s report.
The contrast between the two was clear. The WLB’s report (compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) on the cost of living showed a rise of only 23.5 per cent, while the labor report demonstrated beyond a shadow of a doubt that it was 45.3 per cent. Accepting the figures of the WLB report, it would show that the Little Steel formula should have been revised upward by 8.5 points. But the board did nothing; the President and his directors did nothing.
 
WLB Cowardice
In more recent weeks, the dispute on the rise in the cost of living was again brought before the board as the pressure of labor increased and the ranks of the union movement began to press for rescinding the no-strike pledge. This time the board accepted part of the labor position on the cost of living and agreed that it had risen some additional three or four points to almost thirty per cent. That means the Little Steel formula needs to be revised upward by at least 15 per pent.
What did the WLB do? Nothing. It sent this report to the President without making a single recommendation!
Any way you look at it, that is, any figure you accept from the WLB, still demands a revision of the formula. But the board says no.
 
What About FDR?
How do the President, his advisers and directors meet this situation? Director of Economic Stabilization Fred M. Vinson issues a statement that the Administration does not contemplate a general upward revision of the Little Steel formula. He accepts as accurate the false report of the WLB. He realizes that even this report calls for the aforementioned revision.
The lessons, however, are clear. Labor has been duped by the President and his Administration. His directors and the WLB, carrying out his politces, have cheated American labor out of its due wages – a wage bill amounting to eleven billion dollars, according to the AFL!
The lesson is: Quit the WLB! It is the graveyard of labor’s wage demands! Rescind the no-strike pledge which has made labor the impotent captive of big business and the Administration! Restore genuine collective bargaining and the union movement to its former stature!
 



In a previous article we pointed out that the Russian demands on the Iranian government for concessions of their Kevir and Khurian oil deposits in the northern part of the country, paralleled the imperialist method of expansion by the capitalist powers. These concessions were refused by the government of Premier Said, who declared that it was his cabinet’s policy to postpone the question of such contracts until after the war when the situation in the world would become mare clearly settled.
Having been refused these concessions, Stalin has organized a series of actions against Said’s government which will, in one way or another, result in obtaining these coveted oil areas. The government of Said was denounced as a pro-fascist regime and an enemy of the United Nations. This government, said the Russian paper, Trud, was incapable of keeping order in the country. Russian interests were not properly defended and her supply trains were regularly attacked. The aim of Stalin is to create such a disturbance inside Iran as to prepare a coup and seizure of the oil areas he desires. All of this is quite characteristic of the Russian regime, and the methods used are not unlike those employed by the imperialists of the world against weak and defenseless countries. They are of a pattern with those methods employed by Stalin when he seized the Baltic states and akin to those which are now in preparation for a division of Poland. This will be amply borne out in the facts which follow.
 
Race for Oil
Behind the Russian demands for these oil concessions is an inter-Allied conflict over this black gold, .New facts disclosed since the first public denunciations of the Iranians show that Russia was not the only nation to ask for oil concessions. The British and Americans also asked for concessions in the southeastern part of the country. The course of action obviously dictated to the Iranians, and no doubt suggested by the United States, in view of the differences existing between the three big powers and their separate demands for the same natural resources, was to postpone the whole question until after the war.
About a year ago two, American companies, Socony-Standard and Vacuum, and the British Shell company tried to obtain concessions in the section of Iran along the Afghanistan and Baluchistan borders. They were interested in the same concessions. The Iranian cabinet refused these concessions, especially in view of the pressure of nationalist elements who demanded that the oil deposits of the country be exploited by natives and all profits retained in the country. The Premier, however, was favorable to the idea of granting rights to either the Americans or the British. But when the Russians requested the northern fields, the Cabinet decided against all concessions and for a postponement of the whole question until after the war.
According to PM, this decision was well received in the country and Parliament passed the military budget by an overwhelming vote as an expression of solidarity with the action of the government. While the United States and Great Britain were agreeable to a postponement (the reasons are clear: they both have more than enough oil for the time being), the Russians decided to pressure the Iranians into a surrender of the northern fields. Washington is frankly disturbed by the Russian action because it regards any concessions which the Russians “squeeze” out of Iran as discriminatory unless negotiations with the United States are reopened simultaneously.
Another aspect of the situation which disturbs Washington is that the Russians may take such steps as would, in effect, end Iranian “sovereignty.” This latter is, of course, ludicrous, since Iran does not enjoy genuine sovereignty now. The country is occupied by British, American and Russian troops. Its economy has been subjected to the war needs of the Allies. Its stability is dependent in these circumstances on agreement among the Big Three. What Washington fears is not the loss of Iran’s nominal sovereignty but Russian control over the country and seizure of all the resources at the expense of any and all other powers.
 
Staking a Claim
This is not mere supposition. As justification for Russian demands, Stalin’s mouthpiece, War and the Working Class, prints figures on the world distribution of oil which show America controlling fifty-seven per cent of the world’s oil resources, Great Britain twenty-seven per cent, Russia only seven per cent. The conclusion to be drawn from these figures is that Russia is really entitled to such concessions in Iran in order to equalize the respective oil shares of the big powers.
Russia approaches Iran with a “mutually satisfactory” deal. It is of a piece with all deals which powerful nations try to make with weaker ones when ready to gobble them up, seize their resources and exploit them for profit. In this case Iran apparently should have had nothing to say about it, except in the most formal sense. But, in this case, Iran did say something; it rejected the Russian proposal for a concession. No doubt the Iranians felt strong because they knew of the differences which existed between the three imperialists. No doubt the Premier felt he could get some support from Great Britain and the United States. Thus, standing on the right of Iran to determine what shall be done with oil deposits on its soil, Said rejected the Russian proposal.
What has happened in the past weeks is the swift development of a frame-up against the country to prepare some form of seizure, or to overthrow the government through native figureheads pushed to the forefront by Russian experts and occupation forces.
Washington reports that Russian troops have already blockaded the Iran garrison at Tabriz. The Russian press, while omitting any reference to such a blockade, charges that Iranian soldiers opened fire on a peaceful pro-Russian demonstration – that is, a demonstration protesting the government’s postponement of action on the Russian oil-concession proposal. And, according to the same Stalinist press, the action of the Iranian soldiers “aroused general indignation in Tabriz.”
Note, of course, that there was no “general indignation” by the Iranians against a foreign aggressor, against a power which now helps to occupy the country and threatens it further. No, the “general indignation” is against the government which attempted in its feeble way to defend the independence and the right of Iranians to determine their own affairs.
As part of the general frame-up, the Russian press continues to write threateningly about Iran. It reports mass protest demonstrations in various parts of the country, naming Meshed-i-Sar, Sultanabad, Ispahan and other cities. We have no doubt that these demonstrations were inspired and organized by the Russians. According to Tass, official Russian news agency, ail these demonstrations adopted resolutions demanding the resignation of Premier Said and the establishment of a new government friendly to Russia. Iranian newspapers are also reported to have demanded acceptance of the Russian demand.
If you look at a map you will see that the cities in which these demonstrations took place are all located in the areas containing the oil deposits demanded by Russia, If the government is unable to keep order in these areas in which Russia has interests; then a new government must be chosen. This is the demand made by Stalin. If a new government is not forthcoming, then the country faces a total occupation and control of the disputed territory by the so-called Red Army.
What kind of a new government is Russia demanding? Obviously a government that will be completely subservient to it, a government that will yield to all its demands!
 
Stalinist Imperialism
Wherein does this policy embraced by Stalin’s Russia differ from the traditional policies of imperialism? In no essential way. A demand is made on a small nation, a backward one at that, with little power and no possibility of lasting resistance. If the demand is rejected, then the nation is threatened; internal dissension is stirred up; national elements are organized through bribery; demonstrations are directed by the big power. All this is designed to lead to the breakdown of the government and replacement by one subservient to Russia, or the seizure of the whole country, or at least of the oil-bearing sector.
This is typical imperialist policy by a Russian state which has long since ceased to be a workers’ state and which has nothing in common with socialism or a socialist policy. The policy of Russia reflects the tremendous changes that have taken place since the workers’ revolution of 1917, since the time that Lenin and Trotsky were at the helm. Only one fact need be cited to prove this:
Before the Russian Revolution, when the Czar ruled, Russia had oil concessions in Northern Iran. But when Russia became a Soviet nation, it abandoned these concessions on the theory that it was against working class principle for a powerful nation to exploit another nation, especially a weaker and defenseless country.
Stalin today is using the same measures – imperialism, robbery, exploitation of other peoples – that Lenin and Trotsky rejected when they were used by the Czar for the benefit of Russian capitalists.
Stalin is plundering for Russia’s new ruling class, the bureaucracy, which owns the state and controls the wealth of the country and which reaps all its benefits. The Iran “incident” is only another example of how Stalin is trying to increase “the power, prestige and revenues” of their new ruling class.
 



When a PM interviewer told Earl Browder, high potentate of the American Communist Party, that he would get along well with the National Association of Manufacturers and added, “In large sections they sound almost word for word like you,” he got the following reply’ from Stalin’s representative:
“That’s fine. I’m awfully glad to hear that. I’m not sorry when you say that leading members of the NAM talk like me. My report to the Plenum (of the Communist Party) was distributed to every delegate at the economic conference of the NAM, and I am told most of them read it through; I am very happy when I get news like that.”
We are glad, too, to hear this from Browder, because he now says openly what he stands for. As a matter of fact, the practice of the Communist Party in this country has been, for a long time, in conformity with Browder’s expression.
When the head of the NAM, Walter D, Fuller, notorious anti-labor” big business leader, has praise for the Stalinists, expresses willingness to work with them, and appreciates their services, the real role of the Communist party is thoroughly revealed. They have become the new stalking-horses of American, big business and the most reactionary section of the capitalists to boot.
What is the origin of this latest quick-change act on the part of the Communist Party in this country? It is the change in Russian foreign policy of collaboration, this time with Anglo-American capitalism.
The American Communist Party, like its sister parties in other parts of the world, is not an independent organisation, but a Russian agency whose policies always reflect the policies of the Russian Foreign Office. Its policies have never been stable since the Communist International ceased to be a revolutionary socialist organization, that was many years ago. Since Stalin’s triumph in Russia, and whenever the foreign policy of that country required it, the Communist Party has made quick switches from one policy to another, without ever bothering to explain these changes to a bewildered and stupefied following until long afterward.
A Little History
Starting in 1932, for example, when the economic crisis had reached its severest point, the American Stalinists campaigned against Roosevelt on the ground that he was a fascist. When they finally accepted the New Deal, Roosevelt overnight became the champion of democracy, freedom, security, prosperity and everything that was decent. Anyone who knows anything about the political history of this country during the past fifteen years, also knows that Roosevelt didn’t change a bit. It was Browder’s party which changed. Why?
Stalin’s foreign policy had changed. The victory of Hitler, which he had helped to bring about, scared him and he turned away from the working class movement of the world to the “democratic” capitalist countries. This became known as the “Popular Front” period, in which the Communist Parties in all Countries tried to form an alliance between labor and a section of the capitalists, not to advance the cause of labor, but to defend Stalin’s regime in Russia and the profit system in the “democratic” capitalist countries.
So, in this country, Roosevelt became the arch-democrat and the American Communists suddenly became his most outspoken supporters. It did not last very long, however.
Russia tried to form a “collective security” bloc against Hitler, Tojo and Mussolini. She was not overly successful because of the lingering suspicions which existed between her and the other powers, and the fact that the capitalist powers themselves were not too sure of their direction.
While the League of Nations proceeded to stab Ethiopia in the back during the Italian invasion, Russia protested the League’s failure to apply sanctions against Mussolini. But at the same time Stalin supplied oil and other materials to the Italian armies, which permitted them to wage war against the almost defenseless Ethiopians. The American Communist Party supported Russia in these acts.
 
The Hitler-Stalin Honeymoon
At the same time that Russia was attempting to form a bloc of the “democratic” capitalist nations against the Axis, she was carrying on negotiations with the Nazis for the purpose of arriving at an agreement with them.
A few months before the war broke out, at a time when the English arid French were negotiating with the representatives of the Russian army, Hitler and Stalin announced the signing of a pact. This pact paved the way for the opening of the present war.
The invasion of Poland by the German armies was followed by an invasion of the Russian armies. Hitler and Stalin then proceeded to divide the country, according to pre-arranged plans. Russia also was given the Baltic states. Shortly thereafter she attacked Finland. This was to be her sphere of influence, while Western Europe was to be under Hitler.
In all these quick changes, the American Communist Party announced its full agreement with Stalin in all his actions. This was not without its humor, because at each successive turn by Stalin the American Stalinists were taken by complete surprise.
They denied that it was possible for Stalin to reach an agreement with Hitler. But no sooner was that said than the signing of the pact was announced.
They denied the invasion of Poland by Russia, but the very next day the invasion took place.
From that moment on, in the midst of the war between .the Axis and England (France was knocked out of the war quickly), the propaganda of Russia, which became the propaganda of the American Communist Party, went as follows:
This is an imperialist war. Germany did not start the war – as a matter of fact, Hitler is completely blameless, the war was started by England. England is a bloody imperialist and no one should support her.
In America, the Communist Party opposed every war measure proposed by Roosevelt. It now turned on him in the same way it did in 1932, ’33, ’34. He was a war-monger, a reactionary, an enemy of the people. Fascism now became a matter of personal taste.
The Stalinists fought conscription, lend-lease, war production and the Roosevelt anti-German foreign policy, with vigor, but not in the interest of socialism and a socialist peace, but in the interest of the Hitler-Stalin pact!
 
Then the Switch Came
When Hitler attacked Russia, the Communist Party made another quick change. The war was now a holy war; Great Britain was wonderful; Roosevelt was a genius and, next to Stalin, the greatest benefactor the people had ever known.
Now lend-lease was not enough, conscription was not enough, war production was not enough, the destroyer-bases exchange was not enough! Prepared or not, the United States must immediately declare war on Germany. Thus their only difference with Roosevelt was that, he did not move fast enough – he still hesitated.
When Pearl Harbor took place, everything was just fine. America was now involved in the war. And this time, the American Stalinists really went to town.
They belabored the workers for not sacrificing enough. No hours were long enough to work. Wages must be forgotten about during the war. Suppose the capitalists were making the biggest profits in history out of the war and off the backs of the workers. That was all right, too. As a matter of fact, American labor should readopt the speed-up, incentive pay, rotten working conditions, arid permit big business to destroy all the gains of the union movement after years of fierce arid bloody struggle.
From the time that Russia got into the war until the present the Communist Party has become progressively more reactionary and more dangerous to the masses in this country. Its newly-acquired friendship for Roosevelt arid American big business may become embarrassing to the representatives of American big capitalism, but it is downright dangerous to American labor. BECAUSE THE AMERICAN COMMUNISTS ARE INSIDE OF THE LABOR MOVEMENT, THEY ARE THE MOST DANGEROUS ENEMIES OF THE AMERICAN WORKERS, READY TO SELL THEM DOWN THE RIVER WITHOUT BLINKING AN EYE.
 
CP Anti-Labor Policies
They defend the infamous War Labor Board and the Little Steel formula at a time when the whole official labor movement is out for its scalp.
They are the most adamant supporters of the President’s so-called seven-point stabilization program, when everyone now recognizes that it is really only a one-point program in which wages alone are stabilized.
They oppose any activity of the trade union movement which would lead to an improvement of the conditions of the workers, especially where these activities relate to wages.
They opposed the miners’ fights for an improvement of their conditions.
They opposed the railroad unions’ fight for a similar improvement of the conditions of railroad workers.
They fought against a progressive program in the automobile workers’ union, as well as in the CIO and the AFL.
They have attempted to force the CIO to endorse a fourth term for Roosevelt at a time when some leaders and many workers are thoroughly disgusted with him.
In a word, they have championed policies in the interest of Stalin which can bring nothing but harm to the overwhelming majority of the workers in this country.
All of these changes have taken place overnight, without explanation on the part of the Stalinist leaders, although the explanation is clear: If it suits Stalin, we must carry it through.
 
The Latest Changes
Only in the last few months new changes have taken place with great rapidity. To improve relations with his Allies, Stalin made the formal gesture of dissolving the Communist International. This does not mean that Stalin’s international GPU will cease to function. On the contrary!
This announcement of the formal dissolution of the Comintern was followed by another declaring that The International, the song of world labor, was no longer the official song of Russia. That decision has already been accepted by what is left of the Communist International outside of Russia.
And the most recent action was the announcement by Browder that the National Committee of his party had decided unanimously to dissolve the party into a “Communist Political Association” in the name of national unity. From now on the American Stalinists will operate in the existing political parties.
With great rapidity Browder has announced his support of capitalism, the two-party system, monopolies and cartels, a new world imperialism to be carried out jointly by the United States, Russia and England. His attacks are all levelled against the true socialists, the militants in the union movement, lukewarm, lip-service socialists, and even the poor liberals.
Browder denounces them for their criticisms of capitalism. Yet what is wrong with the liberals is not their criticisms of capitalism but their inability to understand that all the ills affecting the people are due to capitalism. Thus they hope to make a better world out of a system which cannot be reformed.
The liberals are not wrong in describing what is ugly, brutal and mischievous under capitalism. They are not wrong in describing the terrible exploitation which exists, the poverty, unemployment and war which occur with regularity under imperialism. They are wrong in not understanding that the only way to get rid of these things is by abolishing capitalism and replacing it with socialism.
When Browder says that imperialism and monopoly are natural under capitalism, he is right. But that does not mean that they have to be accepted. They are natural and good for the capitalists; they are bad for the people. A struggle against imperialism and monopoly is a fight in the interests of the masses of people. There’s the difference!
We have seen an organization which was once socialist change into an organization which is now anti-socialist, anti-working class, anti-labor. Workers, beware of the Communist Party! It can only betray you! Unionists, beware of the representatives of the Communist Party and their fellow travelers! They can, only ruin your splendid organizations, these new friends of the National Association of Manufacturers!
 



With an air of apparent impartiality, the President has established a Cost-of-Living Committee to investigate the exact state of affairs on the home front as it affected the overwhelming majority of the people, This investigation of the cost of living came after clamors by the labor movement to change the Little Steel formula and to establish a measuring stick for wages which would truly conform to the rising living costs.
Since then several reports were made public. The Bureau of Labor Statistics, a government body, estimated the rise in the cost of living at 23.4 per cent and then declared that wage increases granted more than matched this rise. Then retired self-satisfied.
This report by the Bureau of Labor Statistics was immediately challenged by the labor members of the President’s committee. They declared that the cost of living had actually risen by 43.5 per cent and that the wage increases granted to workers did not conform to this stupendous rise. Moreover, millions of workers received wage increases not comparable even to the. low figure of 23.4 per cent, while other millions have received no increases since the war began.
The labor members of the committee pointed out that the BLS figures overlooked some extremely important factors. Among these were that the overwhelming majority of the workers expended their wages on those items whose increases were the highest, as, for example, food and clothing.
The most interesting aspect of this dispute is that the index on the cost of living for farmers issued by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics shows the cost of living at 42.6 per cent, a figure almost identical to that issued by the labor members of the President’s body.
 
Enter the Professor
Now comes a professor, one Dr. Willford I. King of New York University, a man who usually produces “economic analyses” for business organizations, to refute the contentions of the labor movement. This august gentleman has just prepared a report for the National Industrial Conference Board which says that the rise in the cost of living has been only 20.8 per cent.
What’s wrong with the figures of the labor members of the President’s committee? According to the professor, who works for big business organizations, it seems to have “the earmarks of rather an argumentative brief than a scholarly scientific document.” “Scholarly!” “Scientific!” These are mighty impressive sounding words, and authoritative to boot. But let us see what is actually involved.
The labor movement contends that the “official” statistics do not take into consideration important items that do not appear in “scientific analyses” but which are nevertheless real to the workers of the country. Among the things which go to make up the real level of living costs for the people are: the black market, which gouges the poor; deterioration in the quality of goods sold the people by profiteering manufacturers; moving expenditures for war workers; higher prices in war production centers; dual residence and increased taxation on those least able to pay. These things must be added to the actual rise in living costs over current wages.
Do these things go to make up the cost of living? Obviously they do. But the genial professor denies it. They are not scientific because they do not necessarily show that prices have risen.
The black market? Piffle, says the professor, it really doesn’t amount to much. Then he goes on to blame the workers for trading on the black market, when in reality the existence of the black markets can be placed directly upon the inefficiency and inability of government agencies to stop them, and the refusal of “honest” business enterprises to abstain from trading goods in such a profitable way. The workers are really at the mercy of the black market, which has many ramifications.
 
Disposed of with Sweep of Pen
How is it possible to exclude the existence of the black market from the rise of living costs which the workers actually meet? Only with the sweep of an opinionated pen of a university professor whose problem of existence is relatively simple!
Take the deterioration in the quality of goods. The fact is that prices for clothing have risen tremendously. But more important, the poor quality clothing for which the same prices are changed as for previously higher quality goods – and higher prices for the quickly-deteriorating clothing – may not show up so high in “statistics,” but to the masses of people paying for them, this is a real rise in the cost of living. Is this scientific? Maybe it isn’t to the professor, but it is a fact, and that makes it scientific enough.
What about the higher cost of living in war centers? This isn’t recorded in the Bureau of Labor Statistics, nor in the figures of the big business organizations, who take averages for the whole country, rich and poor alike, cities and rich suburbs alike. But it is an uncontroverted fact that the cost of living is higher in places like Detroit, Akron, Chicago, St. Louis, etc., than it is in other places in the country. Is this real or not? Well, just ask any worker living in war production centers!
What about expenditures in moving and the maintenance of dual residences? Have the workers voluntarily done these things, moved and maintained double homes? Obviously not! They have been compelled to do these things by the conditions created by the war. Are these expenditures real or not? Of course, they are, and no professor, working for big business, can gainsay them. Do they enter into the living costs of the workers? How can anyone deny it, you ask? Well, big business can. Its hired propagandists can. The Bureau pf Labor Statistics can. And the War Labor Board, acting under the instructions of the President and his War Stabilization Board, does!
We could go on at great length to show that actuary the figures issued by the BLS and the business organizations are played with-and interpreted to suit the purposes of these bodies. They in no way actually interpret the real cost of living.
The labor movement, however, has taken into account what the masses of people actually spend in order to live. The CIO and AFL have shown that one-third of the working people have not received a raise since the war began – that one-third of the nation lives on substandard wages – that the War has increased the living costs of the workers in a real and substantial way over and above any wage increases granted. The tangible factors cited by the labor movement are real. Their figures are really scientific.
The figures of the so-called “experts” are pseudo-scientific since they are colored to sustain the viewpoint of all the forces fighting the wage demands of the great mass of workers in the country.
 



This week saw the struggle of hundreds of thousands of railroad and steel workers for wage increases reach a climax.
On Monday, December 27, more than 150,000 steel workers went out on strike with the slogan: “No contract – no work.” Following the brilliant lead given them by the coal miners, the steel workers declared they would not trespass on the companies’ properties.
Up until all of the railway unions accepted President Roosevelt’s proposal that he act as final arbitrator in the railway wage dispute, all the operating and non-operating unions had voted to strike on December 30.
In the case of the steel workers, the men walked out when the WLB backed up the steel owners with a refusal to okay retroactive pay for any contract signed. Roosevelt intervened with a promise that any contract signed between the owners and workers would be retroactive.
Thus we have still another case of Administration run-around, sidestepping and overruling that has been characteristic of its intervention in labor-management disputes and collective bargaining.
With a promise of retroactive pay, the steel workers have gone back to work. But this concession which they obtained from the President would never have been obtained had the steel workers sat back to await a grant from any conceivable quarter.
In the case of the railway workers, the President has virtually promised wage increases, compensation for overtime work for which these workers have not hitherto been paid, and other demands made by unions, if they accepted his arbitration.
Thus after almost two years of negotiations and buck-passing, the railroad workers took the only action possible for labor to win even the slightest demands.
Many of the reactionary papers are absolutely right when they point out that the steps taken by the railway and steel workers might not have been taken were it not for the fight which the coal diggers of America waged for their most elementary rights. While the miners did not win all that they asked for, they showed that it was possible to win by united and militant efforts.
 
The Campaign of Business
The yellow press as usual has carried on its lynch agitation against the workers. They have hidden behind the screen of the war and patriotism to denounce the workers. But, as usual, what really lies behind this campaign against American labor is a defense of the profit interests of big business.
This campaign against the workers of the nation is inseparable from the campaign against the renegotiation law which takes back some of the war profits of big business (and much too little at that when it is remembered that profits continue at the highest rate in history). This anti-labor campaign, too, is inseparable from the campaign of the National Association of Manufacturers to bust the union movement in this country and to make the workers bear an even greater burden in the war.
 
Labor’s Share
But behind this whole strike situation is the fact that the no-strike pledge given by the labor officialdom without the consent of the great rank and file, was based upon the Administration promise that prices would be kept down, rationing would equalize distribution of goods, and no black markets would operate in the country.
Exactly the opposite has happened! There have been sharp price increases; there has been no equity of rationing, and black markets have mushroomed all over the country. The cost of living has risen steadily.
But wages have been stabilized and frozen. Labor has in large measure been frozen. Withholding taxes on top of hidden taxes have played havoc with the wages of the workers. The higher paid workers have had their real wages lowered. The lower paid workers have had their real wages reduced even further.
Who is at fault for this situation? First and foremost, the profit system under which we live, where everything is carried on for the private profit of a minority class of industrial overlords of business.
 
Big Business’s Share
Big business is producing for the War – that is to say, it is willing to operate its factories and “let” the workers toil – only on the condition that its profits are guaranteed.
The big industrialists have had new factories built for them. They have received all the materials necessary to operate their plants. They have received the government orders and money with which to proceed.
On top of all that, they have cost-plus contracts and where such contracts do not exist, they are guaranteed, a very substantial profit. This is revealed in the fact that, despite the highest corporation taxes in history, big business will get more than eight BILLION dollars of profit in 1943. Their “reserves” run into tens of billions of dollars.
And yet they have organized their forces throughout the land, their newspapers, their hired radio commentators, their congressmen and senators to fight any concessions to the workers and resist their legitimate demands.
In this situation, the Administration, seeking to satisfy the class interests it represents and at the same time placate labor by a few concessions, has made the situation worse.
 
The Little Steel Formula
The WLB has been a veritable bull in a china shop. It has contradicted itself endlessly. First it demands adherence to the rotten Little Steel formula. Next it announces that the formula is dead. Again it declares that the formula has been unfair to labor because it has resulted in laying the whole burden of the war economy on the shoulders of the workers. And finally it resolves to retain in full force and effect the same formula!
Stabilization Director Byrnes and his deputy, Mr. Vinson, have only muddied up the waters on their own. Vinson has rejected proposals for wage increases in the railway dispute agreed to by the unions and operators and recommended by a special panel. He was supported by his superior.
The Stalinist Daily Worker rushed into print to denounce the congressional reactionaries and to praise Philip Murray, saying that the steel workers’ strike is not like the coal miners’ strike and that the head of the Steel Workers Union is not a John L. Lewis. To be sure!
But did not the same situation prevail in the case of the coal miners? Weren’t the coal miners given the worst run-around in American labor history? Would the miners have obtained even what they did without resorting to their militant struggle for their rights?
The yellow Daily Worker and the liberal press point an accusing finger at only one group responsible in Washington, the congressional anti-labor bloc. But it would take all ten fingers to point to the anti-labor forces in Washington.
Read the charges of the railway unions against the Administration! And you will find that the anti-labor actions in Washington range from Congress to the Administration and its many bureaus and agencies which trip over each other.
The demand of the Stalinist Communist Party that the Little Steel formula be retained but that it be brought into balance with the stabilization program and the cost of living is a fraud. The only thing that can be done with the Little Steel formula is to throw it out of the window. It has served its only real purpose: to keep labor’s wages depressed!
It is impossible to create any balance with it. It is necessary to discard the formula. There can be only one measure bearing, any equity for the workers: An equal increase, in wages for every increase in the cost of living.
 
What Labor Must Do
The reactionaries and their press have used this fight by the railroad and steel workers to carry on an anti-labor campaign among the service men. The labor movement must take note of this campaign to tell the truth to its brothers in uniform!
What is the truth? The truth is that labor bears the main brunt of the war. Labor suffers from high prices, poor quality of goods, inequity in rationing, the vultures of the black market, high taxes, long hours of gruelling work. The right of the workers for better wages will not and cannot enrich them. It can only make their lives more bearable.
On the other side of the ledger we have big business getting rich out of the war. There you will find the real culprits. There you will find the profiteers in war goods and food and clothing and rents. There you will find cost-plus contracts and guaranteed profits.
Thus when big business strikes for its profits, that is called legitimately demanding “an incentive to produce.” When labor strikes for the right to live, that is called a strike against the war effort.
Senator David Walsh only last week stated that when the soldiers come back and find out about the “unconscionable profits” made by big business, they will have their say about this situation.
The railway labor unions have said as much and more. But it is necessary for the whole labor movement to get up on its powerful legs and tell the truth to the whole country, to every segment of the population: Labor is getting the heavy end of the load; big business is getting its greatest profits in history!
This is the real background to the labor dispute!
 



The month of September marks the end of the fifth year of the war and the beginning of the sixth. Already the Second World War has outlasted the first by a year and while the signs indicate the end of the road for Germany in Europe, there is still a great war taking place in the Pacific which is destined to last for some time after the European phase is over.
What the war has meant in terms of the slaughter of human beings, of military personnel and civilians, in the destruction of property and wealth and in the dislocation of the lives of tens of millions of peoples, is impossible to tell now.
Science is organized and chained to the war machine, with the result that the most devastating weapons of destruction are devised to slaughter human beings. The good that science can do to elevate the living standards of a whole world is subjected to the control of the profit-greedy capitalist classes of the great powers.
Gigantic weapons of destruction are not the sole invention or property of the Germans; they are part of the war machinery of all countries. They reveal how capitalism devours the people during war just as it devours them in peacetime through unemployment, low wages, poverty, starvation and and exceedingly low standard of living. Millions die a slow death in peacetime as a result of this system. Millions die quickly in wartime from more direct means. But the net result is the same.
At the beginning of the war, the people were told that this time, for sure, it was to be the last war. Yes, said the statesmen, the same thing was said in 1914, but this time we really mean it. If we can lick Hitler, Mussolini and the Emperor of Japan, we will be in a position to have a lasting peace.
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill have had many conferences. They announced that the Allies were really fighting a war for “Four Freedoms.” The Atlantic Charter was going to prevent war in the future because it would guarantee the rights of all countries to freedom and all people to a livelihood, to real honest-to-goodness free speech, free press, national independence, etc., etc.
But that was in the beginning. There isn’t much reference to the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms today, when it is clear that the Allies are fighting a victorious war.
No, war is going to be permanently avoided. We shall, say the spokesmen of Allied imperialism, try to prevent war for at least the next generation. Now all discussions center around peace plans! And what peace plans!
Naturally the main problem is Germany. What shall be done about this country? Here Allied policy reveals that it has learned nothing from the war, but that its approach to the whole question is one of revenge. Revenge against whom? The fascists of Germany? Yes. And the German people, the millions of German workers? Them, too! But not the German capitalists, the real rulers of the country.
The pack is led by Stalin, who helped betray the German workers and paved the way for Hitler’s rise to power. The ruling classes of America and Great Britain are right along side of him. They plan to divide up the great German nation, to prepare a peace that will make the infamous framers of the Versailles Treaty appear as Good Samaritans.
Will this guarantee a future peace? Is it helping now to cut the ground from under Hitler at home? No, it is doing everything to keep the German people welded to a regime which it hates, because it fears just as much the prospects of Allied and Russian occupation.
Can the Allies keep a nation of sixty to eighty millions split up into fragments? Won’t it awaken the strongest feelings for national unity and independence? Of course, it will. But the Allied policy is one calculated to take revenge on a people who had the fascist regime foisted upon them from above, from the very classes which rule in England and America, the capitalists.
The capitalists of Germany, the financiers and industrialists, paid for Hitler, arranged for him to become Chancellor and helped the victory of his party which never had won a majority support in the country and which at all times had the whole German working class against him.
But Hitler was hailed by the capitalists all over the world, because he showed the way to defeat the labor movement, the workers’ political parties, and saved the profit system in Germany.
Great Britain, the United States, with Stalin’s complete support, are determined to prevent any social change in Europe. They have declared that they will seek to prevent any overthrow of the present industrial and financial classes of Germany. In other words, they will do everything in their power again to prevent the German masses, the workers and the poor peasants from asserting their will in establishing a true government of the people, a workers’ government, of genuine peace, freedom and security.
This was the policy pursued in Italy, where the action of the workers was a direct factor in aiding the overthrow of Mussolini. Once Mussolini fled, Allied policy in Italy made use of the despicable monarchy and its fascist and semi-fascist henchmen. There, too, the main Allied policy was to prevent the rise of the militant labor movement and the workers from taking power. Instead, all the remnants of the old liberals, who didn’t know how to fight fascism when it arose, and those who were living “quiet” lives under Mussolini, were resurrected to rule Italy.
France, too, saw a movement of the people in the underground which participated actively in the war against the German oppressors. The partial liberation of Paris by the organized Parisian underground was an example of the heroism, organization, devotion and skill of the most advanced section of the French working class. In France, as elsewhere, the Allies are determined that these movements shall not get out of hand, shall not bring about any social change benefiting the people.
The advance into Rumania, this time by the forces of the Red Army, disclosed that Stalin pursues the same policy as the Western capitalist powers. No social changes, no interference with the barbaric regime of King Michael, who silently permitted the slaughter of workers, Jews and peasants – all in the interests of the Rumanian landlords and profiteers. It has been reported that the Red Army, in those areas of Rumania which they conquered, refused to interfere in the rule of the existing government, even to the extent that anti-Semitic laws were permitted to remain.
The Allied imperialists are desperately afraid of the intervention of the people, of the workers’ rebellion, of the socialist revolution which would uproot the profit system and establish a system of production for use, for the improvement of the lives of the people; a system which would guarantee peace by eliminating the competitive struggle for markets and raw materials, for profit; a system in which genuine equality would replace the inequalities of capitalism with its unemployment, its poverty, its murderous, futile and endless wars.
And what will have been achieved after such a victory, after the great slaughter? The re-establishment of conditions which can only lead to the outbreak of a Third World War, for which all the powers are now preparing even before this one is over.
One can see that there is no real hope for future peace except through the abolition of capitalism which is the evil breeder of fascism, miltarism and war. The sole hope for humanity, the hope of civilization, lies in the establishment of a socialist society of production for use, of genuine freedom and equality. Socialism alone can prevent a Third World Slaughter.
 



The news from France is still too sparse and inconclusive to offer any definite picture of what is actually happening in the country. But several important facts are clear and well known. France is sharply divided between the de Gaullist forces organized outside of the country, the French underground and its armed detachments in the French Forces of the Interior, and the former collaborationist elements. These divisions, however, are not merely national divisions over matters of policy pursued prior to the Allied invasion of France and the subsequent expulsion of the Germans. They not only reflect the deep desires of the French people for their national independence from a foreign oppressor, an oppressor which united the French masses in a common struggle, but they also reflect the sharp struggles between the classes in France.
Behind the fact that the masses never ceased to fight against German occupation and French collaborationists is the additional fact that they were fighting against the “old order of things.” With good instincts, the French people, especially the French working class, recognized that the defeat of France was to be placed where the real blame lay: on the French ruling class, the financiers and industrialists who preferred Hitler to the rule of the French working class and peasantry.
The French people knew that their capitalist class played ball with Hitler before the defeat, as well as after, rejoicing in the fact that the defeat and occupation of the country by the fascist scum temporarily destroyed the French labor movement, the trade unions and the political organizations of the working class.
Not only that, the French workers today do not want a return to the conditions that existed before the war. They may not know exactly what they want in the same sense as class-conscious socialists who seek the abolition of capitalism and the establishment of a system of production for use. But they do know that they will not accept a return to the long working day, the miserable working conditions that prevailed in the country, the years of unemployment, poverty and war.
They saw some of their bosses run to all four corners of the earth when the Germans came. They know that the big business men who remained in the country when the Germans came, collaborated with the Nazis against the French people, thus insuring for themselves continued operation of their factories – and profits.
 
Preserving “Order”
Therefore when the capitalist press talks about preserving “order” in France, they mean to keep the French workers from asserting their desires and demands. The Allies have made it plain to de Gaulle that he will receive their support only to the extent that he maintains this order and keeps the working class in check.
In check? What does that mean? It means to keep the workers from taking the factories, from asserting their full democratic rights. It means liquidating the Forces of the Interior, who fought so valiantly against the Nazis and who threaten to fight valiantly in behalf of the French masses.
We are now told that the FFI has weapons, that is composed of young, heroic men who know that they were the ones who stayed at home, braved the occupation of the Germans and never ceased the struggle for freedom. For this, the underground and the FFI demand priority in all considerations and deliberations concerning France, and demand that the “exiles” take second place. They don’t want the ruling class element who ran France into the ground to return and pick up where they left off. They want a say in the affairs of the nation, they want to direct them, and no one has a better right to this than the workers of the country.
 
The New Struggle Begins
But already the struggle inside the country is beginning. The press reports that the workers have seized plants when owners and directors fled as the Allied armies and the FFI made their appearance. In some instances there is no ruling force except the workers, and they have taken charge of the factories. This is exactly what the Workers Party predicted would happen. Allied policy is to prevent any social change which would leave the economy in the hands of labor. They want to insure ownership and control of the economy to the French capitalist class.
The French working class, however, is demanding guarantees of work, decent conditions, advanced social legislation, placing economic burdens on the backs of the French ruling class and the right to determine the economic life of the country.
Where will this conflict end? It is difficult to say now. We are only at the beginning of a great new struggle for freedom. The French workers are still in a state of disorganization. Those parties which do exist, like the French Socialist Party and the Communist Party, offer no hope to the French masses. On the contrary, they are preparing now to hand the workers over to the mercy of the old system and the old rulers. Their policies in France are the same as in other countries: work with the capitalist class, establish “law and order” and return to the good old days when they were “loyal oppositions” fighting for a few crumbs for the workers.
But they will not be able to halt the struggle of the masses for a fundamental change in the social order so as to guarantee them security, peace and freedom. Up to now there is no evidence whatever that these three desires and necessities of the French people can or will be realized under Allied rule, a de Gaullist government or from the existing reformist Socialist Party, or the Russian-controlled Communist Party. They all stand for capitalism and the old system.
What is needed in France is a new organization, a revolutionary socialist party which will carry forward the struggle for real freedom, real security, real peace through workers’ rule and the construction of a socialist economy of equality. This struggle will go on as surely as the world turns. The real hope of France, as of all of Europe, lies only in this direction.
 



Several weeks age Labor Action carried a story from its Buffalo correspondent reporting the action of the local CIO Council in attacking Labor Action by resolution and requesting the FBI to investigate its policies and financial backing.
The scabby Daily Worker, official mouthpiece of the American Communist Party, now masquerading as the Communist Political Association, reported the passage of such a resolution on June 24. Accordingly, Labor Action officially communicated with the Buffalo CIO Council and requested two things: (1) To verify or deny these reports and (2) to send Labor Action a copy of the resolution if such a resolution was passed.
It is now more than three weeks since that letter was sent and no reply has yet been received from the Buffalo CIO Council, a fact in itself extremely suspicious. We have no doubt about the action which was reported to us; we merely wanted confirmation from the Council itself. It is a sad commentary, however, that a body, having passed a resolution of condemnation, fails to notify the person or paper which it condemns.
What motivated the passing of the resolution condemning Labor Action and who are the forces behind it? The answer to these questions will reveal the interesting fact that the inspirers of such an action and those completely concerned with it are the Communists, the American agents of Joe Stalin. The man who pushed the resolution through is Manny Fried, regional director of the United Electrical, Radio & Machine, Workers Union, completely dominated and bureaucratically controlled by the Stalinists, a union in which all discredited Communists who got dumped from posts in other unions, get their labor-skate jobs.
We do not know the details of the action of the Council, but the pattern is not difficult to trace. The Communists inspired the resolution against Labor Action and pushed it through the Council. It is quite evident that the other Council members who are not Communists and have nothing in common with their view were imposed upon and convinced to vote by a series of lies and cheap red-baiting engaged in by the Stalinists. If these non-Communists knew what Labor Action was, knew its program, knew its record, they would not have voted for such a resolution, whose origin is in the headquarters of the Communist Party.
Labor Action is not an underground paper. It is published openly and speaks its mind freely. It has a program which appears in its columns. Its source of support, is also no secret. It comes from workers who agree with the paper and support it, as is the case with so many other labor and working class political papers. The fact that the resolution asks the FBI to probe into the politics and financial backing of the paper is the least of our worries.
But what is this all about, then? The answer is clear. Labor Action is a militant, working class, political, socialist paper. It is anti-capitalist. As an anti-capitalist paper it is the most consistent and persistent opponent of fascism. It was opposed to fascism when it first raised its head; it opposed Hitler when the Communists were locked arm in arm with him; it is against fascism now, whether abroad or at home.
As a socialist paper, Labor Action stands for a change in the social order. We are opposed to this system of exploitation, of production for profit. We are against a system of unemployment and poverty for the millions and riches for a handful of capitalists. We are for socialism, a system of production for use, in which the means of life, production, and distribution are not monopolized by a handful of capitalists for their own enrichment.
Our views on the war are clear, too. We do not believe this is a war for freedom, permanent peace and democracy and security, for the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms. We do not believe that this is a war against fascism as a political system, but between rival powers. It is a war between different capitalist countries, all of them fighting over territory, markets, raw materials, etc. There is no guarantee that out of this war fascism will cease to exist. Only the workers can destroy that vicious political regime of capitalism which comes into power with the aid of big business!
For the Workers at Home
At home we fight against placing the burdens of the war on the backs of the workers. That is why we have opposed the wage freeze, the breakdown of union controls, and the collective bargaining system, deterioration of working conditions, destruction of union standards. All of these have resulted from an offensive by the monopoly , capitalist industries, the big trusts. Labor’s hands are tied
by the no-strike pledge and we have fought against it. The no-strike pledge is crippling the union movement and making it an easy prey of the bosses’ drive against unionism. For these things and many others, the American Communists have organized a nation-wide campaign against Labor Action.
The reason for this is clear enough. Labor Action’s program is popular among the thousands of workers who read it. We are not alone in our program. Thousands of union militants agree with us. They too are against the no-strike pledge; they too ate against the wage freeze; they too are for strengthening union conditions and union controls in the shops. They fight with us for higher wages NOW, in the midst of the war, when big business is profiteering from their labor and production!
But that isn’t all. Labor Action says that the workers must be organized independently on the political field as well. Labor Action says that the workers have been sold down the river too many times by the boss political parties, the Republicans and Democrats. Labor Action says that w,hat the workers in this country need is a party of their own, AN INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY! And many thousands of workers agree with us.
Labor Action supports those workers who go out on strike to fight for their very lives, their standard of living, their families. We understand that the fight the workers now make is most important for the future. It is a fight against the dreary prospects of the post-war period. Any fight the workers engage in now is a fight to maintain the standard of living of the workers in the coming days. It is also a fight for the soldier who is coming hack. Labor Action does not want these soldiers to come back to unemployment, low wages, long hours and poor working conditions. The only thing that can guarantee the soldiers a more decent standard of living is the union movement, but a union movement that defends its gains and fights for its life, a militant and powerful union movement.
 
American Communist Policy
For these and many other reasons the reactionaries hate us, the bosses hate us, misleaders of labor hate us, and, of course, the American Communists hate us. But there is an even more pressing reason so far as the Stalinists are concerned. As agents of Stalin they are interested in only one thing: to support Russia, defend its policies and make a general nuisance of themselves in the American labor movement, to confuse the workers and sell them down the river.
They support a bureaucratic regime that lives off the backs of the workers in Russia. We tell the truth about that regime and fight for the freedom of the Russian workers. They don’t like that.
They helped put Hitler in power in Germany! We told the truth about that.
They made a pact with Hitler in 1939, which opened up the Second World War. We told the truth about that and they didn’t like that, either.
They denounced Roosevelt as a fascist, then hailed him as a democrat, then denounced him as a warmonger and then again hailed him as a liberator. All of this followed the line of Russian diplomacy and Russian Interests.
They defended Germany, Italy and Japan before the United States got into the war and said the war was imperialist. They denounced Great Britain and the United States, Churchill and Roosevelt as warmongers before Hitler attacked Russia. They said Germany was innocently attacked by the Allies! They lied about the war then; they lie about it now. And we told the truth about them.
But most important of all, since Stalin has become an ally of Roosevelt and Churchill they have switched their line again. From their slogan, “The Yanks Are Not Coming,” there are now not enough Yanks to go! From their opposition to war production, now there can never be enough war production. On the home front they fight every attempt of the workers to improve their living standards and their working conditions.
 
New Friends of Big Business
The American Communists are now the advocates of “free enterprise,” that system which brings so much misery to the workers and their families. They defend the profit system and hail the achievement of the blood-thirsty monopolies that gouge the people. The American Communists are now the chief advocates of policies which cannot but lead to the destruction of the labor movement. Bridges, their mouthpiece in the CIO, is the open advocate of a no-strike policy even after the war. What they want to do is effectively hogtie the labor movement and make way for its destruction.
The American Communists act as the office boys for big business in this country. Browder has become the great friend of the National Association of Manufacturers and the United States Chamber of Commerce.
Because Labor Action has effectively exposed their role, because Labor Action wages an incessant struggle in defense of the best interests of the labor movement, the Communists inside of the union movement have been organizing a nation-wide attack against it, as well as the Workers Party, whose views it represents.
But they won’t get away with it. The workers will see through this bosses’ scheme. They are quickly recognizing where these brethren stand.
Our only advice to the unionists who supported the Buffalo CIO Council action is to get a copy of Labor Action, read it, study its program and you will find more than ample reason to reverse your decision. You cannot but find our program an excellent fighting weapon in the interests of the whole labor movement. And you will then come to understand why we say that the Communists are the greatest enemies inside of the union organizations, calculated to do the greatest harm to the workers in this country.
 



What invests the present stage of bourgeois society with revolutionary class perspectives? The extreme nature of the world capitalist crisis. In a direct way, rather than a solely historical one, the present imperialist war is a continuation of the last war. It marked the second attempt within twenty-five years on the part of German imperialism, with a fascist political regime, to overthrow the imperialist relationship on the world market, to bring about a new redivision of the earth (this relates not merely to the colonial world, but to large areas economically and politically contiguous to and integrated with western capitalist civilization). Naturally, this effort on the part of German imperialism led to a collision with those imperialist nations which had already brought about an early division of the world and had only increased their holdings following the defeat of Germany in 1918.
The resort to war by one power to achieve, in the realm of economics, a “more equitable” or predominating share of the world’s riches in the form of land, labor power, markets and raw materials, is not only a reflection of uneven and unequal capitalist development but, in the present case, even more than in the First World War, demonstrates the inability of world capitalism to survive on the basis of equality of nations. On the contrary, the most compelling fact in this war is that contraction of the market makes it impossible for any group of nations to share “equitably” the riches of the earth based on capitalist exploitation.
In the absence of a decisive social change from capitalism to socialism there remains only one major perspective for modern imperialist-capitalism: the triumph of one power over the rest of the world and the consequent exploitation of the rest of the world by that single power. The exploitation of the rest of the world by such a single power can, in turn, take place only on the basis of a tremendous lowering of the shares of opponent nations, accompanied by a declining standard of living in the whole world with the possible exception of the single victorious capitalist power.
With the war drawing to a close in Europe and all the dreams of a new German world empire shattered by the colossal arms of the Allies, there is also revealed that the struggle between the Allies and the Axis was merely one manifestation of the inter-imperialist conflicts which exist between all the powers, between England and the United States as the most important example. Even before the war has reached a conclusion on the European front there is expressed, in many ways, the extremely sharp economic and political contest taking place between the latter countries.
It will not be possible for the United States to share its new world power “equally”; it must dominate the world alone, distributing minor snares to its allies. For America itself faces a doubtful post-war future unless it achieves complete world hegemony. Expansion of industry in the midst of a declining world market merely emphasizes the need for American finance capital to gather within its embrace the important economic areas of the world and to share others with competing powers, the latter on ever-diminishing rations. A victory for the United States, it has become quite clear, means a reduction of the “riches” of the overwhelming majority of her allies; it means economic devastation of Germany and Japan.
 
Prospects of Intense Class Struggles
The consequences of such a situation, given the continued existence of capitalism, will be reflected in heightened class activity in Europe, the most important laboratory of the class struggle. Europe never recovered from the First World War. Stagnation was apparent in all countries. Deep crisis was followed by relative stabilization (the result of the absence of a victorious revolution in the West), but even this partial stabilization took place on a lower economic plane. The overwhelming majority of the European people lived on a lowered standard of living. Mass unemployment became a permanent feature of economic life; poverty was widespread.
As a result of the present war, the Continent will be an even more devastated area: millions of dead, more millions crippled, a starved population, a new generation growing up on a starvation diet. But above all, the war will find the Continent without a single important an all-embracing economic problem, of acute importance to the continued life of the masses, capable of radical solution on the basis of capitalist class relations, private property and production for profit. Mass unemployment on an even larger scale than in the last post-war is more than likely, with any prospect of its solution made a hundred times more difficult precisely because of the narrowing character of bourgeois economy, the impossibility for each of the industrial countries on the Continent to experience a period of industrial expansion, the destruction of the industrial might of Germany, a key to European industrial prosperity, and the chaotic condition, in general, of European economy.
The needs of the masses will be all the greater, just because the capitalist order will find it more than ever before difficult to solve even small problems. For example, the early months of a post-war period in Europe may find the masses acutely concerned with the problems of national independence and simple democratic rights. But even the achievement of quasi-independence and bourgeois democracy, which is necessary and important for the masses, for their class development, will not satisfy a hungry and unemployed Continent. The masses will know how to equate the two and the objective conditions of a declining capitalism. A European capitalism exploited by Washington will drive the masses to seek a radical solution of its impossible economic and political existence.
Whatever the nature of the military victory in Europe, it is easy to see that the post-war period in Europe will approximate the 1918–19–20 post-war period of the First World War. We can say with certainty then that the post-war period will see no end of revolutionary situations and revolutionary upheavals in which the masses will seek in their own way and by their own methods to resolve the capitalist crisis. We will undoubtedly witness many efforts on the part of the European proletariat to take power, on a national or provincial basis. There will undoubtedly be many examples of a dual power: the reestablishment of the bourgeois democratic regimes in some occupied countries and the concomitant rise of workers’ committees, factory committees, on a broad scale, embracing large areas of given countries and millions of workers and peasants. All of this merely attests to the revolutionary character of the epoch in which we live. For the revolutionary Marxist, however, the acceptance of this objective development in Europe is not enough, for the objective developments in bourgeois society is only half the question, and not, under the circumstances, the most important half.
More important than the specific conjecture is the state of the proletarian movement, its organization, its program, its strategy and tactics. In the last analysis, this is the decisive factor. The objective situation may be ever so revolutionary, but so long as the subjective factor, the organization of the proletariat as a class, and not merely economically organized, but the organization of the socialist vanguard and a mass revolutionary socialist movement which has the support of the majority of the proletariat and the whole population, is absent, it is not possible to talk about an impending struggle for socialism, let alone its victory. In my article, Europe and the Revolutionary Party (The New International, July 1944), I tried to indicate what the problem was in general. I propose now to specify what the Leninist position on this question is and why there is no other solution to the problem than the one previously indicated.
 
Previous Post-War Period
The post-war period of the Second World War, while it will objectively approximate that of the First World War, presents an entirely different picture from the point of view of the class organization of the European proletariat. During the last war and in the post-war period, the grave problem of the Marxist movement was primarily the crisis of leadership in the Second International and in the left-wing groups. The task of winning the majority of the people to socialism was always present, but this task existed coincident with an enormous world socialist movement and mass national parties in the important European countries.
The degeneration of the Second International resulted in the development and growth of revolutionary Marxist groups, splits and parties throughout Europe. This meant that there was a continuity in the theory and practice of genuine Marxism. These groups, under the leadership of Lenin, in maintaining the great traditions of the movement, and most important of all, maintaining in every conceivable way the struggle, made possible the instantaneous mobilization of the revolutionary cadres and the revolutionary proletariat into the ranks of the Third International. Moreover, the Russian Revolution was an immense factor for the reorganization of the revolutionary movement. Consequently, the post-war period of 1919–20, irrespective of the fact that the proletariat in many important countries experienced defeat in their efforts to take power, witnessed a genuinely organized and purposeful struggle. The aforementioned defeats resulted, not from the existence of revolutionary parties and organizations, but from their weaknesses, from inexperience, from a lack of sufficient forces and from a failure to win the support of the majority of the people, an essential factor for victory.
Once the immediate post-war offensive of the working class ended, the tasks of the vanguard forces changed. The revolutionary international recognized after the defeats the need for a new policy, succinctly described as “winning the masses.” Here again the change was conscious, adopted by an organized movement to serve a certain end. The whole revolutionary history of the Communist International is concentrated in those years and we shall refer to them elsewhere in this discussion.
 
How the Present Differs
The post-war period of the Second World War in Europe will unfold against the background of a destroyed workers’ movement. Almost twenty years of Stalinism and more than ten years of Hitler have decapitated European labor. The existence of social democracy and Stalinism as organized factors is not something to be cheered. On the contrary, they are militating factors in the struggle to reconstitute the revolutionary movement in Europe. Both are linked to the bourgeoisie; both are active forces in defense of capitalism against the proletariat. There is yet no counteracting force on the Continent of sufficient strength, power or with the necessary foresight to understand what is now the main task in Europe.
There is no revolutionary party in any country in Europe, no substantial Marxist vanguard. This means that there is no force present which can educate the new layers of revolutionists which will undoubtedly arise. This means, too, that the task of clarification and reorganization is made more difficult, especially when it is understood what a welter of lies and miseducation has to be overcome. Even in the ranks of the Fourth Internationalist movement there is great confusion. The Cannonite Socialist Workers Party, for example, gives no consideration whatever to this, the most important question for Europe. It regards the revolutionary process and the struggle for power as something automatic and that is why its analysis of the European situation is so meaningless. It can apply to any period, twenty years ago, today, or twenty years hence. There is no sign whatever in its resolution on the European situation that it understands in the slightest what has happened to the European labor and revolutionary movement. Where there is a glimmer of the problem, it is stated in an offhand manner, as if it were of no importance. And this is of little wonder, for any organization which can regard Stalin’s Red Army as an army of liberation, of socialist liberation at that, can hardly be expected to understand what the tasks in Europe are.
This attitude fortifies the new support given to concepts of spontaneity. The degeneration of the Second and Third Internationals, the weakness of the revolutionary groups, the crying need for a class solution to the capitalist crisis, all tend to strengthen the adherents of the theory of spontaneity in all its variety. Does this mean that the adherents of spontaneity are fully conscious that they espouse such a concept? Not necessarily. They may not even use the word. But the thought is there. They look upon Europe and say: capitalism is bankrupt; there is no solution to the capitalist crisis. Ergo, socialism will replace capitalism. The socialist revolution is the next stage of development in Europe. This is purely syllogistic reasoning. The basis for this attitude lies in an almost mystical certainty of the conscious socialist struggle for power on the part of an unorganized and leaderless working class.
Others understand that the post-war period in Europe will be accompanied by widespread class struggle, accompanied even by attempts to take power, and discuss the difficulties and prospects of that struggle. They speak of the “gestation of the European Revolution.” In a general sense acknowledgment is made of the fact that the party will be necessary for a successful conclusion of that struggle. But even here, where recognition of the problem is present, it is not with a full conviction of what implications are involved.
 
Back to Lenin
I quote again from Lenin’s attack on the Economists. If the quotation does not wholly apply to the present-day believers in spontaneity, it does in part. Moreover, it poses the whole question, in its proper light, of the relationship of the party to the struggle as a whole:
Others, far removed from “gradualness,” began to say: it is possible and necessary to “bring about a political revolution,” but this is no reason whatever for building a strong organization of revolutionaries to train the proletariat in the steadfast and stubborn struggle. All we need do is to snatch up our old friend, the “handy” wooden club. Speaking without metaphor it means – we must organize a general strike, or we must stimulate the “spiritless” progress of the labor movement by means of “excitative terror.” Both these tendencies, the opportunist and the “revolutionary,” bow to the prevailing primitiveness; neither believes that it can be eliminated; neither understands our primary and most imperative practical task, namely, to establish an organization of revolutionaries capable of maintaining the energy, the stability and continuity of the political struggle.
This is for the old days! Let us agree that the struggles of the European working class today will not be merely economic struggles, but also political. Here again the political struggles that are inevitable in Europe are not automatically socialist struggles.
The state of decay of bourgeois society is so deep today, that the slightest economic struggle immediately becomes a political struggle; sharp economic struggles become political struggles of the greatest magnitude. But that is not enough. Again, it is necessary to give these intense political struggles a socialist character. This is what Lenin tried to teach the movement when he wrote:
The demand “to give the economic struggle itself a political < character” most strikingly expresses subservience to spontaneity in the sphere of political activity. Very often the economic struggle spontaneously assumes a political character, that is to say, without the Injection of the “revolutionary bacilli of the intelligentsia,” without the intervention of the class-conscious Social-Democrats. For example, the economic struggle of the British workers assumed a political character without the intervention of the Socialists. The tasks of the Social-Democrats, however, are not exhausted by political agitation in the economic field; their task is to convert trade union politics into the Social-Democratic political struggle, to utilize the flashes of political consciousness which gleam in the minds of the workers during their economic struggles for the purpose of raising them to the level of Social-Democratic political consciousness.
I said in my first article that bourgeois production relations organize the proletariat. This tendency, however, is contradicted first by the anarchy of production and the general anarchy of bourgeois society, and secondly by the severe dislocation of present-day declining capitalism. The only way the proletariat can offset such disintegrating tendencies is by organization. In his One Step Forward, Two Back, Lenin wrote:
The proletariat has no other weapon in the fight for power except organization. Disorganized by the domination of anarchic competition in the capitalist world, oppressed by forced labor for the capitalists, constantly forced “to the depths” of utter poverty, ignorance and degeneracy, the proletariat can become and inevitably will become an indomitable force only because its intellectual unity created by the principles of Marxism is fortified by the material unity of organization which welds millions of toilers into an army of the working class.
In all this discussion I have tried to show that spontaneity of the masses is a fact, to one degree or another. But it is the kind of fact which produces certain demands of the revolutionary party. Lenin did not deny the existence of spontaneity. What he tried to teach the movement was that spontaneity of itself could accomplish little; certainly it could not be the means of taking power. He pointed out, however, that “the spontaneity of the masses demands a mass consciousness from us Social-Democrats. The greater the spontaneous uprising of the masses, the more widespread the movement becomes, so much more rapidly grows the demand for greater consciousness in the theoretical, political and organizational work of the social democracy.”
There is the whole relationship of spontaneity to the existing revolutionary party. The big danger in Europe today is that there will be many spontaneous movements of the workers, rebellions and putschist attempts. But they will all be vanquished in the absence of strong revolutionary parties with correct theory, practice, strategy and tactics. Does this mean that the existence of a revolutionary party is a guarantee against defeat? No, but absence of the revolutionary party is a guarantee of certain defeat. With a party it is possible to win. What has to be overcome in Europe is the enormous gap between the inevitably rising revolutionary spirit of the masses and the absence of revolutionary Marxist organization.
 
The Meaning of “Democratic Interlude”
Let us approach the question from a somewhat different angle. The resolution of the Workers Party on the National Question in Europe described the probable situation after a defeat of Germany in the following way:
This first period after the overthrow of German rule will undoubtedly be the period of “democratic illusions” to one extent or another, in one form or another. This is the clear lesson of the first 1917 revolution in Russia, the revolution in Germany of 1918, the Spanish Revolution of 1931. The power will, so to speak, lie in the streets. The masses will instinctively incline to take hold of it in its own name. Its difficulties will lie in the fact that it is just emerging from a period of non-organization, or only the most fragmentary organization. Organization is precisely what it needs for seizure and holding of power. The reformist and Stalinist organizations will of course not lead the proletariat to class power. In other words, some interval will undoubtedly elapse before a revolutionary party is properly organized and reaches the leadership of the organized proletariat.
What, exactly, does this mean? If it is true that the coming post-war period will witness enormous class battles, if the working class cannot hope to achieve a victory over the bourgeoisie without its organized party, and if it is impossible to build a party under the conditions of bourgeois dictatorship, as has been so abundantly demonstrated in the past twenty-five years, then the prospect of a “democratic interlude” in Europe should not only be recognized on the basis of the specific bourgeois relationship of forces, but ought to be planned for by the revolutionary Marxists, as favorable ground for the re-establishment of the revolutionary party and the revolutionary international.
There is another aspect of this question of democracy which is equally as important as the fact that a “democratic interlude” will offer the opportunity for rebuilding the revolutionary movement. The chaos of bourgeois society has reached such a. depth that democracy has become a luxury for it. The deep economic crisis, the political instability of the ruling classes, the permanence of the world social crisis secures the dictatorial and totalitarian tendencies of capitalism and makes the struggle for democracy an integral struggle for socialism. It is a vehicle by which the present small vanguard forces can build a mass movement. While the struggle for democracy in no way violates socialist principles and the struggle for socialism, it does clash with the most important interests of the bourgeoisie. The lesson in Italy is already clear. The American, British and Italian ruling classes and, of course, the Stalinists are doing everything in their power to prevent the establishment of genuinely democratic conditions in the country for fear of the consequent re-establishment of the workers’ organizations for the free workers’ struggle. Conversely, the main force in the struggle for democracy in Italy is the working class, but this struggle cannot take place without the sharpest collisions with the bourgeoisie.
 
The Need for a “Class Superstructure”
The problem there is how to link this struggle for democracy with the struggle for socialism. The link is the revolutionary organization and, consequently, the great weakness in Italy is the absence of proletarian organization. The weakness stands out because:
... the class struggle of the proletariat demands a concentrated propaganda, throwing light on the various stages of the fight, giving a single point of view, and directing the attention of the proletariat at each given moment to the definite tasks to be accomplished by the whole class. (Second Congress resolution of the CI on The Role of the Party)
Often in referring to the principles and experiences of the old Comintern we lose sight of the fact that its decisions and practices were based upon a given evaluation of bourgeois society and the prior or coincident existence of an organization in Europe, Asia and America, with a definite body of experiences. The old generation of Marxists knew that without a party there was no prospect of a victory of the working class; without a party there was no possibility of winning the masses. To win the masses meant the opportunity for a party to function in the day-to-day activities of the class, to provide leadership, to maintain closest relations with the masses, in order to prove by experience that it deserves the support of the working class. There is no other way to achieve the emancipation of humanity from capitalism.
It is, therefore, the height of sectarianism to discuss the prospects of a victorious struggle for power anywhere and everywhere in the absence of a single Marxist party in the world. It is just as if one would say: the smaller the revolutionary organization, the better the prospects for socialism; or, the total absence of revolutionary parties and class organizations guarantees the victory of socialism. To cite the fact that Soviets, or workers’ councils, arise spontaneously, is beside the point, because history has shown that Soviets may be reactionary, i.e., under the influence and control of the bourgeoisie or their representatives. This was the lesson of the Russian Revolution and explains why the Bolshevik Party did not raise the slogan “All power to the Soviets” until it was certain of a revolutionary majority. Thus Soviets may and have existed without a party, but without a party their potential revolutionary and democratic force is limited or completely blocked. When the German Communist Labor Party (ultra leftists) proposed that, since the Soviets were the historical form of proletarian rule, the party should dissolve itself into them, the Comintern rejected the proposal as “reactionary.” It was reactionary because it sought the liquidation of the only force in bourgeois society that can bring about the preconditions for the development of the social order of socialism.
 
Bridging a Gap
In The Third International After Lenin, Trotsky concerned himself with this very question, because before the complete degeneration of Stalinism had taken place, he had already observed impending the chaos in the developing crisis of leadership. Thus, he wrote:
If contradiction, in general, is the most important mainspring of progress, then the clear understanding of the contradiction between a general revolutionary maturity of the objective situation (despite ebbs and flows) and the immaturity of the international party of the proletariat ought now to constitute the mainspring for the forward movement of the Comintern, at least of its European section. (Page 86.)
There are several points of interest here. First, the main essential question is posed. Secondly, it reveals that even with the existence of a world organization, the problem still existed of winning the conditions necessary for victory, i.e., the mere existence of the international parties did not automatically solve anything. What, in the main, was that problem? Trotsky continues:
When we looked forward at that time [the first post-war period – A.G.] to an immediate seizure of power by the proletariat, we reckoned that a revolutionary party would mature rapidly to the fire of civil war. But the two terms did not coincide. The revolutionary wave of the post-war period ebbed before the communist parties grew up and reached maturity in the struggle with the social democracy [then having the majority support of the masses – A.G.] so as to assume the leadership of the insurrection ...
But it turned out that the determination of the leadership and the dissatisfaction of the masses do not suffice for victory. There mast obtain a number of other conditions, above all, a close bond between the leadership and the masses and the confidence of the latter in the leadership. This conditions was lacking at that time. (Pages 87f. Emphasis mine. – A.G.)
It becomes clear then why the Third Congress of the Comintern concerned itself, not with theory and principles, which had already been determined at the Second Congress, but with the questions of strategy and tactics. Had there been no Comintern, no revolutionary parties, it would have been impossible for such discussions to take place and yet have any concrete significance. The Third Congress therefore was really a gathering which dealt with the problems of building the International, working out the strategical and tactical line of the parties and preparing for the march “to power through a previous conquest of the masses.” Lenin said at the congress that “the struggle for the masses is the struggle for power.” There you have succinctly stated the correct relationship of the whole question which is so neglected, or completely forgotten, today.
 
Winning the Majority of the Class
To grasp even more thoroughly the meaning of the Third Congress, there is the dispute between Lenin and the ultra-leftists over the whole character of the struggle. In order to strengthen bolshevik concepts, the resolution of the Third Congress emphasized the need to win “the majority.” It stated:
The Third Congress of the Communist International is proceeding to re-examine the questions of tactics under the circumstances that in a number of countries the situation has become acute in a revolutionary sense and that a number of Communist mass parties have been organized, none of which, however, have actually acquired the leadership of the majority of the working class in its genuinely revolutionary struggle.
Lenin led a most vigorous struggle against ultra-leftist and putschist concepts of the struggle for power, especially against the Italian representatives of this tendency! He said then, in 1921, not 1944:
And they want to delete the words “of the majority.” If we cannot agree about such simple things I fail to understand how we can work together and lead the proletariat to victory. That being so, it is not surprising that we cannot come to an agreement on the question of principles. Show me a party which is already leading the masses of the working class. It did not even occur to Terracini to quote an example ... He who fails to understand that in Europe ... where nearly all the proletarians are organized – we must win over the majority of the working class – is lost to the Communist movement. If such a person has not yet learned this in the course of three years of a great revolution, he will never learn anything.
In the above is revealed the true Lenin, the revolutionist who could not think without having the masses in mind, who could not begin to conceive of a revolution without a party, and such a party without winning the majority of the masses. The whole early Comintern was of the same mind.
The Comintern, under the slogan, “To the Masses,” and toward the “conquest of the majority,” devised the tactic of the united front and adopted a series of transitional demands which could bridge the gap between the revolutionary party and the broad masses of the proletariat, peasantry and the middle class poor. It rejected Bucharin’s mechanical concepts of the permanent revolution, his “mechanical understanding of the permanence of the revolutionary process.”
 
Without the Party There Is Nothing
In recapitulation we see the following situation in the capitalist world, i.e., the subjective situation. No revolutionary International, no revolutionary parties. At best there are revolutionary groupings. There are a body of principles and theories which guide these groupings. But there is as yet no adopted strategy or tactics applicable to concrete circumstances of the class struggle in the many countries of Europe, where the situation is most acute and where the prospects of a revolutionary resurgence may first occur. The absence of organization precludes the conditions which prevailed in the early years of the Comintern, the kind of decisions adopted by them. The main principles remain: build the revolutionary parties, win the majority of the working class and its allies. Without these there can be no serious discussion of a revolutionary victory.
Under the specific conditions of bourgeois society in the present period, the struggle for democracy is indispensable to the struggle for socialism, especially since the struggle for democracy is a struggle against present-day capitalist society and the decay which engenders indigenous tendencies of totalitarianism, becoming stronger the longer the social order exists. The working class needs a “democratic interlude” in order to recreate the socialist vanguard, to develop the struggle, and to guarantee a measure of success.
A whole new layer of revolutionaries is growing up. This new layer needs to be educated in the fundamentals of Marxism and in the principles of Lenin’s and Trotsky’s Comintern. And this requires a persistent and consistent struggle against any attempt to reintroduce into the movement those concepts which can only doom the working class to continued defeats and sterility. If such concepts gain credence and strength, the immediate future of the working class will indeed be black and dismal.
 



There is hardly another union in the CIO quite like the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers of America. First, there is not another big international so thoroughly dominated and controlled, lock, stock and barrel, by the Communists, like the UE. Its chief officers, those who really count and determine the policies of the union, are well known Communist Party (now politely referred to as the Communist Political Association) members. This control has extended over many years and is the one important reason why the UE represents such a sharp contrast to other CIO unions, even those bureaucratically controlled, in militancy of ideas, program and practice. Developing under Communist domination, the UE has been a laboratory for the changing Stalinist policies on the domestic front. Its political line has varied with the changing line of the CP. Its trade union strategy and tactics has patterned this changing line.
Since this review of its recent convention is limited, let us confine ourselves to the recent policies of the union. It is, without doubt, the most rabidly pro-Roosevelt, pro-war union in the CIO. In sharp contrast to the unbridled hatred of the President by the Stalinists during the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact, when Roosevelt was characterized as the outstanding war-monger of the world, Roosevelt is today, next to Stalin, the world’s greatest benefactor. Stalin’s international interests are paramount to the UE leadership. Thus the union is closely tied to the Administration, and if the Administration has better “fair-haired unions” in the CIO, it does not lack the devotion of the UE leadership.
Does Stalin’s alliance with the United States dictate a new police for the CP in this country? Then the UE immediately reflects it in this way: it carries out Roosevelt’s domestic program to a degree unmatched by other internationals. It signs wage agreements and agrees to union conditions that are a scandal. It manipulates the union with the single purpose of preventing genuine rank and file democracy. The Sperry local in New York is a case in point. By its constitution, membership meetings are held only twice a year! And by the same constitution, nominations for officers may take place only by the steward body!
 
Issues in the United Electrical Workers Union
Recount the important issues which confront the labor movement and then examine the position of the UE on these issues. There is the question of the no-strike pledge, the wage freeze, post-war planning, the bosses’ anti-union offensive, the WLB, and independent labor politics, and you will find that the UE, while in many respects adopting a position which is formally like many positions adopted by other CIO unions, in each case, goes a good deal further more often in a direction which is unquestionably anti-union.

On the no-strike pledge, it is not merely in favor of retaining this infamous, one-sided agreement which has aided big business in profiteering from the war, but it is surreptitiously fostering the new Communist policy of extending the no-strike pledge for the post-war period. Why Communist? It is the new Communist line that the struggle for socialism is out; now is the time to cooperate with capitalism (read: big business) to help it prosper and profit, and to help it in its imperialist aims. To pursue that policy in the labor movement means to keep the workers in check, to prevent “labor struggles,” to maintain peaceful relations with the boss, who is apparently having a devil of a time trying to make ends meet.
 
Its policy on the no-strike pledge is immediately reflected in its attitude toward the bosses’ offensive against unionism. Whereas the ordinary labor bureaucrat recognizes the dangers inherent in the no-strike pledge when carried over into the post-war period, i.e., knows that the unions face a struggle for life against the industrial giants, the UE is now preaching “cooperation” with industry, “unity” and “partnership” with the anti-union employers. All that this does is to develop a policy of glorified company unionism.
 
While formally adhering to the CIO position which demands a revision of the Little Steel formula the UE has really little interest in the matter. It has no wish to interfere with or make difficult the President’s attempts to maintain inviolate the wage stabilization law and his seven-point program, none of which has been carried out except the wage freeze. Judging by the wage agreements signed, no one can possibly doubt this.
 
While the crying need of labor is the development of an independent labor reconversion program seeking to aid the workers, the UE has already endorsed Baruch’s big business reconversion program.
 
It has rejected independent labor politics and a Labor Party in favor of capitalist politics and adherence to the Democratic Party machine. Grievances of the workers are replied to in typical Stalinist style: elect Roosevelt!
 
The just grievances of labor against the WLB, which is an employers’ body shrouded in the fiction that its balance of power is held by the “public,” is countered by the UE’s unstinted support to that body. For example, in the numerous consent cases of the UE, that is, cases where the company and union reached an agreement, which the WLB rejects, the UE is practically silent. If it is not silent, its protests are practically unheard and no fight is made by it against this infamous anti-labor body.
 

Is There No Opposition?
Is it then that the UE has no opposition within its ranks? No, there is opposition to the policies of the union administration. The opposition is widespread but effectively bottled up by the bureaucratic control of the administration, by the disorganization and disunity of the opposition. The strangulating control of the Communists could easily be broken, but only on the condition that the opposition was nationally organized and had all the accouterments of a unified opposition with a program. The last convention demonstrated that the possibilities of mobilizing the progressives and militants in the union are present. These progressives and militants need leadership. This leadership will undoubtedly arise, but it is not yet present.
There is no doubt that such a fight could have been made before if the former president, James B. Carey, whom the Communists removed from office, had waged a struggle. It seems inexplicable that one of the founders of the union, its first president and now national secretary of the CIO, could be so divorced from his union. But so effective was his removal that, for all practical purposes, he might never have been a member of the UE or present at any of its conventions. Yet he is known nationally in the UE, is respected by the rank and file, has good standing and a good record in the CIO. The story is that after Carey’s removal as president, his retention as CIO secretary was part of a deal. Naturally we cannot vouch for this story, but the facts of life speak for themselves. It is bruited about that Carey’s retention as CIO secretary was the result of a deal between Murray and the Stalinists: they guaranteed not to fight him as secretary, to vote for him, if, in turn, Carey would refrain from any interference in the affairs of the UE. Perhaps there is no basis to this story. But if there isn’t, Carey conducts himself in the UE as though it were true. Everyone knows he is against the present leadership, is opposed to its administrative methods and its anti-union policies. Yet he regularly attends conventions but hardly makes a peep at them. Often it is at a time when the bureaucrats are in deathly fear of his intervention, knowing that he could, if he so desired, upset their well-laid plans.
The latest convention of the UE showed the rising tide of rank and file opposition to the bureaucratically entrenched leadership. The convention, like all previous Stalinist-dominated meetings, was carefully rigged and so run as to prevent the opposition from presenting its views effectively or following through its opposition to the administration. An examination of the issues in dispute reveals that the UE, despite the bureaucratic control, could not avoid a clash over those problems which are acutely affecting the lives of the mass of workers in this country, especially the militant and class conscious elements which make up the labor movement. In this sense the UE convention was like all other conventions which the CIO has recently held. Like the other conventions, this one had to take up the question of rescinding the no-strike pledge, the question of the wage freeze and the WLB, incentive pay, the thirty-five-hour week, etc. In each instance, the officialdom was characterized by the reactionary positions it took against the various groupings which opposed it.
The fight against the no-strike pledge in no way resembled the mass uprising at the UAW, or the large minorities in other internationals. But that a fight could be made at all against the no-strike pledge at a UE convention shows definite progress. The proposal to rescind received only five votes, but there is no question that the sentiment in favor of this proposal was many times larger. Only a wild, hysterical, flag-waving campaign of the Stalinists succeeded in damning the wide opposition to the pledge.
 
It Is Possible to Defeat the Stalinists
In anticipation of an even sharper struggle over the WLB, the resolutions committee was compelled to bring in a fairly strong-worded resolution on the WLB – this, for the first time since the issue became an important one in the labor movement. But the practical day-to-day conduct of the officialdom precludes any effective actions that the union might take to enforce the views of its resolution.
A fight over incentive pay and the thirty-five-hour week also developed. Here the bureaucratic manipulation of the chair by the union’s president, the Stalinist stooge, Fitzgerald, prevented the opposition from even speaking up effectively. A similar thing happened on the proposal to increase the salaries of international organizers from seventy to eighty dollars a week. The reaction of the rank and file delegates was unmistakable. And when the vote revealed little support for the administration, Fitzgerald adjourned the session to prevent a rollcall vote. Thus, the measure was passed.
The administration got a real scare when Fitzgerald was opposed for the presidency by Martin J. Hogan, one of the opposition leaders. Running without a program, with practically no organization and no previous plans, Hogan mustered about one-fourth of the convention vote against the incumbent president. On this isue alone it was possible to see what an effective struggle, program and organization might have accomplished in the UE.
The opposition at this convention was not confined to progressive Local 425 of New York, as in the past. It was joined by other forces from District 4 and from New England. Had these forces been prepared prior to the convention, had they been organized around a progressive program with national ramifications, the fight at the convention would have been ten times as effective, with excellent results. More important, however, it would have laid the necessary basis for the organization to oust the Stalinist union-wreckers at the next convention. In any case, the convention revealed that a struggle for progressive and militant unionism in the UE is not a hopeless proposition. The Stalinists’ control of the union is tenuous. It was obtained essentially because the UE was one of their concentrations and they conducted themselves in the union as a unified, disciplined caucus against an open field. The course pursued by the union under their leadership is so blatantly against the best interests of the labor movement and the rank and file membership that any well-organized opposition based upon a program of progressive unionism could number the days of Stalinist control over the UE. This is indeed the important lesson to be learned from the last convention. The scattered progressives have a big task ahead of themselves: to gather their forces, formulate their program, unify their fight and develop their own leadership in the course of this struggle to oust the Stalinist union wreckers.
 



The plans of the Allied powers for Germany are coming out into the open. The United States, Great Britain and Stalinist Russia have evolved a “plan which calls for the dismemberment of the German nation, its division into at least three parts, the destruction of its industries and the transformation of the country into an agricultural, potato-eating land!
This is an act of simple revenge, not against the fascist beasts alone, but against the German people in general and in particular against the German workers. How is this act of imperialist vandalism justified against seventy to eighty million people who inhabit the country? By identifying the people, especially the German working class, with their fascist rulers, the national oppressors, with the very party and government which for the past twelve years have ruled through a reign of terror against their opponents and the entire working class of Germany.
The rulers of the Allied countries are fostering a great lie, a lie as great and detestable as any invented by one of the arch-liars of our time, Adolph Hitler. The overwhelming majority of the German people, including practically every single worker, were anti-Hitler.
 
Hitler – Agent of Capitalism
Hitler and his bloody party, acting as the paid agents of Germany’s industrialists and financiers, yes, the German capitalist class, never won a majority in any election held before his party seized complete power.
Hitler and his party followers were nursed by the direct assistance of the German steel owners, the chemical industrialists, the bankers, the boss class of that country, as a weapon against the German labor movement and for the purpose of warring against .the “have” nations.
Hitler and his party were hailed by the capitalists of other countries, by capitalists in Great Britain and the United States. Not a few of them rendered financial assistance to the German fascists.
Hitler and his party were hailed by every labor-baiter, open-shopper and enemy of the workers in all countries, because his first act was to destroy the German labor movement, the most powerful in all the world.
Hitler was made Chancellor and his party put into power by German capitalism against the opposition of the great majority of the German people and the whole German working class. Even as Chancellor, when he held the reins of government, controlled the press and the radio, and dominated the police, Hitler could not win a majority in the last “free” election which the country held.
The workers of Germany never ceased their opposition to the fascists. They were ready to fight at a moment’s notice, at the first sign given them by the leaders of their many organizations.
 
German Labor Wanted to Fight
The German trade unionists wanted to fight. The German working class as a whole wanted to fight. They knew the meaning of fascism, they understood its national and international consequences.
They knew that a victory for Hitler meant the end of the labor movement; ‘they knew that a victory for Hitler meant a new world war, more bloody, more catastrophic than ever before.
They knew that such a war could and would benefit only the German capitalists and the capitalists of all countries. They knew that such a war could bring only increased misery, poverty, death and destruction for the overwhelming majority of the workers of the world.
But the German working class was betrayed by its leaders. The workers in the unions were betrayed by their leaders, who did not take a single step to organize the struggle against the Brown Shirts.
The Social Democratic Party and its leaders betrayed the workers by playing the game of capitalist politics, taking not a single serious step to organize a fight against the fascists, pleading with Stalin’s Communist Party to join with them in some kind of fight.
 
Stalinist Crimes
But the worst culprit of them all was Stalin’s Communist Party of Germany. It fought against a united front of all labor to give battle to Hitler and his beasts. Yet it was this potential united front which the fascists feared above all else. They knew they could not stand up against the united will of the German labor movement. But the German Communists stood like a stone wall, blocking the path’ of the workers who desired, begged and cajoled their leaders to do something before it was too late.
The worst crime that Stalin’s German Communist Party committed against the German workers, as well as the people, as a whole, was the theory they espoused that it would be a good thing if Hitler and the fascists won, because that would make it easier for the workers to come to power! They advocated this theory up to the very day that the fascists won out. And it was only after Hitler came to power that they issued a call for a general strike! They issued a call to struggle when it was too late!
It was Stalin personally who admonished the revolutionary German workers as early as 1923 not to make a struggle for power, otherwise they might incite the German fascists. Imagine! Struggle by the German workers would “incite” the fascist horde which was determined to take power anyway. Yet the fact was that the only real fear of the fascists was action by the working class.
The Stalinists consummated this policy of betrayal when Stalin signed a pact with Hitler which opened up the Second World War. Stalin helped divide Poland with the German Hitlerites, and Molotov, Stalin’s Foreign Minister, made public the statement that “fascism was a matter of personal taste!”
The capitalist powers were playing a game with Hitler. France was trying to line up countries against Germany. This was the official government policy. But in France, the bulk of the French ruling class favored Hitler as against their own working class.
England was playing Germany against France and Russia in order to keep her balance of power on the Continent.
The American capitalists played at politics with a big section of them greatly admiring the German fascists because they destroyed the labor movement.
Russia played its own game, first calling for collective security against Hitler and then making a pact with him.
And since the bloody Second World War broke out, the Allied powers, the inventors of the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter, which they never meant seriously, did not once make the kind of appeal to the German people that would hasten their struggle against their own rulers, the fascists. Quite the contrary, they made every conceivable threat to the German people and the German workers, telling them, in effect, that no matter what they did, whether they overthrew Hitler or not, the Allies were preparing a fate for them even worse than fascism.
Thus the overwhelming majority of the German people stand on the edge of an abyss with dismal alternatives. They face either continued misery under fascism, or dismemberment, poverty and revenge at the hands of the Allies.
Thus the German masses, living under a police regime, under the worst kind of torture, now face new police regimes and new tortures under the rule of the United States, Great Britain and Stalin’s Russia.
Germany’s great industries will be destroyed! The country will be reduced to an agricultural status! And the Allies expect eighty million Germans to live under such conditions! Would it not be better just to shoot every single German? Would that not be more humane?
What the capitalist rulers of the Allied powers want is to exploit the German people for profit! That’s what Great Britain wants, that’s what the United States wants and that’s what Russia wants.
These powers are holding the German masses responsible for their rulers, the same rulers who now terrorize and exploit them. Russia pursues the same policy as the other imperialists, even more ruthlessly. Russia wants to make the German working class pay for the crimes of Stalin in betraying the German masses to fascism and for making the infamous pact with Hitler.
The crowning point of Allied policy is to prevent the resurgence of the German masses, their organization and their struggle for power that would free them from the exploitation of capitalist private property and the profit system as a whole.
The Allies are united in their determination to prevent any socialist rebellion of the German workers which would sweep away the whole rotten edifice of capitalist barbarism which rules the world today.
The Allies are afraid to let the German people loose on their fascist exploiters. While the Allied diplomats sit in their foreign offices, gambling with the lives of the people of the world, the German masses could really take care of their fascist exploiters.
That is exactly what the Allies fear. They fear the “anarchy” of workers’ revenge! They fear that this revenge will include the German ruling class, the industrialists and financiers who put Hitler into power and should suffer the same fate as the black-hearted murderers. And, to repeat, they fear that the German masses will go beyond this revenge to set up their own state power, a workers’ government that will put an end to capitalism in Germany, a capitalism which has brought them nothing but repeated wars, exploitation and, finally, fascism.
If the Allied powers get away with their plan to exterminate the German working class which has not forgotten its past and which undoubtedly understands its future and what has to be done, a blow will be dealt to the workers of all countries, yes, even to the workers of the United States.
 
Defend German Labor!
The interests of American labor dictate that we rise to the support of German labor. Against dismemberment of Germany! For the right of the German masses to set up their own democratic government of toilers, a workers’ government!
Hand over the task of settling with Hitler and his satellites to the German working class rather than to a War Crimes Commission which does not even have Hitler’s name on its list!
If the German workers are crushed a second time by the Allied powers, the European workers will suffer another terrible blow, a blow which could not fail to have its repercussions in this country. That is just what American big business wants. It would gain heart by such ail event; it would be strengthened in its constant anti-labor offensive.

Freedom for German labor!
 
Demand full democratic rights for the German masses!
 
The German workers must have full control over settling with their native fascists!
 
Reject the dismemberment of a country of eighty million people now ruled over by a regime they never wanted, but which was supported up to this war by the capitalists of all nations!

 



The White House Campaign Expenditures Committee is having one helluva time trying to find out who are the financial backers of America’s fascist-minded rabble-rousers, anti-labor racketeers and avowed fascists and their organizations.
Already, Joseph Kamp, noted supporter of fascist doctrines and professional labor-baiter dealing in red scares (he makes his living digging up the “dope” for wary industrialists) has been cited for contempt for his refusal to disclose his source of financial support. Frank Gannett, owner of a large number of newspapers and a notorious truth-raper, is another of a long string of reactionaries whose stock-in-trade is anti-labor propaganda bought and paid for by big business. He, too, refused to reveal his sources of financial support, which runs into millions of dollars.
A small sensation, however, was caused by that demagogue, Gerald L.K. Smith, who, while he refused to list all his financial backers, did say that among them was Harry Bennett, former head of the Ford Company service squad, now a vice-president and reputed to be running the Ford empire. Smith stated that he received $2,000 from Bennett to aid his struggle against “communism and labor racketeering” (read: unionism).
 
Bennett’s Feelings Were Hurt
Bennett, employer of thugs and organizer of goon squads to fight unionism, was hurt no end by Smith’s disclosure. What a dirty thing to do! He only gave this fascist scum and wearer of the cloth money so that he could finance radio talks against “communism and racketeering.” And what does old Reverend Smith do but tell a story that gives the impression that Bennett was supporting him politically. Ain’t true, says this ex-football player and ex-pug, now turned “industrialist.” Smith is just picking on him because he wouldn’t support the political beliefs of America First.
Bennett went on to say:
“I do not support Smith’s political beliefs. I have told him so publicly and privately and in no uncertain terms. He was given no money by me for his own political purposes. As a matter of fact, no one suspected that, at the time I gave him the money, he had any political ambitions such as have been evidenced of late.”
He only gave him the money to help break the back of the rising Automobile Workers of America (CIO): And that, according to Henry Ford’s servant, makes the contribution justifiable.
But there is more to this story. Bennett said that he gave Smith names of others in the automobile industry who were also interested in a little union busting campaign. What moneys he received from these other auto barons, Smith has so far not revealed. But there is no doubt that he received “aid” from them, too.
 
Whose Money Was It?
Whose $2,000 was it that Bennett gave to Smith? Well, the facts on this aren’t too clear. The Ford public relations officials told reporters that they weren’t sure whether the money belonged to Bennett personally or to the Ford Company. They “assumed” the money was Bennett’s.
But, Labor Action reader, can you imagine Bennett, who was personnel director of the Ford Motor Company at the time he gave the m0ney to Smith, shelling out $2,000 of his own funds in the interest of the Ford Company? And that Mr. Ford knew nothing about this? That’s just about too much to expect!
Labor has often charged that Ford was one of Smith’s backers. It could never document this charge. But Smith’s testimony is a living proof that this charge had its basis in fact. Lest anyone try to dissociate Henry Ford from Harry Bennett, just remember that Bennett is Ford’s employee. In the many years during which he served his master for good pay, he carried out the policies of the head of the Ford empire.
Bennett is no free individual acting on his own behalf, especially where it was a case of combating the militant Auto Workers Union. He acted in the interests of the Ford Company when he instructed his goon squads to beat up union organizers; and he acted in the interests of the company when he gave money to Fascist Gerald L.K. Smith for the same purpose. What Bennett is really boiled up about is that Smith mentioned his name as a contributor. If the Reverend hadn’t said a word, Bennett would not, of his own accord, have admitted giving him any money.
It isn’t only a matter of “Ford’s $2,000 ... thrown down a rathole,” as R.J. Thomas says. What is important is that Smith’s testimony showed that when it comes to material support to an individual fascist or fascist movement you will always find big business as its financial mainstay.
Fascism does the work of big business. It did it in Italy. It did it in Germany. It will do it wherever it has the chance. That is why it is silly to think that big business, the industrialists and financiers of America will ever fight fascism seriously. The bigger and stronger the labor movement, the more direct becomes the link between big business and fascism. The labor movement must organize the fight against fascism.
 



There is no better testimony of Russia’s imperialist role in this war than the recent diplomatic exchanges between Stalin’s regime and the Iranian government of Premier and Foreign Minister Mohammed Said Maraghei, for ten years Ambassador of his country to the Kremlin. The dispute, like so many others between imperialist powers and colonial countries, is over oil. The Russian government proposed that Iran grant it the concession “for the exploitation of Kevir and Khurian oil deposits in the northern part of Iran.” Premier Said’s government rejected the proposal, declaring that nothing would be done about new concessions until after the war.
It would seem that this exchange between two sovereign nations would end the discussion for the time being. But this is not the way of big powers when dealing with more or less defenseless countries. Stalin’s Russia is proceeding in the time-honored imperialist manner to force these concessions from a reluctant regime. How? By preparing a series of attacks upon the Iranian government which will either bring about its downfall or force it to yield to the superior forces of its giant neighbor.
The history of imperialism reveals that this is the general pattern by which the powers obtain their loot from weak and defenseless countries which have an abundance of raw materials to be exploited for profit. The British Empire was a past master of this art. It would undermine a government which did not meet its demands. It would organize a campaign of propaganda beginning in London and seeping down to the press of the very country which it wanted to exploit or turn into a colonial possession. Bribery, coercion and the direct use of force were the several means employed.
 
The Way of Imperialists
But the British Empire was not alone in these methods. All the imperialists operated in the same way. Germany France, Holland, the United States, Italy, have at one time or another employed the same or similar weapons to achieve their aims of obtaining land, raw materials, cheap labor or markets which would profit their respective capitalist classes. That is how all these countries obtained their possessions, their colonies, their spheres of influence, their export .of goods, their profits., This is how India, China, the whole Middle East, Africa, Latin and South America, the Pacific islands of great wealth, came under the possession and control of the big powers. The hundreds of millions of peoples which populate these lands have been and continue to be cruelly exploited in the profit interests of the ruling classes of these countries.
The methods of the imperialist powers have long been under the sharpest criticism of revolutionary socialists, of many liberals and anti-imperialists in general. They have pointed out that imperialism means exploitation of backward, and colonial countries for the special interest of the capitalist classes of the “advanced” countries. That imperialist policy meant taking the rights of these peoples, the rights to their own land, their own governments, their very lives. Great Britain, Germany, France and the others were rightly condemned for their barbarous and coercive treatment of these peoples. In the United States, too, the sharpest criticisms have been voiced against its imperialist policies and interference in the affairs of the small neighbors to the south.
In the present case of Iran, Russian policy is identical to that pursued by the other powers. Examine briefly what has actually happened. There is some history to it, too. Iran was the object of imperialist exploitation for many, many decades. Czarist Russia, England and Germany fought over this lucrative prize for tens of years. The elimination of Germany as a competitor left Russia and England alone to dispute over the highly desired booty of Iranian oil.
 
Policy of Workers Russia
But, when the Russian Revolution of 1917 occurred, when the workers took power and set up their own government under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, a new foreign policy was developed by Workers’ Russia. The Bolsheviks renounced all concessions which capitalist Russia had obtained from Iran. The Iranian people were told quite frankly that Russia no longer had any profit interests in the country; that the Russian workers did not want to exploit the Iranian peoples, but wished to have the friendliest relations with them, to exchange goods to the mutual benefit of both countries, to establish peaceful relations for all time.
This policy was actually carried out and for many years the relations between the two countries were excellent. The action of the Soviet Union, for then it was truly a Soviet Union, had an additional effect. By renouncing the imperialist policies of Czarism, it militated against the imperialist rape of the country by Great Britain. For the British Empire was always confronted by the reality of a new Russian foreign policy which many in Iran understood, and the country was better able, although not wholly successful, to resist the increasing appetite of British imperialism for oil.
How do Stalin’s policies square with the policies of Lenin and Trotsky? They are exactly opposite. Whereas Lenin renounced imperialism, and defended the colonial countries, Stalin adopts the old imperialism. Stalin not only does not renounce those sharp practices for which imperialism is noted, but employs them himself.
Here is how Russia proceeds in the present case of Iran. Since the Iranian government rejected its proposal, she opens up a propaganda campaign against the actions of the government; charges it with all kinds of crimes; creates opposition within the country and in general creates a state of chaos and opposition in order to undermine the existing government and either force it to change its policies, or bring about its downfall.
In case either of these measures proves ineffectual, Russia lays the basis for the direct use of force and winning her objectives in that way.
Thus the Russian newspaper, Trud, began a public campaign against the Iranian government. Among the charges made against it are that the government had left unpunished “harmful actions of certain evil-intentioned elements” who interfere with the supply of goods which are sent by lend-lease through Iran. Secondly, the government had not opposed the present “intensification of subversive work by pro-fascist elements in Iran.” The Iranian government did not prosecute “criminals” who attack Russian supply trains, but did persecute “Iranian officials who are striving loyally to carry out their obligations under the treaty alliance between Iran, the USSR and Britain.”
What else? In its article, The Words and Deeds of Mr. Said, Trud goes on to say that the Premier’s policies have made for “strained and tense” relations with the Allies. Furthermore, “reactionaries have set Premier Said to the task of smashing workers’ organizations and democratic organizations and for this purpose have introduced a bill for the militarization of industry.”
This is indeed interesting. We don’t know what is meant by workers’ organizations in this predominantly agricultural country with few workers, or democratic organizations in this backward colonial nation dominated for many years by imperialism. The purpose of the writing, however, is very clear.
Russia is preparing to depose Said if he does not grant them the oil concession. If he had, none of these things which are cited against him would ever have been written. Would this mean that they would still have existed and it would have been all right so long as Russia got its oil? Or is it that all these things are untrue and that it is merely part of an imperialist plot against the Iranian government? We incline to believe the latter.
In any case, these are not the important criteria. The fact is that Russia, to prepare its case against the Iranian government, must show first that it violates a “good neighbor” relationship, does not represent its own people, cannot rule its country (remember the point about Russian supply trains), prosecutes the friends of Russia and permits her enemies to go about freely, and as a clincher, harms the interests not only of Russia but of the United Nations, too.
Now, if no change is forthcoming from this government, the basis is laid for its overthrow, or its submission, either by “convincing arguments” backed up by the show of force of the Russian army or by the direct use of this army.
 
Oil Imperialism
In this little affair is not only mirrored the “new” imperialism of Stalinist Russia but also the sharp struggles and enormous intrigues which exist within the ranks of the United Nations. The war is by no means over when these Allies are already beginning to split the booty. The Russian magazine, War and the Working Class, prints statistics to show the world distribution of oil, statistics which disclose that the United States controls fifty-seven per cent of the world’s oil resources, the British twenty-seven per cent, and Russia eleven per cent. Is this important? For Stalin, yes. Because now he has established the basis for his claim for oil concessions in Iran in order to equalize the possessions of his Allies, who have more oil than he.
The struggle for oil is almost as old as capitalism. It was one of the causes of the outbreak of Imperialist World War No. 1. It was behind the outbreak of Imperialist World War No. 2. At the time of the Russian Revolution, that country dropped out of the oil war because Workers’ Russia renounced imperialist policy. Under Stalin, Russia rejoins the imperialist race for oil. Thus, the colonial peoples of the world have another power to fear, another army which may sweep over their borders, another corps of national economic experts who will seek to decide the fate of their existence. The other imperialists act in the interests of their capitalist ruling classes. The Russians act in the interest of their bureaucratic ruling class.
The case of Iran is a living proof of how far removed is Stalin’s Russia from the Russia of Lenin, from Workers’ Russia which renounced all imperialist policy, all territorial and trade concessions which the Czarist imperialist regime had obtained, it shows how far removed is Stalin’s army of seizures and occupations from the socialist Red Army of, Trotsky. Now would be a good time for the leading writers of the newspaper, The Militant, to explain in what way Stalin’s policy in Iran, and the conduct of the army stationed there, carries on in the interests of world freedom, world socialism!
 



By this time the whole world knows about the public attack made by Jacques Duclos, leader of the French Communist Party, on Earl Browder, chief editor of the Daily Worker and president of the Communist Political Association, for having “dissolved the Communist Party,” drawn “erroneous conclusions” from the Teheran Conference and made “himself the protagonist of a false concept of social evolution in general, and in the first place, the social evolution of the U.S.”
In continuing his sharp criticism, Duclos wrote that “one is witnessing a notorious revision of Marxism on the part of Browder and his supporters,” that “the French Communists will not approve the policy followed by Browder, for it has swerved dangerously from the victorious Marxist-Leninist doctrine.”
Duclos’ criticism appeared in Les Cahiers du Communisme, the theoretical organ of the French Communist Party, and this is what makes the whole nature of the attack so unusual. When the Communist International functioned openly such matters were dealt with in the upper circles of its executive committee, which is another way of saying in the ruling committee of the Russian Communist Party.
Since Stalin formally “dissolved” the Communist International as a means of strengthening his alliance with Great Britain and the United States, the Communist Parties were presumed to have obtained their independence. That is why the attack launched against Browder employed the device of making it appear to have originated in the leadership of the French Communist Party.
 
Why This Attack?
What is behind this attack on Browder, who is noted for his abject following of Russia and the Stalinist leaders in all their political turns? Browder was never noted for any great intelligence, audacity or independence of action. Whatever policies he pursued and foisted upon the American Communist Party were an automatic reflection of the political course of Stalin. The answer to this apparently puzzling question must be looked for in the field of world politics, that is, the relations which exist between the Big Three who dominate the international scene today .
These relations have gone through various stages during the war. Suspicions were evident from the start. First were the mutual fears of a separate peace with Germany. Second was the dispute of the second front, when and where it would begin. Third were the disputes over the division of Europe, which are sharper than ever now that the war has ceased in Europe.
So long as the European war was on and Germany remained a dangerous antagonist, the policy of Russia and the Communist Parties was to strengthen the Big Three coalition in order to guarantee the continuation of the war on two fronts and lend-lease aid. Without the latter Russia would have been unable to continue the fight. The Moscow-Teheran-Yalta conferences represented successive stages in the active solution of the main military and political issues which both united and separated the Allies. With each conference, the alliance apparently became stronger.
Russia became an equal partner with Great Britain and the United States.
All during this period the Communist Parties of Europe and America, which maintained a close liaison with Moscow, accommodated their policies to Russian needs in this alliance. They agitated on a worldwide scale for support of the Teheran-Yalta decisions, national unity in the countries of the United Nations and total prosecution of the war effort in these countries. So far as the labor movement was concerned, the policy meant that it should conform itself to the needs of the national governments and the ruling classes in all countries, to subordinate the needs and interests of the working class to capitalism.
 
How the Parties Acted
All the Communist Parties pursued the same policy no matter where they were located. They naturally adapted themselves to specific national conditions in carrying out the general line. Stalinized parties which are habitually addicted to sudden shifts in policy to conform to the needs of the Russian Foreign Office, had no difficulty in applying themselves to the new situation created by the Big Three coalition.
The Canadian Communist Party became the Labor-Progressive Party. In Cuba, the Communist Party took the name “Socialist,” as did other parties. The American Communist Party, however, formally dissolved itself as a party and became the Communist Political Association. The one difference created by this “dissolution” is that it promised, in the name of national unity and support to Roosevelt for the purpose of strengthening the cause of Stalin in this country, not to conduct itself as a competing party in elections. Thus it became an appendage to the Roosevelt machine of the Democratic Party.
It renounced the “class struggle,” declared that the struggle for socialism was an unreal aim in this era, called for a permanent no-strike pledge, capital-labor peace and the rights of monopoly capitalism. It advocated a policy of “benevolent imperialism” for America’s ruling class and in general conducted itself very much like any other capitalist party.
Did the American Communist Party make these decisions independently of its sister parties in other parts of the world, independently of the Communist Party of Russia, which is its real boss? Hardly! Otherwise it would have been inconceivable that two years should pass before any criticism was leveled at Browder for his actions.
The reason why the American party went much further than any other Communist affiliate is to be deduced from the special conditions prevailing in this country and the extreme importance that good relations be maintained between Russia and the United States so long as the war in Europe was still in effect.
 
New Big Three Conflicts
Since the end of the war, the conflicts among the Big Three, which were always present and only provisionally solved at the conferences because of the pressure of the military struggle, have assumed a more open character. They are based upon American aims to dominate Europe economically and politically, British determination that no single power shall exercise control over the continent and Russian policy based upon the domination of the whole of Eastern and Central Europe. The conflicts over Poland, Greece, Italy, Trieste, the Balkans and Germany merely express the differences in aims of the three powers.
Stalin is calling on his reserves in this current struggle which has been expressed so sharply at the San Francisco Conference. These reserves are the Communist Parties in all countries. The threat he makes is a simple one: If you stand in my way, I have allies in your countries who can come to my assistance. It is true, they are not very strong, they have discredited themselves with labor in your countries by the policies which I imposed upon them, but they have great resiliency and stamina; and they will do whatever I say to make things difficult for you at home.
This is a form of political blackmail to enforce Russian demands upon the Allied coalition. If anyone doubts that the Communist Parties will respond to Moscow’s interests, it is only necessary to recall the many shifts which these organizations have already experienced.
Now that a new situation has developed in Allied relations, the Communist Parties are preparing a change of line, to be effectuated if it should become necessary. What are Stalin’s interests in these parties? Those we have already mentioned. Negatively, they can make the situation difficult for the ruling governments in Great Britain and the United States. Positively, they can gather support for Russian policies and add to the Allied difficulties.
These parties have value to Stalin in this kind of situation only insofar as they have a mass base among labor. In supporting the anti-working class policies of Russia in the past period, many of these parties lost great strength among the workers. But this loss was justified in their minds by Russia’s military needs. For patriotic window dressing they could rely on intellectual fellow-travelers and middle class elements. Since the European phase of the war has ended, the situation has changed. Now Stalin’s needs are different and to serve these needs the Communist Parties must strengthen their position among the workers.
In Europe, where there is considerable ferment among the masses, Stalinism attempts to acquire leadership of the masses to strengthen his position on the Continent while at the same time he can, by such leadership, prevent any revolutionary changes that would have an adverse effect upon his rule in Russia.
 
A Stalinist Practice
The correction of Browder’s line, however, is in keeping with the current needs of Stalin. It is one way of warning the State Department that the American foreign policy of today is against Stalin’s interests and that he is ready to use his foreign battalion in the U.S. to aid him. The change in party line is a familiar Stalinist practice. Is there any question as to who ordered the change?
The New York World-Telegram pointed out, when it forced this event into the open by publication of the Duclos story, that the latter had just returned from Moscow, where he was shown the secret minutes of the Central Committee meeting of the American CP where dissolution was decided. His article was unquestionably written at the behest of the Russian Stalinists.
Now Browder is being made the scapegoat for the policy. Whether this means the end of Browder’s leadership in the party is impossible to foretell. Before the World-Telegram story appeared, the local central committee was already preparing for a “gradual” change of line. The publication of the story forced the issue into the open. It was featured by Browder’s pathetic acknowledgment that the European parties did not agree with his course in America and that it was necessary to study their important criticism and advices. Browder is evidently getting ready for a turn – about-face.
How far will the Communist Party go? Will it now become the advocate of militant labor action in the United States? Will it advocate the end of the no-strike pledge and cease to propagate for its extension in the post-war period? Will its trade union representatives and fellow-travelers make the switch, as some of them already indicate? Will they become advocates of class struggle and anti-imperialism? All of this depends on the outcome of the San Francisco Conference, for Russian foreign policy is the real determinant of Communist policy all over the world.
The Browder affair only emphasizes the fact that the Communist Party is not an independent organization of the workers, fighting in the interests of labor and its emancipation, but is an agent of Russian foreign policy, existing solely for the interpretation and defense of the interests of Russia. And it does this at the expense of the interests of the workers in all countries. The American Communist Party, whether or not it changes its line, remains, like its sister organizations in the rest of the world, the most reactionary force in the labor movement.
 



A new Polish delegation, headed by former Premier Mikolajczyk and Jan Stanczyk, so-called Socialist leader, has arrived in Moscow to work out the compromise with Stalin as to how they shall be represented in the Polish government and thus end the quarrel among the Big Three. While it is made to appear that President Truman’s representative to Stalin, Harry Hopkins, succeeded in bending the Kremlin oligarch’s will on the Polish question, no really important change will be forthcoming.
All the necessary preparatory work for Russian domination over Poland has already succeeded in wiping out in that country those elements now opposed to the imperialism from the East as they opposed the imperialism from the West. They included not only Polish reactionary nationalists, colonels and landlords, but above all, and in the first place, the heroic elements of the Polish working class, the activists of the Polish Socialist Party, the Jewish fighters of the Bund and the militants of the trade union movement. After the fight against the Nazis which culminated in the Warsaw uprising of last winter, during which the Russian army marked time outside the city, they finally succumbed to the Russian GPU and its Polish assistants, the Lublin government installed by Stalin.
 
Organizing Poland
Tens of thousands of these people have been wiped out, either by execution, imprisonment or mass deportation to the convict camps in Siberia. The leaders of the Polish people for the most part have truly been liquidated. Even if Stalin does permit Mikolajczyk and Stanczyk and a few of their friends to enter the government, no fundamental change in the Polish situation will follow.
Stalin’s agents will dominate the country. Behind them Stand the GPU and the Russian army ready to insure the rule of these enemies of Polish independence. With all this power at his disposal, Stalin made sure of the deal with Hopkins by barring any Pole who would not in advance agree to Russian domination of Polish policy.
As living proof of Stalin’s attitude we have the case of the “sixteen Poles” which almost became a cause célèbre at the San Francisco Conference. These sixteen Poles include one General Bronislaw Okulicki, commander of the Polish home army and formerly aide to General Bor. He and the other fifteen were arrested and accused of “diversionary” activities against the “Red” army and of having killed more than five hundred of its officers, in addition to “conducting intelligence and spying activity in the rear of the Red Army.”
The press now reports that fifteen, including General Okulicki, of the sixteen prisoners have confessed their guilt. There you have the perfect Stalinist frame-up. We observed this process in the infamous Moscow Trials where afterward the charges and alleged facts were proved to have been false. Then, too, we had confession after confession describing the weirdest plots. All of them were later shown to have been invented by the secret police. We have no doubt that the same kind of “evidence” will be presented and the present Polish defendants found guilty by their “confession.”
It is also possible that as an international political measure, Stalin may grant the defendants clemency. The charge against them is that they maintained “secret” radios with which they contacted the London Polish government. These were the same radios they used during the German occupation. It is also charged that they had weapons – the same weapons they used against the Nazis – but did not turn them over to the Russian army.
The significant fact about the trial of the sixteen Poles is that it is opened simultaneously with the negotiations between Mikolajczyk, Stanczyk and their aides and the Lublin government with Stalin at its side. And there is really nothing strange about this. The Russians have bluntly told the Allies where to get off on the question of Poland, namely, that Russia would brook no interference with its Polish policy.
All talk about the Yalta agreement and Russia’s failure to carry it out are a lot of words, since the whole premise of Yalta was that it acceded to Stalin’s demands on the question of borders and Russia’s right to dominate the country.
The present trial and negotiations arise from the. fact that the overwhelming majority of the Poles are against the Lublin gang, renamed the Warsaw government, and Russian domination over the country. Like all other peoples, the Poles will not stand for a foreign oppressor who bars the way to genuine Polish national freedom and independence.
The Polish desire for national liberation is accentuated because for tens of years the Poles have been oppressed by Russian Czarism. Now they face a new foreign oppressor in Russian Stalinism.
The Poles have always been militant in their national struggles for independence. If they resist the Russianization of Poland today it is because they cannot easily forget that their country was partitioned in 1939 by Hitler and Stalin in accordance with the dictators’ pact dividing tue Polish nation between them.
 



The American Communist Political Association, under directives from the Kremlin, has adopted a new line calling for greater militancy in the labor movement and prosecution, of the class struggle against “reactionary monopoly capitalism.”
Last week we pointed out that this was inevitable since the criticism of its policies by Jacques Duclos, leader of the French Communist Party, emanated from Moscow and that the leaders of the CPA would interpret it correctly as an instruction to alter the program of the Association.
The leadership of the American Communist Party responded like trained seals. The fact that the New York Telegram disclosed the whole affair brought it into the open. But the change had been taking place “gradually,” a course already decided by the National Board of the CPA.
The National Board accepted the substance of Duclos’ (Stalin’s) criticism that the party under Browder’s leadership was following a false policy and that a revision of its program must take place.
The National Board of the CPA met on June 2, and adopted a resolution entitled: The Present Situation and Next Tasks. The interesting feature of the report on the meeting is the disclosure that Browder, the party’s secretary, voted against the resolution. In addition to him, Roy Hudson, the party’s commissar, who enforced the Browder “line” in the union movement, abstained from voting. These two were mainly responsible for the execution of the policies ot the organization. Subsequently, Hudson announced that he favored the resolution, his hesitation arising from his desire for clarification on some of its points.
The fact that they were mainly responsible does not mean that the other members of the committee were in opposition to the policies. With the exception of Foster, who disagreed but decided not to fight the line or to bring it to the attention the the party, and Sam Darcy, who was subsequently expelled from the Central Committee and the party, the National Board supported Browder and carried out “his” line with enthusiasm and great energy.
Several things must be kept in mind in order to understand this switch in the American Stalinist-Communist policy.

The “Browder line,” as we explained last week, was not Browder’s personal policy. It was the Russian line applied to the United States and in its essential features was applied by all other Communist organizations in the world. When Browder advocated labor-capital peace, support to Roosevelt in the election, national unity, full prosecution of the imperialist war, support to the capitalist ruling class, he responded to Russia’s needs in the war. They were to cement the alliance of the United States and Great Britain with Russia.
 
But when Browder advocated class peace and declared that the struggle for socialism had to be postponed because it was an unreal perspective, or when he declared that labor must support “free enterprise” and capitalism in general, he did what every other Communist leader in the rest of the world did.

The one difference between the conduct of the other parties and the American CP is that the American organization formally dissolved its party, transferring it into a political association in order to deflect criticism and suspicion that it did not really mean its new policy of denying the class struggle in favor of class unity.
 
Russian Diplomacy Rules
As long as relations among the Big Three were fairly amicable and their differences seemed to be resolving themselves at Teheran and Yalta, no criticism was made of Browder. But the moment these relations became sharpened by the end of the European war and the necessity to decide the division of the spoils practically, Stalin ordered his foreign battalions to change their policies to conform to the new international situation.
The Stalinist rulers in Russia keep their fingers on the pulse of the affairs of the Communist organizations and make certain that they do not step out of line. Browder’s previous policies conformed to Russian needs and that is why for a period of two years nothing whatever was said in the, way of criticism, of the “line.” Only now, when the San Francisco Conference discloses the sharp and sometimes irreconcilable differences between Russian and Anglo-American aims, does it become, necessary to instruct the American Stalinists to change their line. This is a form of blackmail that Stalin uses to force his policies on his opponents or to obtain a favorable compromise.
 
What Resolution Says
In Part One of its resolution, the National Board calls for the prosecution of the war against Japan to the end. But even here they lay the basis for a further “radicalization” in
the event; Stalin cannot reach agreement with Churchill and Truman and alters his Far Eastern policy. In reply to a question put to him at a mass meeting, Browder stated:
“It is premature to say whether the Japanese war will become an imperialist war.”
In the minds of Stalin’s followers it will become such a war when Russia finds it cannot go along with the Allies in the Far East or openly challenges their policies. The basis for such a change is contained in the sharp criticism of San Francisco on the ground, that Britain has taken the lead in establishing its program and in changing the American foreign policy from the one advocated by Roosevelt to the position of the “reactionary State Department,” Therefore:
“It is imperative that the American people resolutely support every effort of the Truman Administration to carry forward Roosevelt’s program for victory, peace, democracy and sixty million jobs.”
The Communists are taking upon themselves the defense of Roosevelt and his policies against the “reactionaries”! This is really preparation for the full application of the change in line toward greater militancy in the labor movement and the prosecution of the class struggle in the interests of Russia. But if Big Three relations are improved and no such change is needed, the Stalinist representatives in America can always point to their resolution to show that Roosevelt’s policies are being carried out and the Allied-Russian coalition has been strengthened.
Since everything they do and say is measured by the degree of unity between the Big Three, it is easy to see how their policies are dependent upon the international situation.
Part Two of the resolution develops a program for America in building the peace and meeting the problems of the reconversion period. Here too the program is provisional. The section on the peace is a restatement of Russian foreign policy which in many aspects parallels Roosevelt’s policies. The section on the home front borrows from Roosevelt’s program and the CIO dealing with full production and jobs.
This program can be used in two ways: a peaceful, persuasive discussion and appeal for its adoption, depending upon Russia’s good relations with the United States and Great Britain; or a militant class struggle policy, punctuated by strikes, demonstrations and general militancy in the labor movement. The latter method will be used if Russian relations with the United States and Great Britain deteriorate.
The latter part of the resolution takes the previous Communist policy apart, because the dissolution of the party makes it difficult for the American Stalinists to carry out any change in line with the same effectiveness as when they had an active party functioning. All signs therefore point to the resurrection of the party to meet the needs of this changing policy.
 
Labor! On Guard!
Labor must be on guard against the Stalinist-Communist menace. “Whatever the degree of change that follows in their policies, it must never be forgotten that these changes arise not out of any interest in the well-being of the working class, its progress or defense of its interests and the struggle for its emancipation from exploitation by capitalist imperialism. The sole aim of the Communists is to serve the interests of Russian foreign policy!
When Stalin finds it expedient to make a pact with Hitler, the Communists all over the world support that alliance.
When the requirement of that pact calls for hindering the Allied war effort and agitating against them as imperialists and war mongers, the Communists carry out that policy by calling strikes, impeding production, denouncing Roosevelt and Churchill and defending Hitler and Germany as victims of imperialism.
When Hitler attacks Russia and Stalin joins the Allied coalition, the Communists all over the world become jingoists, fight against the interests of labor, support capitalism in the prosecution of the war and in general do everything to advance the imperialist interests of the Allies against the imperialism of the Axis.
And now that difficulties have arisen among the Big Three and the war in Europe is over, the Communists respond to Russian interests by preparing a switch in policy that will assist Stalin. If that means great militancy in the labor movement, his American representatives will faithfully carry out that line regardless of its consequences.
That is why labor must be on guard. Stalinism remains the worst enemy of the working class. Labor must continue its independent struggle for the advancement of its interests. But this can be done only by the most vigorous and vigilant struggle against Stalinism.

Remember how they fought for a permanent no-strike pledge!
 
Remember how they fought to keep intact the wage stabilization program, the Little Steel formula and the WLB!
 
Remember how they advocated incentive pay plans and speed up systems which the unions had fought for so long.
 
Remember how they turned the unions under their control into company unions aiding the bosses against the workers.
 
Remember how they constantly admonished the workers who bore the main burdens of the war through long hours, speed-up systems and frozen wages, to work harder, longer and to maintain the wage freeze.
 
Remember how they acted as strike-breakers whenever and wherever the workers, driven by the anti-union offensive of big business, broke the no-strike pledge.

These are only some of the things to be remembered. But they all reveal that the Communists in the labor movement act against the best interests of labor. The present change of line may confuse many workers. The task of progressive and conscious workers is to explain to the mass of labor why Stalinism remains the gravest danger to the working class.






Zig:
(Three weeks before the Communist Political Association changed its line and on the occasion of Earl Browder’s 54th birthday he was eulogized in the following way):
“Your bold, mature Marxist leadership has enabled our movement to make a lasting contribution to our nation ...
“When the history of the turbulent and convulsive past decade is finally written, the work of the American Communists will constitute a proud and significant part of the record, thanks in large degree to your profound Marxist leadership ...
“Because of the policy your leadership inspires, the Communist movement has strengthened its role in the life of the nation and has helped the American labor movement as a whole to make itself a powerful force for the victory ...
“On this occasion we recall your constant injunction that we raise ever higher our standards of work, thought and study and never cease to strive for the mastery of Marxism. Felicitations and warmest wishes for many long years of health and leadership.”
– By John Williamson, secretary of the CPA, on behalf of the National Board of the CPA, May 20, Daily Worker


ZAG:
(From the resolution of the National Board of the CPA, adopted on June 2, sharply criticizing Browder’s leadership and policies):
“... Today we Communists must not only learn from our achievements in the struggle against fascism, but also from our weaknesses and errors. In the recent period, especially since January, 1944 (during the triumph of Browder’s “Marxist” policies – Ed.) these mistakes consisted in drawing a number of erroneous conclusions from the historic significance of the Teheran accord ...
“This revision of Marxist-Leninist theory (by Browder’s “profound Marxist leadership” – Ed.) regarding the role of monopoly capital, ... led to other erroneous conclusions, such as utopian economic perspectives... it also led to tendencies to obscure the class nature of bourgeois democracy ...
“The opportunist errors which we were committing ... adversely influenced our work ... We were, however, readjusting ourselves too slowly to new world developments (Anglo-American-Russian conflicts – Ed.), because we failed to understand the basic opportunist errors that had crept into our policies.”



 



It would seem that the recent outbreak, of fighting between the French and Arab nationalists in Lebanon and Syria is of no great consequence since the countries are small and the population less than that of many of our states. But behind this conflict between French imperialism seeking to maintain a stranglehold on this area and Arab nationalism fighting for independence, is imperialist intrigue involving the big powers who are motivated by the large oil deposits in the Middle East.
The movement of the Arab peoples for independence is not only a struggle against France; it is in reality a struggle against all imperialism. The consequences of the fight in Syria and Lebanon is, therefore, not lost upon Great Britain, the United States and Russia. They see in this somewhat isolated event a danger to their plans for control and exploitation of the resources, not only of Syria, but of Iran, Iraq and the whole Middle East.
Britain’s sharp intervention, which was supported by the United States, and Russia’s intervention in behalf of France, are based on their common interest in oil – not the independence of the Arabs – and the fear that French policy endangers their penetration and domination of these countries.
 
Background History
The fight over control of the Middle East, and Levant in particular, has a long history which it is necessary to outline to enable one to understand the nature of the present conflict.
1. Syria (of which Lebanon and Damascus are an integral part) was for many years dominated by Turkey and ruled oppressively as all subject nations are. She obtained her “freedom” during the first World War when Great Britain enlisted the aid of the Arab nationalists to help drive the Turks out. Of course, Great Britain promised Syria independence in exchange for her assistance against the Turks.
2. The British forces, however, were weak and their campaigns against the Turks were not very successful. To enlist the aid of the French, the British made a gift to her of the Syrian area from the Mediterranean Sea to an undefined distance eastwards. How far was never quite determined because the British were then quite unaware of the existence of oil in this area and the extent of the deposits.
3. The French accepted this gift from England, a gift which England, of course, had no right to give. But such exchanges are commonplace among imperialists who trade nations and their peoples like so much merchandise. It goes without saying that the Arab people and the highly mixed other populations of the country had nothing whatever to say about this gift.
But the French, while ungratefully accepting Syria from the British, did not repay the latter’s kindness with the military assistance which they had expected. The only source of support the British did obtain were from the Arabs themselves. Under King Feisal, the Arabs pushed the War against the Turks, helped drive them out of Syria and thus redeemed British military honor. The British repaid Feisal by establishing him on the throne of Syria.
4. France, however, refused to give up this valuable possession and occupied the country despite British discomfort. Culminating the sharp struggle between them, the French drove out King Feisal and began the administration of the country with 90,000 troops. The British did the next best thing. They made Feisal King of Iraq, which adjoins Syria to the east, and which has great oil deposits.
 
Mandated States
From that point on the whole history of the Middle East turned into a conflict between the British and French against each other, and the two of them jointly against Arab desires for independence and a unified state of Syria, Iraq and Palestine.
The old League of Nations sought to organize the conflicts by establishing what was then called “A” mandates. “A” mandates gave total recognition to French domination over Iraq and Palestine.
The professed aims of the British and French in Syria and Iraq were “to emancipate them from Turkish oppression, to encourage and assist in the establishment of native governments, ‘freely chosen by the populations themselves,’ and to recognize these governments.” They stated this in the Anglo-French Joint Declaration of November 8, 1918. Article 22 of the League of Nations Covenant acknowledged that these countries “have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand alone.” These “A” mandates were regarded publicly as “merely transitional protectorates” to help lead the Arab states to full independence.
In the case of Syria, the mandate, specifically stipulated that an organic law and constitution should be established “in agreement with the native authorities,” and that France shall “enact measures to facilitate the progressive development of Syria and Lebanon as independent states.” Britain’s mandates over Iraq and Palestine were similarly worded.
 
Imperialist Intrigue
All this, like the Atlantic Charter, looked very good on paper. But twenty-five years have passed and these countries still do not have their independence. The British and French have done everything in their power to prevent such a development. As against the Arab people they were united. Simultaneously they engaged in severe struggle against each other, a struggle which is marked with, intrigue, double-cross, chicanery and hypocrisy.
The French, after driving out Feisal and the native Administrators, governed the country with a ruthlessness comparable to the British in their possessions. To strengthen its rule, the French divided Syria into five units: Lebanon, Damascus, Jebel Druse, Allepoo and Alaouite. This was for the purpose of weakening the unity of the people in their struggle for independence and to make it easier to defeat them militarily.
From 1920 on, there has been constant warfare between the French and the Syrians, just as between Britain and the peoples she dominates. The more skillful British have been able to overcome their difficulties by bribery and division in the broader areas of the territories they controlled. The French, confined to the small Syrian nation, were unable to overcome united opposition of all the Syrian people. In addition, the British, in an effort to drive the French out of the Middle East and thus leave herself in control over the whole area, have instigated, organized and financed movements against the French.
 
Struggle over Oil


 


What makes the British and French determined to maintain their, respective control over the Middle East territories is the discovery of rich oil deposits since the last war. It is estimated that there are 213 billion barrels of oil located here. This explains not only Anglo-French interest, but the penetration of the area by the United States as well, and Russia’s new interest.
Pipelines from the rich oil areas in Iraq cross the French mandate of Syria and the British mandate of Palestine. The British want to get rid of the French, place a puppet regime in power in Syria similar to the one in Iraq, continue their control over Palestine and thus insure, not her lifeline to India as Churchill falsely maintains, but the oil deposits of Iraq and the whole Middle East.
The United States which has obtained large oil concessions in this area is supporting the British position. While Russia mouths phrases of “colonial independence” and settling the Syrian dispute among the Big Five, she threatens the independence of Iran and also seeks a share of the oil riches of the Middle East. “A wave of oil” has engulfed the Middle East and this is what the inter-imperialist struggle is all about.
The other powers are afraid that French imperialist policy in the Middle East, less subtle than their own, may create the kind of disturbance in this part of the world which could ignite the whole Arab independence movement. That is why the British sent troops into the fighting zones to “keep the peace.”
But in this dispute, the hypocrisy of the imperialist powers is brought to light. For example, when France was defeated in 1940, the Free French, in an effort to displace the Vichy rulers in Syria and Lebanon, promised independence to the countries. And when the Free French troops, together with the British, occupied the area in 1941, a promise of early independence was made to Syria. France was to be accorded special privileges similar to those held by Britain in Egypt and Iraq.
In 1943, independence was officially promised by treaty.
 
British Aims in Syria
The French now claim that Syria and Lebanon cannot have independence because the treaty has not been carried out. Syria and Lebanon say they cannot negotiate a final treaty unless they are fully possessed of their sovereignty.
The French charge that the British engineered the present fight to embarrass the French and get them out of the Middle East. The French add that they have as much right to maintain a stronghold in the Middle East to guard their lifeline to Indo-China as the British have to maintain a stronghold in Egypt, Palestine and Iraq to guard their lifeline to India.
The Arab League, a new organization presumably established for the purpose of fighting for Arab independence all over the Middle East and North Africa, and which has intervened in behalf of the Syrians and Lebanese, is really a creation of the British. All its efforts are directed against the Jewish immigration to Palestine and against France. None of its efforts is organized against the British.
The British hypocrisy in this case is in keeping with its imperialist tradition. But this time the United States and Russia chimed in. All of them pretended to be interested in the freedom of the peoples rather than in oil.
 
San Francisco and Oil
Britain maintains the same kind of control over Iraq and Egypt as the French over Syria and Lebanon. If we leave out for the moment the conduct of Great Britain in India, where for centuries it has engaged in the most cruel, violent and limitless exploitation of the population, and look only to Iraq and Egypt, we find:

Britain “maintains similar unavowed protectorates over ‘independent’ Iraq and ‘independent’ Egypt.” Yet the British drove the legal Prime Minister of Iraq out of the country. British tanks surrounded the palace of the King of Egypt and forced him to maintain a Prime Minister he did not want. British troops remain in those two countries and there are more British troops in Syria and Lebanon than French.
 
In Greece, the British, by military force, established the government they wanted over the protests of the Greek people.

But if the British this time acted in their own imperialist interests against the French, the two will unite if the Arab struggle for independence envelops the whole Middle East and North Africa. As the well know journalist, Edgar Ansel Mowrer, put it: “Imperialists will have to stick together to uphold their empires.”
The final interesting aspect of this struggle is the complete ineffectiveness of the World Security Organization in San Francisco to have intervened. On the basis of the decisions adopted there, France could have “legally” prevented, by virtue of Big Five veto rights, any intervention by the other powers, either military or economic. Moreover, it could have vetoed any investigations or inquiries. What then could this organization do? Just what happened: intervene by armed force and thus create war or the basis for war.
National independence, freedom of the peoples, the right of self-government, all these are but words in the mouths of the imperialists to fool the people of the world. Economic, political and military interests dominate the course of all the powers. In the case of the Middle East, the rights of the peoples are subordinated to oil imperialism.
 

  As was expected, the negotiations between the Warsaw Polish government and representatives of the London Poles, the “democratic” Poles, resulted in the reorganization of the Stalin-appointed government and the inclusion in the new set-up of former Premier Mikolajczyk and former head of the Miners Union, Jan Stanczyk, member of the Socialist Party. Also added to the “new” government as members of the Presidential Council were Wincenty Witos from inside Poland and Stanislaw Grabski from London. This development in Polish affairs is credited to the mission of Harry Hopkins, personal representative of President Truman, who flew to Moscow to obtain Stalin’s agreement to broaden the Warsaw government in line with the Yalta decisions. Stalin agreed to “broaden” the government although he protested that he was carrying out the Yalta agreements and, from one point of view, that is exactly what he had been doing.  The Yalta Sell-Out The Yalta agreement conceded to Stalin his chief demands on Poland, a shifting of its borders and the recognition of the Lublin government, which he created with Polish Communists and fellow travelers, under the supervision and surveillance of the GPU. British-American demands for a broadening of the government were insisted upon in order to make the Polish sell-out look more palatable. They had already accepted in principle Stalin’s right to have a Polish government completely subservient to Russian interests and demands. In granting the concession to Hopkins and including the aforementioned Poles in the government, Stalin conceded very little. Poland is firmly in his grasp economically and politically. The important opposition forces, the independent organizations and their leading elements have been uprooted. Thousands have been liquidated in the purges which followed the establishment of the Lublin government. Other thousands have been arrested and deported to Russian prison camps. A real commentary on this phase of world power politics is the change in British-American policy with respect to the exiled Polish government in London. This government, invited to London by the Churchill Cabinet after the defeat of Poland by Germany and its joint partition with Russia in accordance with a prior agreement contained in the Hitler-Stalin pact, awaits its death. London and Washington are now preparing to withdraw their recognition of this body, as well as the money which has kept it alive, and through it, to a considerable degree, the underground struggle against the Germans. Naturally, this government will not abdicate but will go on fighting for what it calls the “independence of Poland.” Moreover, it will continue to find widespread support inside of Poland, where the desire for independence is powerful. It will not be easy to suppress this fundamental urge of the Polish masses who no more want the domination of Russia than they did Germany.  Nothing Really Changed The mere inclusion of the London Poles in the “broadened” Warsaw government will not fundamentally alter things. As Clifton Daniel wrote from London in the New York Times of June 24: “Their presence in the Cabinet, however, cannot be expected to have any profound effect on the foreign policy and domestic social and economic policies of the Warsaw government.” The “leniency” of the sentence of the sixteen Poles in the Moscow trial for organizing “diversions” against the Russian army is a result of the agreement reached by Great Britain, the United States and Russia on the Polish question. These Poles were arrested and convicted on the charge of continuing the struggle for the independence of Poland after Russian occupation on orders from the London government, then headed by the same Mikolajczyk who has just become a member of the Warsaw regime. This is their real crime. But Stalin will never permit the existence of any genuine free and independent Poland. That is why, in the first place, he has purged the revolutionary working class fighters. In his counter-revolutionary program for Poland he has received the firm support of the United States and England. Thus, five years after the Second World War broke out over the violation of the independence of Poland by Germany and Russia, and a few weeks after the defeat of Nazi Germany, Poland has been sold down the river by Allied powers who plunged into the war in her behalf. This fact alone testifies that freedom, security, peace and the national independence of nations were not the things for which the war was fought.   
  The current discussion in the Communist Political Association carried publicly in the Daily Worker is indeed a revelation of the depth of the corruption of what was at one time a revolutionary socialist party. It is many years since the socialist goal was the reason for the existence of the Communist Party. To-day, in its deepest degeneration, the Communist Party (Association!) is totalitarian, utterly lacking in principle, devoid of any socialist character, and is simply the American section of Stalin’s international battalions. Its main purpose of existence is to defend the bureaucracy in Russia and to represent its interests in this country. The current discussion among the Stalino-Communists does not reflect a dispute over principle, over whether Browder or Foster is a better socialist. On the contrary, the dispute arises over the changing needs of the Stalin bureaucracy in Russia. So long as the war against Germany was still being fought, and Russia required the assistance, industrially and militarily, of the United States and Great Britain, the line followed by Browder was not in question. Only at the end of the war, when the difficulties among the Big Three over the division of the spoils in Europe became a real and concret eproblem, did the Stalinist line change in this country. Why?  Pawns of Stalin To enforce his demands of his allies, Stalin needs assistance in the form of the Communist organizations in the United States and England as well as in the rest of the world. The “new line” is a warning to the British and American ruling classes: grant me my demands or I will make it difficult for you. Browder had no doubt carried out the line of class peace and class collaboration too well. What is meant by that? Merely that he took an unnecessary step in dissolving the party which Stalin might find necessary again. In all other respects his line up until yesterday, and Foster’s line reveal no fundamental difference in theory and practice. They are both reactionary, anti-socialist, class collaborationist and anti-labor. As between Foster and Browder, the latter has logic on his side. He says, in effect, if you follow the Foster program, you are really following the program I advocate, only you wish to dress it up a little better to make it look nice. You are really dishonest, says Browder to Foster. As a matter of fact, however, Foster is the better Stalinist. He understood why the party should have been maintained as a blackmailing instrument. The fact is that Stalin tolerated Browder’s line (the real difference is whether the party should have been converted into a nassociation) so long as it was useful. It was clear to that master of intrigue in the Kremlin, that any change in line could not have been effected by Browder, who had gone out on the limb too far and had to be made the scapegoat in this situation.  Bureaucratic Confessions But the most revealing thing in this discussion, as we have already pointed out, is the manner in which the leading members of the National Board of the CPA, all of whom supported Browder slavishly and without any question, have suddenly seen the light.Their “self-criticism” is really a study in self-debasement and immorality. They reveal their fundamental dishonesty and disloyalty. They reveal, above all, the effect that a totalitarian party and totalitarian ideology has on the individual. He loses all self-respect, dignity and elementary honesty, becoming transformed into a hack, a machine man utterly incapable of independence of thought and action. Most important of all, the party and its leaders reveal how in misleading the workers in general, they misled the average worker member of the party, who thought he had joined a working class party devoted to the interests of socialism. They are the victims of a corrupt gang of bureaucrats who regard the rank and file of the party as so many cattle to be led wherever their bureaucratic interests direct. Here is Exhibit No. 1 of the totalitarian leader of the Stalinist School. Mr. Gil Green, member of the National Board of the CPA, President of the New York State CPA, a “promising” young bureaucrat who sold out his dignity and self-respect many years ago. Listen to him confess how he misled his party: “Had I personally been guided by this approach (Leninist) I would not have written some of the articles that I did ... I, however, never questioned the validity of the basic line as such ... I made a basically false estimate of monopoly capitalism ... My own share of responsibility (for the false line) I consider particularly great. I did not follow blindly – I was firmly convinced that the main line was correct ... In fact, in seeking theoretical justification for our policies, I was one of those who contributed to the further revision of our basic body of Marxist-Leninist principles. Unable to make the line fit the theory, I began to reshape the theory to fit the line. Such errors cannot be considered as small ones ...”  They Prattle On Now comes Exhibit No. 2, Benjamin J. Davis, Jr., member of the National Board, misleader of the Negro people, and recently Tammany-endorsed candidate for the New York City Council: “I applied it (the Browder line) in all my work, and most specifically in the field of Negro work, with resulting serious weaknesses in that work ... I did not detect the errors because I was not sufficiently mature and equipped as a Marxist, an inadequacy brought sharply to my attention by the impact of the Duclos article ... It is my opinion that bourgeois ideology influenced all on the Board who bear responsibility for the error.” Then we have Exhibit No. 3, Israel Amter, member of the National Board and long-time leading Stalinist: “There has not been an atmosphere of comradely discussion also at National Committee meetings. This has been absent to such an extent that a comrade, at a recent National Committee meeting declared this was the first time in the whole period that hehas been a National Committee member that he has dared to speak freely and without fear of being slapped down ... Above all there has been a lack of democracy in our organization. There was and is as yet no stimulation but rather a bureaucratic stifling of initiative, independent thinking and criticism in our ranks. “Together with all the members of the National Committee, I consider myself equally responsible for the present situation ... I became conditioned to swallow the whole bourgeois liberal line that he (Browder) developed. In spite of my 44 years in the Marxist movement, I threw over-board all experience and Marxist training.” Exhibit No. 4, Roy Hudson, the trade union director of the CPA, admits: “I went along because, my inadequate grasp of Marxism prevented me from understanding that something was fundamentally wrong.” This doesn’t exhaust the list by any means. What these totalitarians call “self-criticism,” is pure and simple bureaucratic confessing. What an utter lack of conscience that they can come before workers as leaders and ask their support afte  radmitting that they are “ignorant,” “inadequatelyeducated in Marxism” (the only theory and practice which can emancipate the working class), have “misled workers,” succumbed to “bourgeois (capitalist) ideology” and committed the gravest of errors against the working class. The spectacle is indeed illuminating. But it carries with it a lesson. Workers! turn your backs on these conscienceless misleaders and  betrayers of labor. Worker members of the Communist Party! Quit thistotalitarian organization of bureaucratic misleaders who use you as pawns in their own self-interest, as well as the interests of the  Russian bureaucracy. There is no more socialism or workers’democracy in Russia than there is in your own party. Join a truly revolutionary socialist party. Join the Workers Party.   
  Stalin’s Russia has now presented demands to Turkey whichemphasize Russian imperialist-expansionist policy. It is reported that Russia demands of Turkey:  The return of the districts of Kars and Ardahan, adjoining southern Russia (the Armenian state).  The granting of bases in the Bosphorus Straits and the Dardanelles.  Revision of the Montreux convention on the “Straits” (Bosphorus Strait, Sea of Marmora and the Dardanelles).  Acceptance by Turkey of territorial changes in the Balkans in favor of the smaller states.       Turkey’s initial reaction to these demands is to oppose the first, second and fourth, while she is willing to consider the third, which relates to international regulation of the Dardanelles. In the earlier years of the war, when Russia was allied with Germany, her seizure of territory was represented as a defensive measure aimed at guaranteeing her sovereignty. It should not be difficult to remember that the two wars with Finland and the subsequent incorporation of Finnish territory into Russia, the incorporation of the Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and the partition of Poland with Germany, were all represented as measures of defense.  “Defense” of Russia The Russian explanations were, of course, laughable to the world at large. The invasion of Russia by Germany and the consequent ending of their alliance made it possible for the Russian diplomats to say: See, we told you that all the aggressive acts we have taken were preparatory to an attack on us by Germany. The slightest investigation of the facts would disclose that all  the propaganda put out by the Russian Foreign Office was to theeffect that the defense was against the Allied imperialists who threatened Russia because of her peaceful alliance with Hitler’s Germany. Hitler’s Germany, the world was told by these same diplomats, did not want war, but was forced into it by Anglo-French imperialism. The defeat of Germany has changed matters considerably, but at this time the power of Russia in Eastern Europe, Asia Minor and in Asia generally, is so great, or, to put it another way, Allied power there is so weak, that little can be done about Russia’s expansion at this moment. The demands now made on Turkey are not fundamentally different from those made on Finland, the Baltic nations, Poland, Rumania and Iran. Russia violates the sovereignty of those nations which are too weak to resist her great military power. The warnings to Turkey by Red Star, organ of the Russian army, bear a striking resemblance to the German Nazi press when demands were made on smaller countries by Hitler preparatory to enforcement of his demands. Self-determination and the rights of all nations to their national independence mean as little to Stalin, whom Lenin called a “great Russian nationalist,” as they do to other imperialists. Consider the demands made by Russia on Turkey: 1. The return of the districts of Kars and Ardahan. “Return” is indeed a strange word. Kars and Ardahan were once part of Armenia when it was a part of the old Ottoman (Turkish) Empire. During the decline of this great empire, which stretched into Europe and the Middle East, Czarist Russia tried to partition it in its favor. Czarist Russia was frustrated, in its first attempts by the British and the French in the Crimean War of 1853–56. But Czarist Russia tried again in its war with Turkey in 1877–88.It sought to take Constantinople, the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles. England promised the Sultan of the declining Turkish Empire to defend the country against any attempt to destroy it – providing, of course, that some dismemberment took place. This was a direct warning to Russia. But to appease Russia she was granted Bessarabia and the districts of Batum, Kars and Ardahan! The Austro-Hungarian Empire was given Bosnia-Herzegovina and the British took for themselves the island of Cyprus. These districts were returned to Turkey in 1921 after the Russian Revolution. Now Stalin’s Russia, feeling its great power, demands their return as part of Stalin’s plan to resurrect the borders of old Czarist Russia. What we are witnessing is a reenactment of imperialist policy where whole countries, districts and smaller areas are exchanged, taken or occupied without the peoples involved being consulted or permitted to decide their fate. 2. Russia’s demands for bases in the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles are also a restatement of the old czarist demand. In Czarist days, Turkey was threatened with invasion, for Russia then wanted Constantinople and all of European Turkey. When Stalin demands bases in these areas it is only another form of invasion and interference with the affairs of another sovereign state. As in other  cases, Russia justifies her demands on Turkey on the grounds of defense. This demand is closely connected with the third. 3. Russia demands a revision of the Montreux Convention. Just exactly what revision she asks is not clear because it has not been publicly stated. The Montreux Convention was an international meeting of powers to regulate the use of the Dardanelles and Bosphorus Straits and the Sea of Marmora. It was held in Montreux, Switzerland, on July 20, 1936, and was attended by Bulgaria, France, Great Britain, Greece, Japan, Rumania, Russia, Jugoslavia and Turkey. It would seem that any demand for revision of these decisions would be addressed to those nations participating in the convention which decided the limitation of Turkey’s powers over her own waters. But Russia’s demands on Turkey are obviously an attempt to obtain a bilateral agreement and then confront the other powers with an accomplished fact. Turkey, of course, is defenseless against such demands. The fate of her areas will be decided by foreign powers. What a commentary on imperialist politics! Can you imagine what a howl would be raised by the big powers if Turkey demanded defensive bases at Leningrad or Odessa; if Belgium demanded defensive bases at Dover on the Channel, or if Mexico asked for defensive bases at New Orleans or Tampa. What a hue and cry would be raised by the big powers about their national sovereignty and territorial integrity! Their rights would be enforced by military power. These same rights do not apply to the smaller nations because they do not have the necessary military power to “achieve” such rights. 4. The final demand, calling for changes of European an dTurkish territories may be for bargaining purposes or to strengthen the Russian puppet states in the Balkans. What will be the outcome of this latest dispute? It depends almost entirely on the acts of the other powers. Great Britain is greatly disturbed by these demands and because Russia has already expressed interest in the international commission at Tangiers (Gibraltar) and in the Board of Directors of the Suez Canal, claiming to be vitally concerned with an outlet to the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Such an expansion of Russia would seriously affect British control of the Mediterranean Sea, which she regards us an empire lake leading to her prize possession, India. Obviously the problem will be solved by an agreement between the big imperialist powers. The important lesson in this affair is that it shows that the war, presumably fought as a “war of liberation,” had nothing whatever to do with the lofty principles of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms. The real wishes and desires of the people are completely ignored as the big powers move them around like so many chess men. An imperialist war can only give rise to imperialist politics. That is what we observe daily.   


The French Communist Party has made another small turn which emphasizes its complete dependence upon the foreign policy of Stalin’s Russia. It has made public, through a statement of its appointed leader, Maurice Thorez, that all the decisions of the Yalta Conference are completely acceptable to it and that it does not share with General Charles de Gaulle and his cabinet their reservations and opposition to the Crimean gathering. What is so strange about this?
The answer lies in the whole nature of the European political situation, the course of Russian foreign policy and the struggle of power politics as personified by the United States, Great Britain and Russia.
Prior to the Yalta meeting, the three powers had been following more or less separate roads, each intent on strengthening its own respective position in Europe. Despite the fact that they, France included, are party to the Dumbarton Oaks agreement for a new world power organization (similar to the ineffectual League of Nations), bilateral treaties were inaugurated. First, Russia and England signed a twenty-year treaty. Then Russia and France signed a similar treaty. England and France already had such a treaty.
 
Change in Russo-French Relations
Up to the time of the French treaty, Russia’s relations with that country and its appointed titular head, de Gaulle, was friendly at first (during the North African campaign); after Teheran, somewhat cooler. But When de Gaulle went to Moscow to sign the treaty, and referred to Stalin’s prison camp as “dear and powerful Russia,” the friendship between Russia and France rose to a feverish height.
The Communist Party in France followed a militant policy in the sense that it defended the Resistance Movement, its right to bear arms and its demands for economic, political and social reforms. It severely criticized de Gaulle’s regime and conducted itself generally as an opposition party.
That policy lasted until the Franco-Russian treaty was signed. With customary suddenness the line was changed. Was it changed as a result of a discussion in the Communist Party of France, after due deliberation and consideration by its membership? Of course not. The line was changed in Moscow, brought to France by Thorez and simply announced as the new party line. That’s the way of totalitarian parties allied to totalitarian states.
Thenceforth the French Communists supported every important measure proposed by de Gaulle. They agreed to disarming the resistance movement. They discovered a hundred and one reasons why this movement should dissolve. They defended the government in its determination, not to carry out any radical reforms and in general acted like any capitalist political party.
 
Yalta: A New Political Stage
The imperialists who now rule France are indignant that they were left out of the Yalta meeting. They want to take their place as equals in the dismemberment and enslavement of Germany, as well as in the partitioning of Europe. But since the Allies continue to treat France as a defeated power, even as they talk about helping it in its comeback and reserving a place for it as the. fourth power, de Gaulle is rebelling. He refused to meet Roosevelt. He has been critical of Yalta because he was not asked to participate in the conference. He acts like a spoiled child who does not understand his place in the home of the United Nations.
The French Communist Party, which up to Yalta completely supported de Gaulle, has now publicly criticized him. Again the position taken by Thorez was not the result of a party discussion or decision, but of an order emanating from Moscow. It reads: The decisions of Yalta must be supported! The tasks of he communists all over the world is to replace all previous policies with a new one: complete endorsement of the line of Moscow-Teheran-Yalta!
Therefore, says Thorez, “France will have the place that she legitimately deserves. That place will be what we make it (No, it will be what the U.S., England and Russia make it—C.D.). We are glad of it and we do riot share the reserves and regrets of those who are astonished that France was not called to that conference.”
It is added, however, that while the French communists do not accept de Gaulle’s foreign policy, it will continue to support him on domestic policy which, as the New York Times stated, is: “To postpone far-reaching economic reforms until after the war.”
 



The budget message delivered two weeks ago by President Roosevelt is the kind of report made to Congress which most people pay little attention to, in the belief that it is one aspect of government which does not really interest or affect them much. But the contrary is true.
The budget message sets out the moneys the government plans to spend in the following year, outlines the different categories for which expenditures are necessary, and reveals in general some of the important aims of the Administration.
The budget message, like others delivered by Roosevelt, is a war message, for its main preoccupation is with financing the war. Many people know that the cost runs into hundreds of billions of dollars. Few know exactly how much it costs to run the war each year, and what effect it has upon depressing the living standards of the people.
There are several important aspects to the message. Since the U.S. entered in the war in 1941, $288,800,000,000 has been spent on the war alone, resulting in the highest taxes ever paid by the American worker, and a declining standard of living in the midst of a period when everyone is working.
This means the U.S. has spent $72,200,000,000 a year. This is more than $515 for every man, woman and child in the country.
It has spent this money for means of destruction at the rate of more than $199,013,000 per day. or more than $8,292,000 per hour.
Despite these huge sums, and a rising government debt of over $200 billions, for which the future generation will pay by sweat and toil, big business, the corporative interests of the country, haven’t been squawking very much.
This is interesting because it wasn’t very long ago that the business interests raised a terrible howl about government expenditures for relief and WFA projects which Roosevelt demanded in fear of the terrible consequences that would ensue if half the population were allowed to starve.
Big business, the monopolists of the country, the reactionary senators and representatives and the yellow press screamed away at relief and WPA projects because they would eat away at their wealth at a time when industry was at a standstill. or shut down altogether. Our graph shows how pitiful a figure was used for relief in contrast to the war billions – only $14,591,159,000!
The reason why big business says little or nothing about the giant war expenditures is because many of these expenditures go in to make up the greatest profits in the history of American business. Despite all their moaning, they know this to be the fact.
In addition to presenting the budget for the war, Roosevelt also projected a plan for 60,000,000 Jobs, which everyone wants and attached to which is a proposal to provide the sum of $279,000,000 for the year 1946. One and a half billion goes for a federal public works program, and another billion dollars is for federal aid to highways. The total budget for such a thing is $3 billion. This meager sum (again in contrast to war expenditures) is to provide additional employment for those whom private industry, or “free enterprise,” cannot absorb.
 
Post-War Planning
No serious plans are prepared by the capitalist ruling class and its political administration in Washington to provide for the overwhelming majority bf the people. Instead we get a lot of pap about “free enterprise,” lower taxes for corporations, rebates to the monopolists and Roosevelt’s honeyed plans for keeping employed sixty million workers!
The Roosevelt budget message reveals the mentality of the capitalist politician. It shows that he, like the rest of his class, plans with profits in mind at all times. The total sum of $3 billions for public works, road building, etc., would hardly pay for ten days of the cost of the war. His program is a capitalist program. Hundreds of billions of dollars for war and destruction! Pennies for security and human lives!
In sharp contrast to this capitalist program of starvation, the Workers Party and Labor Action present a program which calls for: A $250 billions five-year federal public works program to provide jobs and relief to the unemployed.
This is a modest sum. It is only $50 billions a year; far less than the war budget.
Every government expert admits that housing for millions is sub-standard. Other millions of people actually face a shortage of shelters. Many parts of the country are without electricity or means of power. Roads and communications are sadly in need of repair and extension. And these are only a few of the things that can be done.
There is the matter of improving the health and physical condition of millions of people. The draft demonstrated the sad physical condition of so large a number of American youth.
Most of the people in the country suffer from inadequate medical care. A real program would provide for such necessary care.
Most Americans do not complete their education. Our program would provide for that, too!
These are only a few of the many things that can and should be done.
The President’s plan is no plan at all. It merely emphasizes that for him, as for the rest of his class, the ideal is:
Everything for war! As little as possible for peace!
The Workers Party program is a modest step on the road to securing sixty million job! and plenty by all.
To secure such ah adequate program of public works, an independent Labor Party is necessary. One of its first planks would deal with adequate public works.
Roosevelt has shown his hand. His contemptuously meager “plan” is doomed in advance.
Labor must break with Roosevelt and form its own party to secure —
PLENTY FOR ALL!
 



Power politics met in Yalta, Crimea. Power politics was represented by the United States, Russia and Great Britain in the persons of President Roosevelt, Dictator Stalin and Prime Minister Churchill, the great chiefs of state.
The Big Powers met to decide the fate of Europe and the whole world. The power of American arms and production, the power of Russian armies and their occupation of the eastern half of Europe, the declining power of the British Empire – these things dictated the decisions reached at Yalta. Thus these decisions, compromise or otherwise, are at best provisional.
Any change in the relationships of power and arms will accordingly change the decisions reached by the Big Three. For the time being, however, they stand as a monument to the imperialist solution of the world problems. There was not one fresh breath of the spirit of genuine democracy, peace and security. What the representatives of the great military powers of the world decided was how to reinforce their present positions and to prevent any upset in their plans to defeat their economic, political and military rivals.
The decisions Will be implemented by meetings of their several commissions, their foreign ministers and finally by the forty-five other nations regarded as members of the United Nations, although subordinate ones to be sure. For the latter purpose, a conference is called for April 25 in San Francisco, where the principal job of the “United” nations will be to ratify the decisions arrived at by Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill.
What was achieved at Yalta?
 
Germany:
The powers made decisions on the, military prosecution of the way with concerted offensives to bring the war to a speedy end. They then went on to lay their plans for the joint occupation of Germany, the destruction of its industries, its military power, the Nazi government and party, and to dismember the country. Germany will be made to jpay for the war through reparations arid through the enslavement of its people, in their majority the German working class. France, relegated to a second-rate power, was invited to help enslave Germany.
Stalin long demanded his ten million slaves. Yalta endorsed this demand.
Thus, the German workers, who have paid with their blood, sweat and tears, and their very lives for the rule of Hitler, which enslaved them with the aid of the imperialists of the world and the capitulation of the Stalin to fascism, are now to pay additional indemnities for the crimes of their rulers. Yet, the crime of their rulers are the crimes of all the ruling classes of the world.
It is doubly interesting to note that nothing whatever was said about the German financial and industrial ruling classes who financed Hitler and put him into power. No plan was devised by these three organizers of chaos about the coal, steel, chemical, munition magnates and the financial wizards of Germany who put Hitler into power to destroy the labor movement and fight this war in their interests.
No, how could they? This class in Germany is the same kind of class which rules in Britain and the United States, and the one with whom Stalin has done so much business. The capitalist rulers of the United Nations dare not punish their capitalistic partners-in-profit in Germany, lest the peoples of the world get the notion to punish profiteers of the world and achieve their real freedom.
The Big Three, however, will punish the long suffering people of Germany who have lived under the lash and knife of German fascism. Behold the liberals of England and America, the trade union leaders of the same countries and the totalitarians of Russia cheering the enslavement of the German masses, while their capitalist rulers go scot free for their crimes!
The German workers will be relieved of the slavery of fascism, only to have it replaced by the slavery of occupation and foreign rule! This is the third peace! This is the so-called democratic peace!
 
Poland:
Poland, the nation whose independence was violated by Germany and Russia in 1939, and over whose destruction the Second World Imperialist War began, the Poland which has been fighting in the war for more than four and a half years, was doomed by the action of the Big Three.
The Conferees at Yalta decided to recognize Stalin’s demands for the dismemberment of the country. It granted to Russia all of Poland east of the Curzon line. It decided to compensate Poland with territory taken from Germany, an act which will require that the Big Three underwrite this grab of Eastern Germany and East Prussia.
The conferees recognized Stalin’s hand-picked Lublin Committee as the provisional government of the New Poland, except that it shall be broadened to include Poles from abroad! Which Poles? Naturally, no Poles who have opposed Stalin’s occupation of the country or his demands – only those who are tractable and will accept the present “compromise”.
The Big Three read out of existence the reactionary Polish Government-in-Exile, now residing in London, a government which it recognized, housed and supported up to the very eve of the conference in Crimea. This legal Polish government, insofar as Poland had one, was not consulted about the decisions. It was told what its fate would be – not directly – but through the public announcements made of the conference decisions.
 
“Free” Elections
Oh, yes, the conference decided to hold “free” elections to determine the future government. These elections will be supervised by the Big Three, where, as one paper put it, the Russians will be in a minority of one! What hypocrites!
The Germans have already purged Poland of its most heroic people in the territory which occupied it. Stalin has purged Poland of its most heroic people in the area under his domination. The Lublin Committee which he organized has waged a campaign of terror against all its opponents since it has been in power.
And now they will run a “free” elections to select the new government. The impartiality of the elections will be determined by the fact that the Big Three will have a commission present on which Russia will be a minority of one! This is a farce too tragic for laughter. In all of these deliberations, the people, the Poles, the White Russian and Ukranian minorities are not even consulted. The Big Powers have decided on the basis of arms and their separate interests, not the interests of the people.
 
N.Y. Times
Listen to how the venal and hypocritical New York Times sets aside any objections to the deal made on Poland. In an editorial of February 14, it writes:
“Meanwhile ... the Polish Government-in-Exile, functioning in London, insisted that it had no mandate from the Polish people to surrender any part of Polish territory and that Russia was attempting to force a settlement of the whole question by unilateral action.
“That was true before the Yalta conference met. It is now no longer true.”
The fact that Britain and the United States assented to Stalin’s machinations in Poland, now makes it a just and legal action, according to the great minds on the Times editorial staff.
The Times goes on to say:
“The solution proposed at Yalta is a Three-power plan, supported not only by Russia, but by Britain and the United States. To be sure, the Polish Government-in-Exile had no hand in this decision (to be sure). But the fact remains that the decision was made in the name of the three Powers which alone are capable of defending the integrity of Poland against a renewal of German aggression, and by the three Powers which will once more have to bear the brunt of the fighting in case such a threat develops.”
Thus, in a single paragraph we are told that only the big Powers can decide the fate of all small countries.
That this war, which is not yet over, is incapable of any lasting solutions, since the danger of the same war, or a similar one will arise after the close of the present.
Jugoslavia, Balkans, Baltics:
The action of the Big Three on Poland is hardly different from its actions elsewhere.
They understood the power of Tito, Stalin’s hand-made Marshal in Jugoslavia. To be sure, they made a little compromise, by agreeing on a Regent in place of King Peter, and added a few gentlemen from the London Jugoslav government, but the fact remains that it is Tito’s government, which is another way of saying this is Stalin’s stamping ground.
The conference did nothing about the Balkan situation, which Stalin dominates. This problem will presumably be solved at another time.
It was equally silent on the Baltic States (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) which Stalin has long since incorporated by force into the borders of Russia. Being practical, gentlemen, the Yalta traders decided to forget all about it.
Nor was anything said about Russia’s machinations in Iran, which suddenly dropped out of the news.
 
Atlantic Charter:
With the cynicism which characterizes all imperialists, the Big Three then announced that they re-endorsed the Atlantic Charter, that is, re-endorsed a document which has been torn to shreds, which was never applied in practice, which President Roosevelt found it possible to joke about, and which is violated every day of the war.
They re-endorsed the Atlantic Charter after the incorporation of the Baltic States into Russia without the consent of the people, after the rape of Poland and a solution to the problem without consulting the people, after the seizure of territories by Russia without consulting the people or giving them the right to decide their fate, after Churchill made clear that the document had no application to the imperialist possessions of the Empire! The hypocrisy of the imperialists has overflowed the cup long ago.
 
And What Else?
Up to now the three Powers have been going their separate ways in the solution of non-military problems. Stalin simply seized everything in his path. England acted more or less on its own in the concrete working out of problems in Italy, Greece and Belgium. The United States was silent most of the time, acquiesced at others, and objected from time to time. The Yalta conference decided at least this: no more unilateral actions. Henceforth the Big Three will jointly decide all questions.
It is also reported that agreement has been reached on Dumbarton Oaks, the details of which are still to come.
 
“Internal Peace”
But most important is the decision of the Powers to supervise the “liberation” of all countries, their governments and elections with a view to keeping “internal peace.” This is clearly a warning to the peoples of Europe that any attempt on their part to get rid of the rotten ruling classes, the capitalistic profiteers, who are responsible for the war, the mass misery, poverty and starvation on the Continent, will be met with the fury of the armed forces of the Big Three.
When they speak of “internal peace,” they mean to prevent any social and economic change that the people may desire. The importance of this action will grow the stronger become the desires of the masses for change. In this way the international counter-revolution is being organized by Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill, all three of them extremely conscious and sensitive to the moods of the masses and their desires. They are the gravest danger to the working people of Europe and the whole world. They stand in the way of genuine social progress and a future world of peace, security and freedom.
And again, as in all previous conferences, not all decisions were made public. Just as the Big Three dared not reveal – and have not, to this day – the terms of the Italian armistice, they have not put before the people who are paying and dying for the War their full plans. Secret diplomacy is the partner of capitalist power politics.
If Stalin got his demands, and it is clear that he did, what if anything did England and America get out of the conference? England got little or nothing, except the assurance that the United States will become an active participant in European affairs, and bolster up. Britain as a subordinate partner of Yankee imperialism.
The United States got a foothold on the European Continent. But more than that, it obtained a letter of credit in the form of Russian participation in the Pacific struggle. There is no doubt that agreements were made for Russian assistance in the war against Japan. There is no doubt either that the division of the spoils has already been decided in principle. This will be clearer in time.
These, in brief, were the main decisions fcf the Big Three meeting in the Crimea. It was a gathering, of imperialists deciding the fate of the world. It had nothing whatever to do with the future peace, freedom or security of the world. It had a great deal to do with power politics, the divisions of the booty, future markets, territories, spheres of influence and profits. Above all, history will record that the seeds of the Third World War were planted in Yalta.
 



Judge Philip Sullivan, sitting in the: Federal District Court in Chicago, handed down a decision in the case of the government’s seizure of the Montgomery Ward plants, which denied the President’s right to seize the company’s properties.
The judge contended that Congress gave no such authority to the President and for the President to act legally in this instance would require a special law by the legislature.
 
A Victory For Property
He was acting, ths judge stated in effect, in defense of the Bill of Rights, protecting life, liberty and property.
Sewell Avery, union-busting head of Ward’s, bailed the decision as a “victory for labor.” He meant, of course, a victory for such high-priced “laborers” as himself.
The labor leaders are stunned by this decision. They defiantly denounce the judge’s ruling, quite confident that the Supreme Court will overrule the District Court, since the government has already announced its intention to appeal the decision.
This may well be true, because the Supreme Court has a substantial corps of presidential supporters. Precedent is what the court makes it. In general, the court has been in accord with the President’s views and may rule in favor of the government under the precept that there is a war going on, that an emergency situation exists and that the President has the general powers to act the way he did in the Ward case.
History of the Ward Dispute
Just exactly what happened in the Ward dispute? The United Retail Clerks won election after election in the Ward plants. Despite these victories, Avery and his gang refused, to recognize the union. The WLB made several long-postponed decisions on wages to the extremely low-paid Ward workers. The company refused to accept these decisions. It claimed that the WLB had no authority to enforce its decisions that Montgomery Ward was engaged in war production and therefore was not liable under the emergency war powers of President Roosevelt. For over two years Ward has been kicking the union around, while the latter patiently waited for Roosevelt, the WLB and the Directors of Economic Stabilization to do something.
While the govvernment piddled around for the same period, the over-patient union called a nation-wide strike at the Montgomery Ward plants, climaxed by the great struggle in Detroit, which was supported by the United Automobile Workers, including many of their officials. Faced with this mass strike, the militancy of the workers, and the rising tide of opposition to the no-strike pledge, which makes unions the easy prey of the union-busting corporations, the President ordered the seizure of the Montgomery Ward plants and directed the Army to operate them.
What did the owners of the company lose? Their business went on; their profits were guaranteed (this, of course, is most important). Attorney General Biddle made it clear that he intended no “punitive” measures against Avery and other company officials. They were to be treated as hard-headed business who who just happened to have a quarrel with the government.
Quite a difference between his action against Avery and his treatment of the coal miners, who were prosecuted and jailed under the Smith-Connally Act. This important difference in the conduct of the government is entirely lost sight of by the labor leaders. Yet here is the key to the government’s real attitude toward capital and labor. On the one hand it operates a company, guaranteeing the profits, dividends and salaries to its owners; on the other hand it prosecutes and jails striking miners fighting for their lives.
 
Shadow-Boxing
As the case is developed, the legal arguments on both sides will be long, technical and involved, evading the real problem of the rights of labor as against the rights of capitalist property. Everything else, whether Ward’s is a “producer” or “distributor,” whether it is engaged in “vital war work” or not, is beside the point.
What is puzzling and what confuses many workers is why Roosevelt, who is admittedly a capitalist in thought and action, ordered the seizure of the Ward property and thus precipitated the decision of the lower court. The answer is to be sought in the whole domestic situation.
Roosevelt organized his war program on the basis of winning the support of labor to the war or, at least, keeping it from opposing the war. He knew, as every capitalist knew, that without labor nothing can be produced – there would have been no war production. There would have been idle machines with a lot of bloated big business men sitting around not knowing what to do.
Under this program, capital gave up the lock-out, for which it received from the government a guarantee of profits – the highest in the history of American business. A fair trade – all to the advantage of the Capitalist owners of industry! They have enriched themselves from the war. Labor is not even holding its own.
 
Why FDR Ordered Seizure
But labor is restless. It is fighting back. It wants to break the crippling no-strike pledge, it wants to thaw out the wage freeze. It wants to battle the union-busting corporations. The President knows this. But he will not change his program; he will not interfere with the profit system or the profits of his class.
His seizure of the Ward properties can only be explained by the fact that it is a sop thrown to labor to make it seem as though the President is truly “impartial.” It was a step taken to draw fire away from his demand for a National Service Act to enslave labor through a draft in the interests of private profit. It was a step to draw attention away from the fact that he will do nothing substantial to change the Little Steel formula or the wage freeze.
The law and the courts under capitalism exist for the purpose of maintaining inviolate capitalist property and the profit system. These were not touched at all in the Ward case. The whole fight was ah inter-capitalist dispute between a capitalist administration and one of its opponents. The labor movement would be making a serious mistake if it staked everything on the courts. Labor needs to rely upon its own strength, its own power, the vast forces of the organized union movement. Therein lies the surest road to success.
 
Labor’s Course
Even if the Ward case is eventually won by the government, it will not be a labor victory, especially in face of the many losses labor has already suffered at the hands of the Roosevelt Administration, which is acting on the basis of “law.”
There is another aspect of the judge’s ruling to which attention must be directed. It is the rising dictatorial powers of the President. It emphasized the true meaning of the labor draft as exhibiting the growing trend toward totalitarianism under “labor’s friend” Roosevelt.
The clearest lesson of the whole case is that labor is being taken for a ride in supporting capitalist politicians and capitalist administrations. Labor’s surest road to success is through the independent political organization of the working class into a Labor Party to fight for governmental power. To do this, it must have a program which would defeat the anti-unionism of big business, the no-strike pledge, the wage freeze, sub-standard wages, war profits and bloated millionaires living on the backs of millions of workers.
 




1. Thunder in the Senate
The May-Bailey “work or jail” bill, passed by the House in response to President Roosevelt’s request for a National Service Act, is now before the Senate, Military Affairs Committee. The Senate committee is presently holding secret hearings on the bill before reporting it out. These come after a report that the Senate committee had agreed on the House bill and would send it to the senior legislative body to be voted on.
Now it has been revealed that a sharp fight took place between the Military Affairs Committee and the “brass hats.” The House passed the May-Bailey bill with a proviso that manpower control be lodged in the Selective Service. There was much opposition to this aspect of the bill, particularly in the Senate. It was then that the War and Navy Departments reached an agreement with the Senate committee to turn over control of manpower to James F. Byrnes, or any committee he selected. The Senate committee then voted the bill favorably.
The Senate Military Affairs Committee did not oppose the labor draft for private profits on principle, although many members of the committee did not agree that it was urgent. They said they were responding to the demand of the President. But between the passage of the bill in the committee and its formal presentation to the Senate some shenanigans had taken place.
The “brass hats” turned around and through several of their supporting senators had the bill turn manpower control over to Selective Service. A terrific howl came from committee members, more notably, Senators O’Mahoney and Johnson. They charged that the Army had double-crossed them!
The committee then decided to hold hearings, which it had previously agreed to forego, and to hold these hearings in secret. New testimony is being taken, supposedly in secret, although Assistant Secretary of War Patterson made public his evidence in favor of a labor draft as part of the
pressure campaign to force it through the Senate. But the senators, fully cognizant of labor and mass opposition to the bill, are taking their time. The majority of them are reported opposed to national service, especially in view of the Allied advances on the military front.
*

2. Why Does FDR Insist?
Many of the senators publicly question the need of a labor draft in view of the situation on the military front. Labor leaders who have punched holes through the Administration propaganda and lies about the manpower shortage, ask similar questions. If there is no real manpower shortage, and no shortage of supplies and munitions, which the brass hats admit have been produced in abundance, why do Roosevelt, the Administration, the War and Navy Departments insist upon it?
The answer is not difficult to trace. The truth is that manpower and supplies and munitions were never the real reasons why Roosevelt and the military wanted a National Service Act. Certainly it isn’t the war with Japan that will still be fought after the defeat of Germany, because American imperialism has been able to fight on both fronts without a labor draft. Then why?
American imperialism is preparing for a great post-war struggle for the economic and political domination of the world. The Administration and the ruling class it represents need totalitarian measures to assure a greater control of the country in preparation for economic dislocations at home after the war, and the same kind of totalitarian control to make it more effective to carry out its world aims of subjecting the economies of all other countries to it.
A free labor movement and a relatively free working class fighting for its own economic existence at home against mass unemployment and a declining standard, of living, as well as a big business offensive against unionism, will make it difficult for American imperialism to effect its world aims, which depend on a peaceful home front.
If this seems a little difficult to grasp at first glance, remember this: the closer the war comes to an end in Europe, the more determined is Roosevelt to get a labor draft. And remember this too: A labor draft is not only for the duration. It will extend for as long as the Administration thinks it necessary. The time to fight the labor draft, then, is not after it is passed, but right now before it is a law of the land. Once it is a law, it will be doubly and trebly more difficult to get rid of it.
*

3. PAC Is Still Silent
It is a good thing to see the AFL, the Railroad Brotherhoods and the CIO organizing a stronger opposition to the labor draft for private profits. Labor is powerful enough to wage an effective struggle against labor slavery a la Roosevelt. But it is interesting to note how totally quiet and inactive is the PAC in this whole tremendously important fight over the National Service Act.
There is hardly a peep out of this important subdivision of the union movement, which gave up millions of man-hours, hundreds of thousands of dollars, and tremendous energy to elect Roosevelt on the false theory that he was labor’s candidate. The PAC is also very quiet about the many senators and representatives it elected who support or have voted for the slave bill. As a matter of fact, the majority of legislators elected by PAC influence, activity and money support the labor draft.
We surmise that one of the reasons for the silence of the PAC is sheer embarrassment at seeing all the professional politicians it supported, from Roosevelt down, act as instruments to enslave the American working class.
There is a deep lesson in all of this. Labor should get into politics, but independent politics, that is, independent labor politics, through its own party and its own program. End the frightful sham of tying labor to the political machines of capitalist political parties and candidates who betray labor the moment they get into office.
 



The World Trade Union Conference now meeting in London was initiated by the British Trade Union Council, one of the pillars of the International Federation of Trade Unions. To it were invited all the unions of the world – or at least a great part of them – including Russia’s so-called unions, which are neither free nor unions, and the CIO, previously barred from the IFTU because of the opposition of the AFL.
The British TUC called this almost all-inclusive conference as a political affair, and considered its deliberation to be merely advisory, having in mind a subsequent inclusion of the CIO and the Russian “unions,” into the IFTU. It raised this question at the executive council meeting of the International Federation of Trade Unions, only to meet with the stern rebuff of the AFL delegations which, although their attitude is generally reactionary, especially on the matter of the CIO and industrial unionism, are certainly mainly correct in their position on Stalin’s Russian “unions.”
The conference, reportedly representing fifty-one countries and 50,000,000 unionists (counting Russia’s 25,000,000 “unionists”), is just what the British originally intended it to be: a political gathering which has little in common with genuine unionism or its international promotion and unity. Here are the main topics of discussion:
 
What They’re Discussing

Germany, and how to enslave the German workers to make them pay for the crimes of their capitalist rulers and the capitalist rulers of all other countries who aided Hitler and the Junkers to destroy the German labor movement.
 
Recognition at the conference of Russian dominated “unions” from the Lublin Committee in Poland.
 
Recognition of newly-formed unions in formerly occupied countries where Stalin’s agents have seized control.
 
The organization of a new trade union international composed of all unions, the CIO and the Russian, thus forcing the liquidation of the IFTU. Behind this demand stands Russia and the CIO delegation headed by Hillman (whose politics parallels the international communist line) and containing innocents like R.J. Thomas and Stalinist fellow travelers like Joseph Curran and Albert Fitzgerald.

The Russian representatives and their Stalinist aides from other countries really dominate the conference. Only Citrine’s strong opposition prevented the conference from seating the Lublin, Yugoslav and Italian delegates. R.J. Thomas rushed into this dispute with his customary tear-jerking plea for unity, and proposed to turn over the question to the credentials committee. That solved this dispute for the moment.
On the matter of Germany, the conference took the extremely reactionary, Van Sittartist view, that German workers should be enslaved to pay reparations to the Allies for the crimes of their fascist rulers. Here the Russian view dominated, although it had no real opposition. The British unionists hold to the same position, and to the everlasting shame of the rank and file of the CIO, their leaders endorsed this imperialist idea of making the people pay for the crimes of their rulers.
What has actually happened on this point is that the “labor leaders” of these various countries adopted the policy of the imperialist rulers of their countries. They showed in London that they were really acting as “labor lieutenants of capitalism.” It took a conservative labor leader like William Green to correctly denounce this action of labor unions supporting labor enslavement!
 
For New World Body
The real pressure for a new international trade union federation came when Sidney Hillman arrived at the conference and really put the heat on to liquidate the old IFTU and substitute it with a new outfit, one that cannot fail to be controlled by the Russians and thereby reflect the Stalinist political line.
When the British objected that the conference was called by them for advisory purposes, the delegates voted for the American proposal to establish a continuations committee. Thus the dupes in the CIO fell right in with what the Stalinists want. The fact that Hillman emphasized that the new body shall be democratic will not affect Russian control. They have their share of zealots in the CIO present in London. The French representatives are loaded down with Stalinist-Communists. In addition, there is Lombardo Toledano, Stalinist leader of the Latin American union movement, to assist when necessary.
What is happening in London is that the international Stalinist movement has finally broken through its world trade union isolation. With the impact of the war it wormed its way into the very center of an embryonic trade union international. This will merely pave the way for its further infiltration into the unions of all countries to represent there the interests of Stalin’s Russia against the true interests of world labor.
You will then see the international no-strike pledge, boss-labor collaboration and anti-labor policies at work. The Communist Party and its trade union representatives do their dirty work here. Now it will be blessed with the formal approval of an international trade union body, in which the short-sighted and politically naive CIO leaders played a stellar part.
The World Labor Conference is not yet over and its final decisions are still to come. The present acts are still provisional. But great damage has already been done.
Our next article, therefore, will contain a complete resumé of the London conference.
 



The Political Action Committee, more popularly known as the PAC, organized by the CIO at its sixth constitutional convention in November 1943, is a new phenomenon in American political life. It took the country by storm when it appeared in the 1944 presidential campaign as a well-knit, firmly organized labor battalion in behalf of President Roosevelt.
The labor-baiters seized the opportunity for a nation-wide anti-union campaign, on the theory that any political activity by the workers is bad. The political activity of the PAC was bad, in our opinion, but for reasons altogether different than those expressed by Dies, Hearst, McCormick and the whole host of reactionaries. As a result of the reactionary pressure, the PAC was twice investigated in Washington (then exonerated by the FBI) and generally condemned by the big business, anti-Roosevelt press.
But as a result of enormous energy, organization and expenditures, the PAC succeeded in rallying millions of votes in behalf of a capitalist candidate for President and hundreds of national and state politicians, as well as local machine hacks and ward-heelers of the two old parties. These very activities helped to make many workers in this country politically conscious, although in a capitalist direction.
 
What the Book Portrays
So vast was the activity of the PAC that a book has just been published describing its formation and activities. This book, The First Round, by Joseph Gaer, a member of the PAC staff, is not the kind of history of a movement that we frequently meet. It is not an all-embracing analysis of the origins of the movement, its political and organizational development, in an effort to place it in the history of American labor. It is, rather, an advertisement for the PAC, popularly written, and containing for the most part a series of pamphlets issued during the campaigning days of the PAC.
In any case, the book is lively, simply written, containing considerable punch precisely because it reprints the extremely well-written pamphlets which the PAC issued during the period of its active campaign: By so doing, the book reveals exactly what was wrong with the PAC from the point of view of the long-term interests of the American worker and his union movement.
American labor has shown over a period of years, great ingenuity in developing methods of struggle (the sit-down strikes, industrial unionism) that would strengthen it in the fight against big business, which has at its disposal the government, the police, the yellow press, the radio, the movies and even the church. On the economic field it is capable of rising to great heights in the struggle against rapacious bosses representing the big monopolistic firms and other giant corporations.
 
Political Awakening
Politically, the American worker has not kept pace. Whereas he knew well what to do in an economic struggle and what to do around a conference table with a boss, when he went out to vote he usually voted for this same boss or some politician hand-picked by him. And while the American worker would never think of selecting the boss or his agent to represent his (the worker’s) viewpoint or demands in a labor dispute, he would and does vote for him on the political field.
In recent years, however, the American worker has been growing up politically. Slowly but surely he is beginning to understand that, just as it is necessary for him to be organized economically in his trade unions, he must be organized politically through his own party, with his own candidates and with a program for labor.
These rumblings for independent political action grow louder and louder. This is what scares the two big capitalist parties, the Republican and Democratic. This is what scares the politically backward labor leaders, who are tied hand and foot by the capitalist politicians. They work with might and main to prevent the workers from organizing politically.
It is true, as Mr. Gaer writes in The First Round, that “labor has always been in politics.” He cites the example of Gompers. Gompers, however, never tied himself to one capitalist political party, as did the PAC. No, under the AFL watchword, “Reward your friends and punish your enemies,” he had his feet in the mire of both capitalist parties.
Gompers, however, had this much in common with the Greens, Murrays and Hillmans of this day: he too fought against independent labor politics when that means that labor should organize its own party with its own candidates and its own labor program in the interests of all the people.
“PAC started out with a program. It had a plan. It carried out its activities in an orderly fashion. It established a national organization which, in turn, cooperated with CIO international unions and their administrative units in the states and in the cities. These joined hands with other labor organizations, with farm organizations, and with many civic, religious and professional groups.”
All of this is unquestionably true. It is also true that the material issued by the PAC was well written, graphic, pointed, punchy and intelligent. But ... the well-organized propaganda which unquestionably had a great deal to do in causing the fear of the reactionaries and the attacks which followed, was contradictory.
 
Propagandist for FDR
The PAC has become the strongest single propagandist for capitalist politics in the ranks of labor. To fortify its campaign for Roosevelt, it naturally had to campaign against genuine, independent political action by labor through its own party, and played no small role in preventing the organization of such a party during 1944.
The First Round contains figures of PAC funds and expenditures. We are, of course, uninterested in the attacks of a Dies Committee on the matter of funds. We do not think that the fund, from the point of view of capitalist politics, is very great, because we know that capitalist parties and politicians spend ten and twenty times the amount of money labor spends in elections. Our objections to the funds raised and spent by the CIO’s political arm arise from our consciousness that this money, coming from the blood and sweat and tears of the workers, was used for anti-working class results.
 
Some “Achievements”
PAC raised a total of $1,371,978.90 from unions, individuals and the National Citizens PAC! It spent the total sum of $1,047,955.11!
Forming a major part of its activities was the enormous amount of literature issued:






 


 


Copies




16 pamphlets


  2,044,900




  8 leaflets


57,600,000




14 misc. leaflets


  3,749,000




21 posters


     415,000




  3 24-sheet posters
   and billboards


           1,500




10 flier st’m’ts


14,570,000




  5 misc. items


  2,563,000




  6 badges


     136,650




     bulletins


       20,000




  3 letters


      40,000






And the net result? In the short period since Roosevelt has been in office, he reorganized the millionaires club at the State Department by changing the personnel, but not the club itself. It is still a millionaires’ club.
Roosevelt is behind the determination of Stabilization Director Vinson to keep wages down, to keep them frozen, to keep unchanged the Little Steel formula, which the whole labor movement is fighting.
Finally, Roosevelt is the author of the demand for a National Service Art to enslave American labor for private profit!
This is what we mean when we say that the PAC was organized for the wrong purpose and carried out bad policies for the American worker, policies which already have had harmful results. Roosevelt’s fight for a slave labor bill alone is the answer to the PAC’s claims. The PAC to date has not spoken as an organization against the National Service Act. And that still isn’t all. Almost all the senatorial and congressional candidates endorsed and supported by the PAC voted for the May-Bailey limited National Service Act! Neither Murray nor Hillman can gainsay these facts!
 
For a Second Round
But the book, The First Round, is an excellent proof of what labor could really do in the field of politics. It demonstrates beyond a doubt that if labor expended this energy, money and organization building a great labor party of its own with a militant labor program, nothing could stop it.
If all the work which went into the pamphlets, leaflets, advertising material, the meetings and the speeches were directed to real independent political action, toward the formation of an independent Labor Party, nothing could stop it – nobody could stop it.
Labor would then truly be on the political march, – not for capitalist politicians and capitalist parties – but in its own interests.
Such a development in this country would truly mark the “Second Round.” And the “Second Round” is what labor really needs to make lasting political and economic progress.
 



Five years, eight months and seven days after the Second Imperialist World War began the remnants of the once mighty and seemingly invincible German land forces capitulated to the overwhelming manpower and materiel of the Allied armies and ended the war in Europe.
But the most destructive war in all human history, a struggle which has destroyed the most important areas of the Continent and inflicted casualties to an estimated 40,000,000 soldiers and civilians from all countries, still goes on in the broad expanses of the Far East.
Nor will a triumph of Allied arms over Japanese militarism bring a lasting peace to the world. Already the seeds of a Third World War have been planted. For no sooner have the rifles and cannon ceased their fire, the tanks halted in their rumble of death, the planes ended their flights of destruction, when the victorious nations engage in the old imperialist game of reestablishing positions by which each hopes to dominate the world.
The war against Germany and Italy in Europe, and Japan in the Far East, was a conflict between rival powers. The Axis nations sought to change the world in their, own favor. By that they understood the necessity of wresting from the United Nations the economic power lodged in Great Britain, France and the United States. In simple words, what Germany, Italy and Japan sought were the colonies, markets, raw material of the Allies.
In order to win the support of their peoples to a war of expansion, i.e. imperialism, they spoke about freedom, the right to live, need for “lebensraum.” They spoke of the need to defend culture, the living standards of their people, and civilization. But they lied, like all rulers lie when they drag their peoples into war.
In defense of their own centuries-old, ill-gotten gains, the Allied rulers pretended that the war to defend. their colonies and riches was a war for the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter, a war against fascism, totalitarianism, militarism and the inhumanity of man to man.
Yet even before the war ended in Europe, but at a time when the military fortunes of the Allies had changed to the point where victory was a certainty, the “noble ideas” announced by Rosoevelt and Churchill, for which the people must give their lives, were completely forgotten.
 
Old Enslavement and New
Hitler had enslaved almost all of Europe on his road to the conquest of the world. He destroyed the independence of nations and enslaved their peoples. The fascist beasts ruled the Continent with naked force, destroying what they could not subject to their brutal rule.
During the early years of the war, German fascism seemed all-powerful, incapable of destruction. But its immense power could not prevent the emergence of a new force on the Continent, the mighty resistance movements in all countries fighting for their liberation from all tyrants, fighting for their national independence, fighting for free speech, free assembly, free press and free organization, and their right to choose their own governments.
The victory of the Allies in Europe, however, did not bring these things to the people. In one country after another the same struggle goes on now against the “liberators.”
Poland, the country over whose independence the war began, is now a Russian puppet state enslaved in the same way as it was under German rule. Its people live under the terror regime ot the GPU and its Lublin offspring.
Finland is completely under the domination of Russia. The Baltic states of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania have been incorporated into the Russian nation and the’ other United Nations have acquiesced in Stalin’s grab.
All of Eastern Europe and the Balkans are under Russian “influence.” Italy, after more than a year and a half of “liberation,” still has not achieved its national independence, nor the important freedoms promised it in the early days of the war. Belgium remains under the supervision of Great Britain. Greece is crushed under the jagged heel of British imperialism.
So far as the colonial world is concerned, Great Britain has already announced that it will brook no interference with, her empire. Stalin’s interest in Asia has already been made abundantly clear in his intervention in Iran and in remarks subtly made about Russian interests in China, and an outlet to the Indian Ocean.
In all of these conflicts, the United States pursues its own aims of preventing any single power from dominating Europe, while seeking to establish its economic weight over the entire world.
 
What Is Fascism?
The war in Europe did establish the fact more clearly that behind the fascist regimes in Germany and Italy stood their respective industrial and financial ruling classes. These regimes were agents of capital, fighting a war to advance the economic interests of these capitalist classes. Despite the economic power of a revived German imperialism, the fascist movement made up of the scum of society, revealed itself to be composed of cowardly mercenaries who disintegrated when defeat became inevitable. Its collapse also revealed that the leaders were in truth merely the servants of their capitalist masters.
But German fascism had accomplished its task at home only too well. In the years preceding the war and especially during, the war they succeeded in so effectively destroying the German labor movement that military collapse did not bring about a widespread national movement of revolt, such as occurred in Italy with a weaker fascist regime. The same German masses which had suffered ten years of Nazi enslavement, now face a new enslavement under the Allied victors.
The defeat of the fascist powers, moreover, does not end the danger of fascism in the world. Fascism has been revealed as the agent of imperialism, as the servant of the capitalist rulers. So long as capitalism continues to exist, so long as imperialism is triumphant, the danger of fascism remains a constant threat to the world.
 
No Hope for Peace
The most important fact to be borne in mind now is that the hope of the peoples for permanent peace is in vain so long as the present social order continues. The deliberations at the San Francisco Conference of the United Nations aimed at the establishment of a new world organization to maintain the peace, already demonstrate that the new world struggle for power referred to above is inescapable.
The struggle for peace is the struggle of the peoples for a new life, for a new social system, for a socialist world of peace, freedom and plenty for all.
The consequences of the European peace for America are already obvious in the widespread cutbacks and cancellation of war contracts. This means the growth of unemployment for millions of American workers.
 
The Struggle at Home
The war economy which was carried through on the backs of American labor will now be sharply curtailed. But the workers who have toiled throughout the war years to break all records in production and productivity under frozen wages, a no-strike pledge and a deterioration of their working conditions and standard of living, face the coming period with the threat of unemployment under conditions where they will be unable to meet it.
The government in Washington which has so faithfully served the interests of American monopoly capitalism, guaranteed its profits and enriched it beyond all expectations, has seen to it that industry will be well rewarded for its “contribution” to the war by refunds running into hundreds of millions of dollars. This will swell even more the already swollen profits of America’s economic rulers.
Yet nothing has been done by this same government for labor to help it meet the post-war situation, such as has been created by the end of the war in Europe.
The present situation dictates to labor to organize its independent forces in a struggle for its rights. It means a fight to place the burdens of reconversion upon the shoulders of industry which can more than afford it and take it off the overburdened shoulders of labor.

The struggle over reconversion means that labor must fight against the closing down of plants and demand their operation in the interests of labor.
 
Labor must oppose the government turning plants over to private industry which will promptly close them because they may not be profitable to operate.
 
Labor must fight for a guaranteed annual wage, for reconversion pay, against any wage cuts resulting from cutbacks.
 
Labor must demand a vast public works and housing program, to provide jobs and means of existence for all of the people.
 

This is only part of the program for labor. To carry on this fight labor must organize itself now, not only on the economic field, but on the political as well, by building a party of its own to fight for this program.
 



The collapsed fascist regime of Germany has announced that its Fuehrer, the mass murderer, Adolph Hitler, is dead. He has been succeeded by Admiral Doenitz, commander of the U-boat fleet and of the German Navy. The report is that Hitler died in the Chancellery.
So many theories have been advanced about Nazi post-war plans, the establishment of a vast underground movement, the disguise of their leaders so that they may once again lead their movement of human scum, the secretion of millions of dollars by these leaders in various countries of the world, that doubt is cast about the truth of the Nazi announcement.
Whether the report of Hitler’s death is true or not cannot be of too much importance. Dead or alive, Hitler’s power is ended for all time. If his own party of murderers does not take his life, if the Allied powers plan any protracted trial of this butcher, he cannot escape the vengeance of the people, in the first place, the German workers. They will take his life.
The Nazi Party is finished, too. The overwhelming defeat it has suffered in the war cannot be overcome. It stands before the world and the German people as a party of defeat, as a harbinger of war, death, destruction and mass misery.
The interesting aspect of the whole war is that fascism in Germany and Italy, agents of their respective capitalist classes, the political system of the monopolists which existed for the sole purpose of destroying the labor movement and guaranteeing the profits of the same monopolists, is destroyed by rival capitalist powers. The urge for profit which drove the German, Italian and Japanese ruling classes to war against the ruling classes of the Allied powers, led to the destruction of the political system to which all capitalist classes aspire when faced with rebellious working people.
Before the war broke put, before the imperialist rivalries had reached a bursting point, the capitalist classes of the United States, Great Britain, France and the other nations looked with great admiration on the regimes of Germany, Italy and Japan. That’s the way to do things, they said. No trouble with labor. Why? You just destroy the labor movement. You establish a regime of the concentration camp, the police jail, the pistol, the whip and the hangman’s knout. That is why the capitalists the world over admired Hitler and Mussolini.
Their admiration ceased when the rulers of those countries sought to advance their economic interests against the Allies. Then it became a war to the death as to who shall survive and keep the riches of the world. In this war, one set of imperialist powers set out to destroy another. And in this war, the fascist systems of Germany and Italy were crushed.
The job of destroying fascism, however, is not ended. Fascism remains a threat to the people, the working class above all, as long as capitalism exists. The way to get rid of this threat, the way to get rid of war, the way to get peace, freedom and plenty for all, is to abolish the capitalist system and the power of the capitalist rulers. The way to get real peace, freedom and security is to establish the free society of socialism.
 



Russia’s role in world politics today is difficult for the average person to understand. This difficulty is caused by a single factor, which can be put under the general heading of confusion on the kind of nation Russia really is. It has been said repeatedly that what Russia will do in a given situation is difficult to forecast because the ruler of the country, Stalin, acts so differently In similar situations.
Some have blamed the difficulty on the fact that Russia is really not a European power but an Asiatic one and acts with Oriental cunning to deceive the plain, outspoken and unsuspecting imperialists of the West.
All of this is nonsense. Russia’s conduct in world affairs is logical, consistent and not difficult to understand if one correctly estimates the character of the nation. For then its purposes become plain as day.
Taking the character of the country into account, Russia’s role in world politics is as logical and consistent as it was in the time of Lenin and Trotsky, with this fundamental difference: the aims of Russia during the time of Lenin and Trotsky were altogether different from the aims of Russia under Stalin. And this is so because the Russia of the workers’ revolution and the Russia of Stalin are, in fact, two different nations.
 
Russia Not Socialist
The confusion which exists today in the minds of millions, consciously cultivated by the imperialist powers, is that Russia is a socialist nation. Thus it pursues aims which represent the interests of the peoples of the world, the workers who live under capitalism and the oppressed colonial masses who live under capitalist-imperialist rule.
 
Russia in Lenin’s Time
If Russia were truly a “workers’ fatherland,” a representative of the future socialist world, how is it explained that it pursues the game of secret diplomacy and power politics which were so vigorously denounced by Lenin, the man who, with Trotsky, organized and led the Russian Revolution? The explanation lies in the fact that the Russia of Stalin is not the workers’ state of Lenin.
In Lenin’s time, Russia was ruled by the workers. This was reflected in the complete freedom of the workers of the city and the poof peasantry pf the countryside, in the extension of economic, political and social freedom to the classes formerly oppressed by, Czarism and capitalism.
The basic form of political representation was the soviet, or workers’ council, based upon the mills, the mines and the factories. There were also soldiers’ and peasants’ Soviets. The workers, peasants and soldiers were directly represented in government through their own elected delegates. They were the government.
Under the workers’ state, trade unions operated freely and in the interests of the Russian working class. Co-operatives and fraternal organizations existed as workers’ and peasants’ organizations, defending and extending the interests of the masses against the bureaucracy which existed even at that time.
Industries were operated by the state, but under the direct supervision of workers’ committees.
Production was carried on not only for the purpose of expanding and improving industry, but in this expansion and improvement to raise simultaneously the living conditions arid standards of the people. In all important respects, however – the working day, the conditions of labor, wages and management – the workers, through their plant committees and unions, had a decisive say.
In the farm areas, the peasants too, through their own committees and peasant organizations, had an important say in the determination of their rights and livelihood.
The country was desperately poor after the Revolution. There was never enough to supply the needs of the people. Russia was blockaded by the capitalist world and suffered intervention by Allied armies, organized counter-revolution of the old Czarist forces, famine and pestilence. By all standards of progress, Russia was a backward industrial country. But the leaders of the nation worked with one aim in mind: improving the conditions of the people, and fighting for the extension of workers’ rule throughout the world.
They were not reactionary nationalists. They were socialist internationalists. They sought the emancipation of the exploited and oppressed peoples of the world. They sought genuine economic, political and social freedom for. the whole world.
 
They Told the Truth
The “Old Bolshevik” rulers, as they were called, carried on an incessant campaign against imperialism. They showed how capitalism contained within it the seeds of war in the competition between the monopolistic powers who sought a redivision of the spoils of the world. They proved that the First World War was an imperialist war for this purpose and that the League of Nations, formed after the war, was merely an organization, serving the Interests of British arid French imperialism.
They explained how the victorious Allies were counter-revolutionary and proved it by showing how these powers united with their former enemies to put down the revolt of the European peoples who were striving to establish a new order in Europe which would forever end imperialism, war arid the exploitative profit system.
In all these things the Old Bolsheviks told the truth and they told it frankly and openly. When the Germany of the Kaiser forced a robbers’ peace on Russia. Trotsky made this known to the world and appealed directly to the people of Germany to defend workers’ Russia. Always, the Russian leaders appealed to the people. No secret treaties, they cried. Let the world know what the imperialists plan. They took up Wilson’s cry, “Open covenants, openly arrived at.” They really put it into effect to show how the imperialists are hypocrites and never do what they say and always say what they do not do in order to deceive the people.
When Lenin called the League of Nations a “thieves’ kitchen,” he meant that they were imperialists whose only interest was to preserve the rotten capitalist world of profit and exploitation and to maintain it through lies, chicanery, hypocrisy and fraud.
Lenin and his comrades always understood, however, that workers’ Russia could not last forever in a capitalist world unless labor in the rest of the world came to its aid by taking state power. Lenin constantly warned the workers against the plans of imperialism to plunge the world into another slaughter.
In all respects the conduct of Stalin’s Russia in foreign affairs is opposite to that of Russia during Lenin’s time. While workers’ Russia based itself on the movement of the working class in all countries, bureaucratic Russia, which helped to destroy the political and economic movements of labor in Europe, bases itself on imperialist agreements with the capitalist powers.
Whereas the old Russia of Lenin denounced all territorial seizures and guaranteed the independence of nations, the Russia of Stalin, pursuing its imperialist aims, seizes territories and violates the independence of nations.
If Lenin’s Russia had been forced into a war on the side of the imperialist powers by German fascism, it would have fought the war to the end but independently from the policies and war aims of the Allied imperialists. It would have maintained at all times a working class policy and based itself on the political and economic movements of the workers in the Allied countries, constantly exhorting these workers to take state power in order to prepare to build a new society of genuine peace, freedom and security.
In contrast, Stalin’s Russia, which has become nationalist an the worst sense, and has exhumed the old Czarist legends. It has introduced the worst features of Czarist militarism into what was once a Red army. It has Ordered its agents in all capitalist countries to establish class peace and to prevent the workers from fighting for their rights in these countries.
Lenin would have built the labor movement to greater power; Stalin destroys the fighting capacities of labor.
Take Germany as a specific example. On the basis of socialist doctrine and practice, Lenin would have fought against a hard peace for the German people. As a socialist internationalist, he could not hold the German people responsible for the crimes of their rulers, the same industrialists, financiers, Junkers and fascists who enslaved them for twelve years. He would have called for a free Germany, for workers’ rule in Germany and an end to the rule of the vile capitalist murderers who dominate the country as respectable business men and associates of business men in the United States, England and France.
Not so Stalin. He prepares an imperialist peace for Germany, a peace of vengeance. He wants to make the German people and, in the first place, the workers, pay for the crimes of their rulers. He wants the German masses enslaved and brutalized for a war which he helped to bring about by his aid to Hitler when he came to power and his complicity in the war through the Hitler-Stalin pact.
Stalin has already incorporated the Baltic states into Russia. He is the ruler of Poland through his puppet government, the GPU-ized Lublin Committee. He has chopped off parts of Finland, Rumania and other areas of Eastern Europe. He has established his power in the Balkans and dominates Jugoslavia through his agent, the former GPU man, Marshal Tito. It is Stalin who is behind the Trieste affair. It is Stalin who has his eyes out for new territories in Asia and seeks to dominate the continent of Europe – not in the interests of socialism, but in the interests of his own power in Russia and the extension of that power elsewhere.
“Why and how is this possible?” many workers might ask. Is not Russia a workers’ country, a socialist nation? Did it not fight valiantly in the war and help defeat Hitler? These questions are important because the answers to them help to explain what Russia really is and why it acts in the manner described above.
It is true that Russia fought valiantly in the war and helped to defeat Hitler. But it fought this war in the same way that the capitalists fought it. It did not fight politically against Hitler and fascism. As a totalitarian stalte, it could hardly fight a “democratic” war. As imperialist states, the Allies could not fight a democratic war.
Stalin fought a purely military campaign with the aid of enormous manpower, lend-lease and a second front in the form of the Anglo-American armies in the West.
In all other respects, too, Russia fought a war with political aims identical with those of the Allies: no genuine liberation for the peoples of Europe, no unification of the many countries of Europe and no real effective economic and political changes and most important of all, no revolutionary changes on the continent.
 
What Stalin Betrayed
This role of Russia under Stalin is to be explained by the great changes that have taken place in the country since the rule of the bureaucratic class. All the achievements of the Russian Revolution have long ago disappeared.
The old revolutionary Communist Party which was the party of the workers, has long ago disappeared. The present Communist Party is the haven of the bureaucracy and preserves, through its control of the state, the interests of this new class power. The control and ownership of the state by the bureaucracy has meant the control and ownership of the factories by the total bureaucracy and the operation of the economy of Russia in its own benefit at the expense of the workers and peasants. The soviet system has been usurped by the bureaucracy. It is no longer the basic political form through which the people control the state.
The free trade unions of Lenin’s Russia have become, under Stalin, state institutions for the purpose of imposing upon the workers the decisions of the bureaucracy and preventing them from expressing their own interests and demands. The state trade unions are now purely administrative bodies ruled by representatives of the state. There is no such thing as free elections in these unions and independence of operation.
The old system of workers’ committees, i.e., factory committees which kept the industrial managers and directors in check, and which defended at all times the interests of the factory workers, has long ago been dissolved. Today the factory managers and directors reign supreme as part of the elite of the bureaucracy. The old seven-hour day introduced in Lenin’s time has not existed since long before the war broke out. The exploitation of the workers is fierce; their living standards and conditions of labor are unbearable.
Russian workers labor ten and twelve hours, seven days a week, under piecework and incentive systems that make American die-hard industrialists green with envy.
Russia has developed the labor camp system to a high degree, its occupants numbering from ten to twenty-five million slave workers.
All of this is exactly the opposite of a workers’ state, a socialist nation. What we have in Russia is a new kind of state power and a new kind of class rule, never before seen in history. We have the destruction of a workers’ state and its replacement by a bureaucratic collectivist state, that is, the rule of the bureaucracy which has in its hands as the state power and through that power, ownership of the collective property of the nation. This is not a “degenerated workers’ state,” as some people have described it, but a “prison for the Russian people.”
 
Power, Prestige, Revenues
The new ruling bureaucracy which Stalin heads has interests which are easily understandable. These are to preserve its own economic, political and social power in Russia and to strengthen its rule by imperialist expansion beyond the orders of Russia. The aim of the bureaucracy is, as Trotsky once wrote, to “increase its power, prestige and revenues.”
Once it is grasped that this is the kind of state which exists in Russia, it will be easy to understand why Russia engages in the game of power politics, why its conduct at San Francisco is fundamentally the same as that of the Allied imperialists, why it too seeks the lands of other peoples, new sources of profit (revenue), new power and prestige.
While it is not a capitalist state, and while it does not have all of the same propulsions which cause the capitalist imperialists to act in, the manner so obvious to all thinking people, it is a class society, an exploiting society, and acts in ways similar to the imperialists of capitalism.
 



The World Trade Union Conference met, with the blessings and assistance of the ruling classes of the United Nations, in the County Hall of London on February 6 of this year. When the war began, the conservative and bourgeois-minded leaders of the International Federation of Trade Unions closed up shop and decided that it was impossible to carry on the work of an international trade union center. In closing down the IFTU, the conservative Sirs of the British Trade Union Council, the most influential section of the “Amsterdam International,” acted in the tradition of their predecessors. It would have been too radical a departure for them to do otherwise than the leaders of the IFTU did in 1914.
Citrine, Schevenels & Co. transferred the IFTU Center from Australia to London and pretended to keep the Federation alive. Beyond issuing bulletins containing information on the various European affiliates, the leaders of the IFTU did nothing. They pointed to the occupation of Europe as an insurmountable obstacle to international trade union activity, when what they really meant to say was that they were too occupied with aiding their national ruling classes to prosecute the imperialist war to function as working class leaders, even in the limited sense in which they had always conducted themselves.
Obviously, if the leadership of the IFTU had the will to carry on the working class struggle instead of pursuing a bourgeois policy in the ranks of labor, the means for keeping the IFTU alive and active would easily have been found. But in the absence of a functioning trade union International, the efforts of the Stalinist “unions” of Russia and the Stalinists in the world labor movement to force the organization of a new world trade union body were guaranteed of success. The Stalinists were aided in this struggle by the determination of the CIO officialdom to seek international affiliations despite the opposition of the AFL, and the confused policies pursued by the British Trade Union Council.
For Stalin and his agents throughout the world, a new international trade union center in which they played a leading part meant to break through the isolation imposed on them by their exclusion from the IFTU. In the event that a new center could not be achieved, any kind of reorganization of the IFTU to permit their adherence would have been acceptable, because Stalin’s paramount aim in this field of politics is to obtain a solid foothold in the labor movements of Great Britain and the United States in order to use them as weapons in his future relations with the two other great powers of the United Nations.
The call for the World Trade Union Conference which the British Trade Union Council had initiated was just what the Stalinists were praying for. The reasons for the call given by the British, through Sir Walter Citrine, were that the IFTU was non-existent and that the change in the world situation (read: Russia’s new role in the war as ally of Great Britain and the United States), and the prospects of an early victory over Germany made it necessary to call together the trade unions of the United Nations to prepare for the postwar period in Europe. Sir Walter and his comrades did not have in mind the construction of a new trade union international. They merely wanted the reorganization of the IFTU to permit the seating of Russian “unions” and the CIO, and held that the Conference had only advisory powers.
For many years, the IFTU refused to admit the Russian “unions.” This policy was consistently adhered to even when these organizations were truly trade unions during the days of Lenin and Trotsky. At that time, the opposition to admittance of the Russian unions was the fear of the British and American (AFL) trade union leaders that the Russian trade unionists would have a revolutionizing effect upon the IFTU and thus destroy the stranglehold which the conservative and class collaborationist leadership had on the International. The opposition to the trade unions in the early days was on grounds that they were not free trade unions but organs of the Russian state, a lie which was nailed time and again by militant and progressive trade unionists the world over. While the AFL retains its old position, the other leaders of the IFTU have been won over to support admission of the Russian “unions” precisely at a time when Stalin has destroyed every vestige of trade unionism in Russia, and transformed these bodies into state organs for enslaving the workers. The British trade union leaders and their international associates are motivated, not by consideration of trade union internationalism and unity, but by the politics of the capitalist governments they serve. Their action was dictated by the needs of the Allied imperialist coalition. The actual deliberations of the Conference bear this out completely.
Thus, in calling the London Conference, Sir Walter and his cohorts on the Trade Union Council violated two provisions of the IFTU to which they had so ardently adhered for. so many years: first, they invited the Russian state organizations to participate and, second, they invited the CIO on an equal basis with the AFL. The AFL, in turn, refused to participate on the ground that the IFTU constitution provided for national representation from only one federated body.
There is no doubt that the conservative British trade union leaders went into the conference with mixed feelings of confidence and fear. The political situation made the convening of such a conference without the Russians and the CIO ludicrous. On what basis could the British Trade Union Council, partner-in-crime of Churchill, champion of the Anglo-American-Russia alliance, reject the participation in the conference of Stalin’s appointed seers over the Russian working class? On what basis could they keep out the CIO leaders who conducted themselves as Roosevelt’s agents in the labor movement, even as they enacted the same role as Churchill’s agents? Merely to please their own consciences of what a real trade union is, or to placate the AFL? Hardly, since they are fully aware of what they had done to the trade union movement during the war.
Could they seriously object to Russian unions on the ground that they were not free trade unions but organs of the state, when this would force them to cast reflections on the democratic pretensions of the great ally in the East?
At the meeting of the executive committee of the IFTU which was convened a week before the opening of the London conference, the AFL, through its representative, Robert Watt, reiterated its position, pointing out that the call for the London conference violated the IFTU provision for national representation. The British leaders pleaded with the AFL to attend the conference in order to help balance off the Stalinist strength, emphasizing the advisory character of the conference. There would be no voting, said Citrine, since you can’t legislate international trade union unity.
The dull British leaders did not fully reckon with the determination of the Stalinists to win a place in any trade union international, to break their isolation or to carry through their plan for the constitution of a new world labor body. Nor did they fully understand the Stalinist strategy prior to the conference. It could not have been a matter of secrecy, for the Stalinists made known their position months beforehand throughout the world. Apparently, the British Trade Union Council believed it had enough power to defeat the Stalinist plan. But Citrine & Co. did not reckon with Sidney Hillman, head of the CIO delegation, whose current policies coincide so happily with international Stalinism.
When the conference opened there were more than two hundred delegates reported, representing nearly fifty million workers from fifty-one countries. The Russians, claiming to represent 27,000,000 workers (!), attempted to reorganize the conference on a voting basis, speciously protesting the disfranchisement of their delegation which was placed on equality with other national delegations. The British objected to the Russian voting plan on the ground that on the basis of their claimed membership they had an automatic majority of the conference. But the Russians were merely fencing. They were quite prepared, as we shall soon see, to compromise on this issue, considering the number of cards they had to play.
Since this was essentially a political gathering, the political spirit of the conference was in keeping with the decisions of “Moscow, Teheran and Crimea.” Whatever concrete differences separated the Big Three union delegations, they were united on what the political tasks of the conference were and they dominated the meeting. The three presidents selected represented the “big nations,” R.J. Thomas, for the CIO; George Isaacs for the British Trade Union Council, and Vassili Kuzmetsov for the Russian slave organizations. The Stalinist hand was strengthened organizationally by the fact that at least two of three vice-presidents (Louis Saillant of France and Lombardo Toledano of Mexico) were either Stalinists or fellow travelers, long associated with Stalinism.
The Stalinists had additional strength in the conference since many representatives from other countries were clearly Stalinists or under their influence. The Russians could also count on support from the CIO for two reasons: first, the CIO had finally reached a position where it could get back at the AFL and, second, its policies under the leadership of Hillman coincided with the current line of Stalinism. Thus when the conference threatened to bog down on the very first day, R.J. Thomas, assuming his customary role as special pleader for unity, prevented a blow-up over the seating of delegates from “enemy” countries, whom the Stalinists championed. Sir Walter very heatedly asked: “How can you discuss the treatment of the enemy with people who until yesterday were themselves enemies?” (He conveniently forgot about the Hitler-Stalin pact and Molotov’s historic utterance that “fascism is a matter of personal taste.”) With the exception of Finland, he did not think that Italy, Rumania and Bulgaria could claim a stable or democratic trade union movement. All of this was an unpardonable lack of confidence in the GPU, but the Russians were adamant. Perhaps Sir Walter did not know the ways of Stalin’s efficient Gestapo.
In addition to this question, the Standing Orders Committee had recommended the seating of the Lublin Polish delegates, whose “credentials had been flown from Moscow.”
According to Margaret Stewart in The Nation of February 17, “this issue, urged Citrine, was still under consideration by the government. Why should the trade unions rush in where ministers feared to tread?” Good old Citrine! The bold working class approach! He countered the Stalinist move by appealing to the bourgeois conscience of the conference. More than that, however, Citrine added, the committee had recommended that voting should be by country (one country, one vote), with a two-thirds majority making up a decision. This did two things: it precluded any possibility that the AFL would attend and was “contrary to the spirit and purpose of the conference which was intended to be only advisory.”
Thomas made the pleas for unity and the conference returned the matter to the committee. The committee then decided that the “ex-enemies” should be invited to send representatives who would be seated as delegates or observers on the advice of the Credentials Committee.
 
New or Old Federation
The big fight at the conference was whether it should decide definitely to set up a new international federation of trade unions. The British opposition to this step was overcome and although no vote was taken which said that the conference constituted itself as the new world federation, it did set up a Continuations Committee to further the work of the London conference. The World Trade Union Conference Committee of forty-five members, representing all the groups present in London, established its headquarters in Paris. The committee will reconvene the world conference in September 1945 in that city to adopt a constitution and set up a permanent world federation. This date was decided upon because immediately before that the IFTU is scheduled to meet. The aim is to put enough pressure upon the IFTU to force its “voluntary” dissolution and thus guarantee the establishment of the new federation without opposition.
Without doubt the decision to form a new trade union center was the important result of the conference, but it would be a mistake to overlook the ideological aspects of the parley. From a political point of view, the London conference was only another facet of Big Three group rule of the United Nations. When the chairman of the London County Council said at the opening session that “this is the first peace conference,” he only emphasized the fact that the gathering was the labor wing of the imperialist powers which dominate the United Nations.
The conference endorsed the policies of Great Britain, Russia and the United States. Echoing the refrain of the monarchs of the Big Three, the leading spirits in London called for a Vansittartist peace for Germany, endorsing the enslavement of German labor with the most reactionary anti-working class arguments. Calling for a successful prosecution of the war, they answered the needs of the ruling classes by admonishing the proletariat to continue its one-sided sacrifices for the victory of one camp in the war and to do nothing that will disturb the profit-grabbing of big business in the capitalist nations.
 
Working Class Issues Ignored
It is easy to understand the true nature of this trade union gathering by observing the number of vital working class interests which were completely omitted from consideration. For example, the conference did not concern itself with promoting international labor solidarity except in so far as it had anything to do with promoting the war and the interests of the imperialist bourgeoisie. It said little and did nothing about organizing a campaign for raising the economic standards of the masses. It refused to treat the question of colonial oppression in a frank and revolutionary way, calling for the liberation of all colonial peoples. Thus, it identified itself with the imperialist policies of Russia, Great Britain, France, Holland, Belgium and the United States. It studiously avoided the question of national oppression and self-determination, merely reaffirming its adherence to the Atlantic Charter, while it endorsed all decisions of Moscow-Teheran-Crimea, which flouted the Atlantic Charter.
What the conference did and did not do merely rehearsed the manifesto – the language, structure and aims of which echoed the Big Three, and in many respects, the Russian side of the international question. The tone of the manifesto is contained in its very first paragraph, which says:
From the World Trade Union Conference, which has concluded its immediate tasks in London, we address this message to the people of all lands who are of one mind in their hope and desire that a new world shall arise from the devastation and ruin wrought by the war. The Second World War has involved all nations in the gravest crisis of human history. In their long and terrible struggle against aggressor powers, the United Nations have fought for freedom and their own way of life. They have successfully withstood the most dangerous assault ever made upon the foundations of democracy and free citizenship. They have resisted the most determined attempt ever made to lead mankind back into servitude and to impose upon the free nations a political system, an economic order and an ideology which, had they achieved their purpose, would have given domination over all free peoples into the hands of those who have claimed by their armed might to exercise the rule of self-styled “superior race,” or to fulfill a so-called “historic destiny.”
Thus, you see, the main task of the World Trade Union Conference is not to promote the interests of labor against capitalism, but to support capitalism, its continued existence and exploitation of the masses, spreading illusions about the prospects of a “new world” arising from the chaos and destruction of an imperialist-capitalist war.
The manifesto perpetuates the illusion that there is a fundamental difference between fascism and capitalism, upholds the pernicious view that there is a fundamental difference between aggressors and “defenders” in an imperialist conflict and that a victory of the Allies means a victory for democracy and permanent peace. The imperialist “democrats” are described as the defenders of freedom, as gallant warriors who have prevented the enslavement of “all free peoples” (India, Belgian Congo, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Morocco, Puerto Rico are a few of the “free peoples” who have apparently been saved).
Elsewhere the manifesto says that the conference will work for a complete victory over fascism in order to “establish a stable and enduring peace [under imperialism!] and to promote in the economic sphere the international collaboration which will permit the rich resources of the earth to be utilized for the benefit of all its peoples, providing full employment, rising standards of life, and social security to the men and women of all nations.”
Perhaps the framers of this manifesto had in mind a struggle against barbarous capitalism for a new social order to accomplish these things which capitalism finds it impossible to grant the masses? No, the capitalist-minded labor leaders who directed the London conference, aided by the Stalinist betrayers of the working class of the world, really mean that capitalism will bring about the millennium. They have learned nothing from their own experiences. But they are now engaged in an imperialist conspiracy to delude the masses and to prevent any revolutionary struggle against capitalism.
And to achieve “these ennobling aims and purposes,” the World Labor Conference, of course, “pledged the organized millions we represent to support the heroic armed forces of the United Nations ...”
 
The Labor Voice of Imperialism
There you have the real political purpose of the conference: promoting the interests of the Allied capitalist countries and Stalin’s Russia. The conference went even further than just acclaiming a general support to the bourgeois system. It called for the support within a given country to those parties and institutions which have supported the war or the war regimes.
“Our World Conference,” the manifesto stated, “placed on record its profound conviction that the freedom-loving people of the earth should give support and countenance only to those governments, political parties and national institutions which are pledged to wage war against fascism in all its forms until it is rooted out of the life of all countries.”
How it will be possible to root out fascism “in all its forms” from a capitalist nation, the writers of the manifesto do not say. Nor do the Stalinist betrayers help them any. On the contrary, the manifesto is clearly intended to oppose any social change. In that respect it is thoroughly reactionary. In addition, the thought behind this paragraph is to maintain support for those regimes which now rule in the countries of the United Nations, Concretely, the London leaders had in mind retaining the status quo regimes in Europe and America. The Stalinists had in mind obtaining international labor support for their dictatorships in Eastern Europe, to keep Roosevelt in power in the United States and those other regimes in other countries which established their peace with Stalin.
The London Labor Conference demonstrated beyond a shadow of doubt that it is the labor voice of imperialism. The grandiose aims it develops in its manifesto, all postulated upon the maintenance of the reactionary imperialist social order, will be shattered long before the war is over. Bourgeois-minded labor leaders will find themselves, irrespective of their formal actions in London, fighting for the very lives of their union movements at the hands of the regimes to which they have sworn fealty. The reality of capitalism will destroy the reformist and class-collaborationist hopes which these backward labor leaders hold out to the masses and they will be driven to one degree or another to fight the profit system with which they now identify the interests of the masses.
But even more important than this aspect of the conference is the grave danger the Hillmans, Citrines and Schevenels have created by giving Stalinism the opportunity to penetrate the Western and American labor movements. This is just what Stalin wanted: the establishment of his battalions in these labor movements where they can carry on the struggle in the interests of his bureaucratic regime in Russia. For Stalin, they are an invaluable prop in the world labor movement. For the working class of the world, they are the most dangerous force of destruction and betrayal of the labor movement and the interests of the oppressed masses of the world.
 



The propagandists of the present war are responsible for a great deal of misunderstanding about the things for which this war was fought in Europe. They wrote and spoke of it as a war for democracy against fascism. Many people did not see that this was and is pure propaganda. But time will prove it to them, just as time proved this to many people all over the world who believed that the first world slaughter was fought in the interests of peace, freedom and security against Prussian militarism.
The people will come to learn that this war, just as the first world war, was a conflict between rival capitalist powers for economic and political domination of the earth.
 
Some Dangerous Theories
In the course of this war a great deal of misleading propaganda has been produced specifically on the subject of fascism. Let us examine some of the common theories on this phenomenon

Fascist is a national characteristic of Germany and Italy. It came in Germany because the people were nationalistic, militaristic and prone to regimentation.
 
It came in Italy because the country was backward.
 
Japan, on the other hand, is regarded as a mysterious country populated by strange people with strange customs. Fascism, however, could not possibly come to such enlightened “democratic” nations like the United States and Great Britain.

These theories are false and dangerous. They disarm the people of other countries, especially the workng classes in their struggle against reactionary fascism. They do not explain, for example, why in almost every important country of the world fascist movements were and are in existence. As a matter of fact, if the war had not come, one or more of the Allied countries might have succumbed to fascist rule.
 
Fascism, Form of Capitalist Rule
Fascism is not a new social system, but a form of political rule under capitalism. As such it is capable of coming to power in any country. This is clearly established by the experiences of Germany and Italy, one, a highly advanced capitalist nation, the other, a second-rate power. The significant fact about the victory of fascism in these two countries is that the fascist movements came into existence and were successful during periods of deep economic crisis. They arose at times when the masses of people were engaged in a struggle against the economic ruling classes, threatening to end their reign.
The aim of fascism is to retain the economic rule of the capitalist class, capitalist property relations and the profit system. Fascism defends the rule of the monopoly capitalists.
Thus in Germany and Italy, fascism came into existence and rose to power through the direct assistance of the monopoly capitalists. Hitler was supported by the Ruhr industrialists, the Krupps munition magnates, I. G. Farben, and a host of other big business firms. Mussolini came into power as a result of a conspiracy between the Italian industrialists and the monarchy who were desperately trying to defeat the revolutionary workers stretching out their hands for power.
The most important aim of fascism is to destroy the labor movement and all forms of independent organization by labor, whether it be economic, political or fraternal.
 
Trotsky on Fascism
Leon Trotsky, the great socialist leader who was assassinated by an agent of Stalin’s GPU, once wrote:
“Fascism has for its basic and only task, the razing to their foundation all institutions of proletarian democracy.”
What happens after fascism comes to power? Here again, Trotsky’s penetrating analysis is instructive. He wrote:
“After Fascism is victorious, finance capital gathers, into its hands, as in a vise of steel, directly and immediately, all the organs and institutions of sovereignty, the executive, administrative and educational powers of the state; the entire state apparatus together with the army, the municipalities, the universities, the schools, the press, the trade unions, and the cooperatives. When a state turns Fascist, it doesn’t only mean that the forms and methods of government are changed in accordance with the patterns set by Mussolini – the changes in this sphere ultimately play a minor role – but means first of all and for the most part, that the workers organizations are annihilated ...”
Why is all this so? Because, by destroying the labor movement, by controlling all life, i.e., thinking, writing, speaking, and organization, the capitalist classes can guarantee their own existence as economic rulers. By regimenting the workers through a police regime, and a huge spy system, buttressed by a government organized “labor front,” the industrialists and financiers prevent the workers and all other sections of the population from fighting for higher wages, shorter hours and improvement in their working and living conditions.
 
Fascism Upholds Profit System
While the laboring populations of Germany and Italy were thus enslaved by brutal fascist regimes, the property and profit rights of the financiers and industrialists were never interfered with! On the contrary, their property rights and profits were guaranteed by the new fascist states.
It is easy to understand then why the regimes of Hitler and Mussolini were admired by the capitalists of all countries, especially those of Great Britain and the United States. If you examine the fascist movements of the latter countries, you will find that the support to them always comes from men of means, from the capitalist class.
Labor never supports fascism. It did not do so in Germany, Italy, Spain, or any other country. On the contrary, it fought desperately against fascism in all these countries.
What other sources of support does fascism have? Misguided middle class people who think that fascism will improve their economic position, and who believe it is labor rather than the big business monopolies which is responsible for their economic plight.
Declassed elements from the ranks of the workers, people who have been broken in spirit by years of unemployment, people without hope and no future, who believe that fascism will bring them wealth property or jobs.
Unemployed professional militarists who live in the hopes that nationalistic, reactionary fascism will revive the military fortunes of a nation and give them important jobs, position in society and money.
 
Profit System Must Go
The experiences of the past twenty years show that fascism brings nothing but enslavement for the overwhelming majority of the people. It brings wealth and power only to the big capitalists, not to the middle classes and certainly not to the enslaved workers.
Why then did the imperialists of the Allied countries go to war against the fascist imperialists of Germany and Italy? Only because the latter banded together to threaten their empires and their wealth. Up until the war broke out, the big Allied powers had many points of common interests with Germany and Italy and did profitable business with the Nazis and fascists.
The defeat of Germany and Italy, and the certainty of defeat for Japan, however, does not mean the defeat of fascism. Hardly. Because the conditions that bring fascism into existence remain. Fascism feeds on economic chaos, and since capitalism cannot guarantee economic security, peace and freedom the danger of fascism is constant. Since capitalism guarantees only economic crisis, war and totalitarian rule of one kind or another, it forces the peoples of the world into rebellion in order to achieve a better life. Fascism, as a system of political rule, as a brutal hated dictatorship, is employed by the capitalist rulers against these rebellious peoples.
The fight against fascism is primarily a fight of the labor movement, of the working peoples of all countries. The fight against fascism is the fight of the common people against the exploiting capitalist classes. This requires the building of a movement of all the working people to fight for a new and better life against reactionary capitalism which guarantees only new wars, extreme world poverty, mass unemployment and intense misery to hundreds of millions of people.
 



Benito Mussolini, the man who headed the fascist state in Italy for more than twenty years, is dead.
Mussolini, the agent of the Italian financiers and industrialists, received justice that was long overdue.
Mussolini, the man who murdered and tortured the Italian workers and peasants in order to guarantee the profits of Italian big business, died at the hands of the people.
Mussolini, the man admired by capitalist business men and capitalist statesmen the world over, was caught in flight, tried and sentenced.
Mussolini, the man who dragged the Italian people into two wars which they did not want, who ruled with the assassin’s pistol and knife, whose weak regime was constantly bolstered through the financial assistance given him by American and British bankers as long as he promised to destroy the Italian labor movement and keep its working people in bondage, was shot and hanged by the workers!
 
He Was Not Alone
Thus ended the life of the “Sawdust Caesar,” the blowhard of fascism, the man who taught Hitler, who is also reported to be dead.
The man who ordered the assassination of the socialist, Matteotti, did not go alone. The Partisans shot his mistress, Claritta Petacci. They arrested, tried and shot Achille Starace, former secretary of the Fascist Party; Roberto Farinacci, another former party secretary; Carlo Scorza, party secretary; Nicola Bombacci, renegade communist, who made his peace with Mussolini, and a score of other fascist dignitaries.
They took these enemies of labor, these petty thieves who acted as the agents of the corrupt House of Savoy and the Italian capitalists who brought them into power, and hung them head downward for all of Milan to see.
When the workers of proletarian Milan heard the news they rushed to the city square to see the bodies. They wanted to be sure that the man who ruled over them for so many years was really dead. They stomped on his dead body.
They spat on him and his dead cronies. All their pent-up hatred was released, for they remembered their terrible slavery, their years of starvation and misery under Mussolini’s police regime.
And so the “inventor” of fascism went to his doom, in a climax befitting a scoundrel. And no one mourned his passing, that is, no one among the broad masses of the people.
 
Upper Classes Tremble a Little
No, it is only among the “upper classes” that they whisper about the swift justice of the people. It is only among the monopolistic ruling classes that a little fear is expressed about the unruliness of the masses.
It is only in the banking houses, especially those which helped to finance Mussolini’s regime, that the action of the Partisans was regarded with little favor.
It was in the high circles of diplomacy where gentlemen whispered softly that justice in this case was a little too swift! And why not? Their class brothers were done away with.
It was only the Vatican, for so many years living in peace with Mussolini and fascism, which deplored the “hasty procedure.”
The action of the Italian workers is embarrassing to the statesmen of the United Nations, who have been resisting the wishes of the people in purging the fascists and fascist collaborators in the “liberated” countries.
 
The People versus the Statesmen
The Milan event only brings more sharply to mind the British policy in Greece and Belgium, where they prevented a purge of the big business men and politicians who were Nazi agents and collaborators.
The Milan event only focuses more sharply the British-American policy in the rest of Italy of preventing a purge of other fascists like the King and his marshal, Badoglio. It calls to mind the long-drawn-ot trial of Roatta, who mysteriously escaped from a prison hospital to vanish completely.
What are the rulers of the Allied nations to do now? Condemn the trial and shooting of Mussolini and his henchmen? Then the whole game about a war against fascism and for democracy will be unmasked a little more.
What is de Gaulle to do in France, where he has resisted the demands of the French people in the underground movement for swift justice of the French industrialists, bankers and politicians who assisted the German fascists in their occupation of the country and in the slaughter of thousands of anti-fascist Frenchmen? What shall her do with Pétain, that reactionary servant of the French 400 families, who headed the Vichy regime? Can he do less than the Italian Partisans?
The Italian Partisans showed the way to mete out justice to fascists. It did not matter whether these fascists were of high station or low. They gave them the justice of the people, a true justice.
Bravo! fellow workers of the Italian Partisans!
 



The beginnings of warfare have broken out between the government forces of Chiang Kai-shek and the “Communist” armies of the North. Whether the present skirmishes will develop into a full-scale civil war is difficult to determine at this time since the dominant forces in China ‘are not the two contending armies, but two foreign powers, the United States and Russia. These will decide whether the time is ripe to test their respective strengths and to determine who shall be dominant in China.
The struggle in China, reported as a conflict over who will control the North, actually reflects the rivalries of the Big Three powers. Anyone who believes that this struggle is a conflict between a reactionary Chinese government and a “Communist” army which seeks to change the social order in China for the benefit of the people will go astray.
The so-called Communist armies of the Yenan are Stalinist armies. They represent the interests of Stalinist imperialism in that country in the same way that the Stalinist parties do in all other countries.
 
After Russo-Chinese Treaty
Shortly after the Japanese surrender, a Russo-Chinese treaty was signed which recognized Chiang’s sovereignty over the whole nation. In exchange from this wholly gratuitous acknowledgment, Russia received special concessions from Chiang. After this treaty, negotiations between Chungking and Yenan were opened and a “basis of understanding” was reported.
Why,‘then, has the present civil war broken out? It should be clear that the “Communist” armies of Yenan are not acting independently, but reflect the policy of the Kremlin. They are at war with Chiang because it serves the interests of Stalin in his present difficult relations with the United States and Britain. Stalin has issued a warning:
If you do not grant my European and Far Eastern demands, if you insist on keeping the secrets of atomic bomb production, if you do not want to reach an agreement, with me as to my interests in world affairs, I have the means to make it extremely difficult for you. I can call upon my international supporters to go into action. I have done that in the Balkans, in Greece, Yugoslavia, Italy and France. I can do it in China, and here is a sample of it. But I can also prevent such embarrassing situations from arising. I can call off my legions. But for that you must accede to my demands or guarantee your willingness to reach an understanding with me.
Do Stalin and his ruling regime actually say these words? No; they do not have to. The rulers of Great Britain and the United States understand the show of force
  
Big Three Conflict
The heart of the Chinese situation is to be sought, then, in the antagonisms which, exist among the big powers, which regard China as one of their battlegrounds.
Do you want proof of this? Observe the reaction of the Communist Party in this country. Its knows what its role is, The War is over. The United Nations coalition is not now an urgent requirement, since the Axis has been defeated. The previous support given to the. Washington Administration of Roosevelt and Truman, has now been withdrawn. But the support of the American Communist Party to Stalin and the Russian ruling class remains as ever loyal and persevering.
 
Stalin’s U.S. Puppets
Through, its spokesman, William Z. Foster, the American Communist Party has denounced the war in North China as an unwarranted attack upon Yenan by Generalissimo Chiang. It denounced American interference in China, charging the State Department with inciting the Chungking government to make this attack on the Yenan forces.
To lend force to its position, it issues the slogan: Let Northern China Alone! It calls for the removal of American warships and marines from across Port Arthur Bay with the question: What are “our” troops and ships doing in China? It does not say a word about Russian armed forces in China. It does not say a word about Russian interests in China, except to defend them.
Here you have additional evidence of the true nature, of the Communist Party in this country (which is the same as all Communist Parties in all other countries). It is carrying out Stalin’s polity in this country with an apparently anti-imperialist propaganda which is really pro-Stalinist imperialism.
If the United States, Great Britain and Russia reach an understanding in international affairs and repair their rotting relationships, the Chinese conflict will end with the same suddenness with which it began. Then, too, you will observe the American Stalinist party end its “anti-imperialist” agitation and lend full support to whatever agreement is reached between the powers, no matter how detrimental it may he for the Chinese masses.
It is now more necessary than ever to raise the cry: Hands Off China! Let the Chinese masses, the hundreds of millions of workers and peasants, decide their own fate. Oust all imperialisms from China, and that includes the Stalinist variety, too. American military forces do not belong in China. Neither do the Russian. Both violate Chinese independence and integrity.
 



President Truman’s radio address reciting the Administration’s policy on wages was listened to by the whole nation. None was so interested in this aspect of the government’s domestic policy as the workers of the country, for the problem of their wages and standard of living is immediate and acute.
The end of the war found labor rewarded for its sacrifices by mass layoffs and a drastic reduction of its wages. But labor is now on the march, fighting desperately to prevent further slashes in its income and demanding in its counter-offensive wage increases up to thirty per cent to make up for the great drop in take-home pay. It is this offensive of labor which caused President Truman to treat the problem of wages in a public address to the nation.
The President’s speech was both an acknowledgment of the justness of the demands of the workers and an evasion of any concrete proposals which could immediately alleviate the sufferings of millions of workers brought about by the lack of a plan and program by the Administration to meet the post-war and reconversion period.
Thus the speech also was an admission of a tremendous failure on the part of a government which planned for war but could not plan for peace.
The President, in justifying his general position that labor deserves an increase in wages, pointed out that already there has been a decline of twenty billion dollars in wages paid to the workers. This is creating, he stated, great hardships for the workers. To overcome this slash in the workers’ income he proposed that wage increases be permitted in three categories:

Cases in which the percentage of increase in average straight-time hourly earnings since January 1941 did not match the increase in the cost of living.
 
Cases of inequalities among plants in the same industry in the same locality, in conditions of normal competition.
 
Cases necessary to insure full production in an industry designated by the Stabilization Administration as necessary for reconversion and where existing wage rates are inadequate to recruit manpower.

This is presumably an executive order. But it is really a statement to the effect that the overwhelming majority of the workers in this country have been and are being cheated of their just earnings. In all three categories it is acknowledged that industry has not been paying labor its full wages.
 
Case for Increases
President Truman outlined five reasons why wage increases can be given by industry. They uphold every argument of the labor movement at the same time that they indict the President’s evasions in his wage speech. The five reasons given are:

Reduction in per hour labor costs by the elimination of time and a half for overtime.
 
Increase in the number of people needing jobs.
 
Increased output per man hour.
 
The very favorable profit position of business.
 
Prospective elimination of the excess profits tax.

Having endorsed labor’s demands for wage increases and having conclusively demonstrated that such increases can easily be granted by industry, what does President Truman recommend? NOTHING! Why not? Because the President is straddling the issue. His aim is to placate labor’s demands by acknowledging the necessity for wage increases while at the same time advising capital that he is not proposing what these increases should be. He merely says that wages should be settled by collective bargaining and that labor must expect a drop in its take-home pay.
 
Silent on Cutting Profits
But the President has not a word to say about profits. He does not propose a out in the tremendous profits of industry; He does not come out in support of labor’s demand’ for a thirty per cent increase in wages. He merely says that a wage increase should be given. Even industry is willing to grant that. The real issue is HOW MUCH of an increase should be given?
The Administration had sufficient information at hand to know how much should be given to the nation’s wage earners. Government statisticians have reported that a blanket wage increase of fourteen per cent would allow industry a profit of $6,300,000,000 in 1946 after all taxes are deducted. This is three times as much as the pre-war average profits of $2,142,000,000!
An average wage increase of twenty-four per cent would still allow industry profits of $4,800,000,000 after all taxes are deducted, which would still be more than twice the profits of the pre-war years.
Truman evaded the question of how much wage increases should be permitted because he did not want to come to actual grips with the real problem of the day: the refusal of big business to cut down its profits and its insistence that labor pay the bill for the post-war period and reconversion just as it paid the bill for the war economy.
Back of the President’s speech is the militant struggle now carried on by labor. It is only this struggle which compels the President to give such consideration to the problem. But labor should remember that Mr. Truman proposes nothing. Labor will get something only if it carries on a vigilant and persistent fight in its own behalf. Without such a struggle labor will- get nothing from the government or big business.
The propaganda purpose of Truman’s speech must be sought for too in the international situation, which sees relations among the powers deteriorating swiftly. Truman’s speech is. also a plea to American labor, aiming to procure its support in any future political crisis.
It is true that the President criticized two committees of the House for scuttling the Full Employment Bill and the Unemployment Compensation Bill, as well as Congress for turning back U.S. Employment Service to the states. In this he merely stated to the nation that he is the bead of a party which is the majority of the government but which acts for big business against the best interests of labor.
The answer to that is clear. Labor has no political party in Washington. Labor needs its own party. It needs a Labor Party, independent of the political parties of big business which pan and will act in the interests of the working class.
If industry cannot pay the just wage demands of the workers there is an answer to that too. Let them get out. Nationalize the big monopolies under workers’ control of production so that industry may produce for the needs of the people and give the workers a living wage and security.
If this government won’t do it, then labor should get its own government, a government of, for and by the workers. This is the only fitting answer to a situation where labor bears the brunt of the post-war period and reconversion unemployment. It is the only real answer to, the situation described in the President’s address.
 



The onward rush of Allied armies through the Reich and the evident collapse of the German armies in the West puts the question of “Hard or Soft Peace?” for Germany on the order of the day.
The official policy of the Allies, as stated in their meetings at Moscow, Teheran, Quebec and recently emphasized at Yalta, calls for the “hard peace” – dismemberment of Germany, heavy reparations and the enslavement of millions of workers. The official details are lacking, but the suggestions are not.
A great campaign is now going on to convince the peoples in the Allied countries to: support the enslavement of the German masses. The arguments for the destruction of the country and the enslavement of its millions are false and hypocritical, especially when they are advocated by the international Stalinists.
We are now being told that the German people are by nature brutes, militarists, sensualists and murderers. If this were true, then anything that is done to the German people would be justified. Thereby another tragedy is being prepared for a country which once boasted the largest and most advanced labor movement in the world.
The tragedies of the German people have been many. The defeat of the German revolution of 1918–19 made possible the continued, rule of German capitalism, of the industrialists and financiers, the Junkers and the militarists. German reaction, aided by social-democracy and international capitalism, retained its power and prepared the tragedy of Hitler, but not without the help of Stalin and his Russian bureaucracy.
 
Stalinist Hypocrisy
In 1923, the German revolution was betrayed by Stalin in his own national interests by calling off the German revolution. This defeat opened the way for the development of Nazism.
In 1932, Stalin again pursued such policies in Germany as guaranteed the victory of the frightful fascist movement, which had suffered a sharp electoral defeat. The policy of the Stalinist Communists was: No united struggle against Hitler. They stated that they could not unite with the social-democrats in a common struggle against fascism because the social-democrats were a greater danger to Germany than Hitlerism. They even welcomed the victory of the Brown Shirts because fascist totalitarianism would prepare the masses for a Stalinist dictatorship, saying: “After the fascists comes our turn.”
In 1939, Stalin made his alliance with Hitler which began the Second World War and heaped the most devastating of all tragedies upon the world, and the German masses, Behind the actions of Stalin’s Russia stood international capitalism supporting Hitler, financing him in part and doing business with the German capitalists whom Hitler served. Now all these forces which are jointly responsible for Hitler try to absolve themselves of their crimes by holding the German people responsible for fascism and its deeds. The loudest of all are the Stalinists – and for good reason: the German workers have many things for which to repay Stalinism.
 
Responsibility of the People
The most insidious doctrine that comes put of the war is the one which holds the peoples responsible for the crimes of their rulers. The German people and, in the first place, the workers are no more responsible for the war than are the masses in England, America, France arid Russia: In all these countries the rulers are responsible for the tragedy of the war.
Did the workers put Hitler into power? Did the people agree to Hitler’s early seizure of European countries? Did the masses create the Munich peace? Or are the Russian workers responsible for the Hitler-Stalin pact? Are the Russian workers and the German workers responsible for the German-Russian invasion of Poland? Are the American workers responsible for lynchings? Are the British workers responsible for India? Or, to put it so simply that even the Stalinist dunces can understand it: Are the Chicago workers responsible for the Memorial Day massacres of the striking steel workers?
The people in general and the workers in particular cannot be held responsible for the crimes of their ruling classes and their governments. That is one of the important teachings of socialism. Only those who identify the interests of the capitalists and workers, rich and poor, exploiter and exploited as one can uphold such an insidious theory.
In all the situations cited, the people had nothing to say. The state power, the instrument of the ruling classes, decided! They and they alone are responsible for the crimes of capitalist imperialism in whatever country they may rule.
It is good old capitalist doctrine, however, to hold the people responsible for the evils which the rulers commit. Therefore the mass of people pay for the wars started by their rulers, while the capitalists go on coining their profits as before.
In all the discussions of the United Nations on Germany, not one word is said about the German industrialists. The liberal commentators are somewhat upset when they learn that the big monopolists and financiers will retain their pre-war power to continue as though nothing has happened in the world in the past ten years.
The reason for this is that the capitalist rulers of America and England cannot afford to do anything to their brother rivals in Germany. They are partners in crime. The war for profit, for which millions of people give their lives, is only a friendly contest between the great corporations and cartels of the warring countries. Once over, the business men of the warring countries resume their peacetime operations as though nothing had happened!
 
Stalin Wants Slave Labor
Stalin’s Russia has accepted this principle of the capitalist nations for its own purpose, its own particular brand of imperialistic aims. And Stalin is the one who demands, German lave labor. Having enslaved the Russian workers, he sees nothing wrong with enslaving ten million German workers.
In justification for this, the Stalinists now say that all the German people and all the German workers are Nazis. One of the dirtiest of their scribblers, a follower of the GPU, one who calls himself Hans Berger, writes repeatedly in the Daily Worker, the most vulgar, scurrilous and reactionary articles on the German workers. He who helped betray the German workers calls all of them fascists and tauntingly asks: If they are not, why don’t they revolt against Hitler now? A man who helped put the chains on the German workers asks why these chained and enslaved workers do not revolt now!
Ilya Ehrenburg, habitué of the Paris cafes, enemy of the Russian Revolution of Lenin and Trotsky and new-found friend of Stalin’s slave state, refers to all Germans as Fritzes, brewers, brainless people.
But these scoundrels, in denouncing the German workers, omit this most important fact about the German workers and their fascist rulers:
Hitler’s Germany is a prison camp. It is a police state in which the people, and first of all the workers, live under the daily supervision of the Gestapo. They work with guns pointed at them. The concentration camps and the police jails are filled with thousands of militant workers. The masses are constantly hounded by Himmlcr’s corps of SS men.
Yet the question “Why don’t you revolt?” is asked by craven men who fled when they should have fought Hitler, when there was the time and a possibility of fighting and defeating him.
Where was Hans Berger before Hitler took power? What did he do and what did he say and advise the German workers to do in 1930, 1931 and 1932? What did Browder tell the German workers to do? What did Wilhelm Pieck, German Stalinist leader in Moscow, do when it was possible to fight? Or Fritz Heckert, a leader of the German Communist Party? All these miscreants helped to make the Germans slaves of Hitler. They only did in Germany what the Stalinist-Communists did in China, Spain and France: they betrayed the German revolution, not once, but twice.
These men who supported the Hitler-Stalin alliance and denounced the war as imperialist on the part of England, France and America only, who denounced Roosevelt as a war-monger, and who issued the slogan, “The Yanks are not coming,” have become super-patriots in all countries only because they are Russian nationalist-patriots and only because Stalin and Hitler fell out in their alliance.
The German masses will fight. There are signs now of their growing rebelliousness. News is beginning to come out of Germany that workers’ committees have made their appearances in Essen, Muelheim, Duesseldorf and Dortmund. Peace demonstrations are reported in Hamburg, Duisburg, Vienna and Munich. Unity between German and foreign workers has also been reported. We are certain that the German masses will soon display that will to struggle and their healthy working class desires which always characterized them.
This is only the beginning. The German masses will not only fight their fascist enslavers. They will fight against any foreign-enslaver. They will not trade their enslavement by a Hitler for an enslavement by a Stalin.
We are for a hard peace. We are for a hard peace against the fascists and the German capitalists, the sponsors of the Hitlerites. But that hard peace can only come from the German workers.
We are against any peace imposed on the German people. We are for the right of the German people to rule themselves, to decide their own fate.
The German workers are our brothers. Their struggle for freedom is our struggle. A victory in this struggle is a victory for the American workers, for the workers of all countries.
Enslavement of the German workers will mean the enslavement of the workers of all other countries; it will be a death-blow to the idea of working class solidarity and the principles of the labor movement.
American workers! Fight against the enslavement of your German brothers. They are the victims of German fascism! They are the victims of betrayals! For a hard peace against the German ruling class! That can only come by giving the German masses freedom to deal with their own ruling class.
 



Only a few weeks ago, the Labor-Management Charter, heralding a new era in capital-labor relations, was blazoned across the pages of the nation’s press. Management, under the leadership of Eric Johnston, President of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, attended by an assortment of big businessmen, and William Green and Philip Murray, signed this Charter.
The Charter recognized the right of labor to organize, but at the same time asserted the inherent right of business to own, operate and profit from the toil of the workers. It talked a great deal about full employment and high wages, but the central theme of the Charter was that labor must do nothing to upset the prerogatives of business, since labor depended upon capital for its jobs and security. Naturally, nothing in the Charter even hinted at the fact that labor produces all the wealth in the world and that this wealth is appropriated by big business for its own private profit at the expense of the well being of the workers and their families.
What the labor “statesmen” actually did was to sign a document which asserted that labor’s existence was secondary to the right of management to profits.
For the privilege of signing this businessman’s creed, the labor leaders promised to do everything in their power to prevent militant unionism in the post-war period, to aid big business in reconverting at a maximum profit. The program which the labor leader’s underwrite was similar to the anti-union, permanent post-war no-strike policy adopted by Harry Bridges and supported by the Communist-dominated unions in the CIO. No wonder the Communist Party is the most active force in the labor movement advocating the endorsement and enactment of the labor-management Charter.
 
C of C-NAM “Differences”
Shortly after the ceremonies, however, the NAM, which refused to endorse the document and which had representatives at the conference who apparently did sign the Charter, gave the show away. It announced that it was presently launching its anti-union campaign by fostering legislation to outlaw strikes and the closed shop and to legally paralyze unionism in general. The NAM also announced that its legislative program was endorsed by the C. of C. which Johnston heads. The C. of C., the NAM asserted, has its own legislative committee which is working very closely with the NAM!
Johnston, of course, vehemently denied this, but Victor Riesel, labor expert for the New York Post, declared the Charter to be a dodo. He pointed but that members of the NAM and C. of C. belong to both organizations.
“One part of the day Johnston’s men, let’s say those in Big Steel, are pounding Green and Murray with a hail-fellow-labor’s-swell benevolence. And later in the afternoon they are NAM leaders campaigning for the outlawing of strikes and what sounds mighty like a ban on closed shops.”
Riesel also points out that the C. of C. key committees are headed by “labor’s most bitter enemies – men who talk of him (Johnston) as a ‘boy scout,’ and are working closely with the NAM.”
One of Johnston’s committee heads is the inventor of the “Mohawk Valley formula” to break strikes. Another is head of a publishing firm which discriminates against unions and Jews. There are many more like these.
While the labor-management Charter was being signed, the auto industry and aircraft are preparing a powerful anti-union drive to break the power of the UAW. The labor management Charter is really a big business scheme to take labor off guard. It is a form of class collaboration which can only have a negative effect upon the movement.
On guard, ranks of labor! Don’t be sold a false bill of goods! When management wants to do something for your own good, that is time to be doubly careful and prepare to fight against a stab in the back!
 



This is indeed a grand occasion-to celebrate May Day together with the fifth anniversary of America’s ‘most’ militant labor and revolutionary socialist newspaper. The satisfaction on this anniversary is greater when it is remembered that many did not give Labor Action a long life, for the paper was born at the start of the second great imperialist war.
To start Labor Action at that crucial period of social dislocation seemed a hazardous undertaking. Labor Action and the Workers Party, with which it is associated, were new ventures. The future of both enterprises was difficult to foresee. But. to have carried them through successfully testifies to the power of the ideas and the vitality of the/movement behind them.
 
Aims of Labor Action
The aim of those responsible for the editorial policy of the paper was and is to offer the program and ideas of the Workers Party in simple terms, to guide the militant workers in their struggle for labor rights and interests, to teach them that the economic demands of labor, while important and necessary, were insufficient.
The economic struggle of the working class and all who toil must be joined to a political struggle against the political rule of the monopolistic capitalist class. To aid in the political development of the American working class, to help break it away from dependence, on capitalist politics and capitalist politicians; is still the great task of Labor Action.
The success of Labor Action manifested itself from the beginning. The response of the advanced workers enabled the paper to expand from a circulation of 5,000 to 12,000 in 1942. The next great step was the establishment of a one-cent Labor Action and the organization of a drive to increase the circulation by many thousands. Since then the circulation of the paper has risen to as high as 50,000 for special issues and now circulates at a steady rate of 25,000. weekly!
Labor Action circulates among a wide variety of American workers and farmers. Its readers number more than the actual circulation of the pager. It is read by the highest paid skilled workers and the poorest, most exploited sharecroppers of Southeast Missouri.
Over the momentous days of the past five years, Labor Action has established an exemplary record of struggle and devotion to the cause of labor and its freedom. For this very reason its existence was at one time threatened by the Post Office authorities. But the paper did not flinch in the defense of its rights to circulate its ideas.
When the war broke out, Labor Action published the manifesto of the Workers Party, declaring the war imperialist. It stated that the victors could only be the monopolistic capitalist classes of all countries who enriched themselves through profiteering from the destruction of lives and civilization. The manifesto pointed out that the masses in all countries were the main victims of the conflict. They bore the main burdens of war. Their economic conditions .deteriorated. They supplied the cannon-fodder for war. The hope of the people, said the manifesto of the Workers Party, was a socialist world of freedom, a system, of production for use and not for profit, a system that would eliminate exploitation for all time. Labor Action endorsed that manifesto and it has served to guide its writings ever since.
The economy of this country is an example of how the war has put enormous burdens upon labor. And yet the United States has felt the war less than other countries. The “equality of sacrifice” program of the Administration has turned out to mean that the sacrifices come essentially from the working people.
 
In Defense of Labor
For American labor, the war established long hours of toil, worsening conditions of labor, loss of rights gained after years of sacrifice and struggle, and a declining standard of living.
When the labor officialdom gave a no-strike pledge, it tied labor’s hands and served as a signal for every labor-baiter and union-buster to open up an assault upon the workers and their economic organizations.
With the war economy in the hands of big business, it was little wonder that wages remained stationary for the majority of workers, the cost of living rose continually higher, price ceilings were violated, quality of consumer goods deteriorated.
Labor paid the price for the enrichment of the capitalist class and for the greatest profits in the history of American business.
In this situation Labor Action spoke out valiantly in behalf of the workers. It has consistently fought against the Administration’s wage freeze, focused the spotlight on war profits, high prices, union-busting, and all attempts of reaction to tighten its grip upon the country.
Labor Action at all times kept its finger on the pulse of the labor movement. It consistently covered the leading conventions of the unions. It spread its message to all the workers.
Other highlights in the compaigns of our paper have been:
 
Some Things We Did

The agitation for independent political action by the workers through the organization of a Labor party, with a militant working class program aimed at taking political power. We intervened in the election campaign to show that it was a struggle between two capitalist parties, calling upon the PAC to transform itself into an instrument for advancing the organization of a Labor Party.
 
A campaign against the no-strike pledge, in which Labor Action joined with the progressive ranks of organized labor to fight a measure which has weakened the labor movement and given unheard-of power to government and industry to defeat the most urgent demands of the working class.
 
A campaign against the, National War Labor Board as an instrument of big business whose purpose it is to maintain the wage freeze and prevent redress of labor’s wage demands. Labor Action has consistently voiced the best interests of labor, and called for the resignation of the labor members from the WLB.
 
Labor Action carried on a vigorous defense of all minorities – Negro, Jewish, Mexican and religious – against the attacks of reaction. It has consistently fought discrimination in the armed forces as another expression of fascist racial doctrines which exist in so many places in the country, often fanned by big business interests.
 
Consistent with the international solidarity of labor’s interests, it has reported the most important events in Europe, defending the rights of the European masses to national independence, their own governments, and complete freedom, peace and security. It has opposed intervention of any power in the affairs of any country and called upon all workers in this country to defend their class brothers across the ocean, to defend the European Revolution against counter-revolutionary intervention.

Labor Action is blazing a trail toward the socialist future. We have only just begun; a long and winding road lies ahead. But we are prepared for it by the conviction that there is no hope for a new and better world except through the achievement of the new social order of socialism, a world of peace, freedom and plenty for all.
 



There was a time when the Atlantic Charter was regarded by the Allied statesmen as a “sacred document, presaging a new postwar world of freedom. But the disillusionment was not long in coming. In recent months, the true meaning of the Atlantic Charter has been made clear for everyone to see,
 
Russian Power Politics
One of the latest wrinkles in interpretation of the Charter comes from the Russians. As everyone now knows, Russia has chipped off a piece of Finland – the fruit of two wars. She seized Latvia, Lithuania and Esthonia, held a plebiscite at the point of a gun in each country and “legally incorporated” them into the borders of Russia.
The big dispute over Poland is being resolved in Russia’s favor with her sponsorship and recognition of the Lublin Committee. Upon the liberation of the country from Germany it will be turned into a Russian vassal state, i.e., those parts not already incorporated into Russia.
Parts of Romania have already been, incorporated into Stalin’s so-called socialist fatherland, where labor is enslaved. In all these instances, the will of the people means nothing – they are not consulted, nor are they permitted to decide their own national fate.
Naturally, the objections to these practices of power politics are many. They come not only from the people, but from unemployed governments in exile – which were retained by the Allies only as long as militarily advisable – and the ambassadorial representatives of these governments all over the world.
In the United States, there are a great number of these “unrecognized” ambassadors and representatives. One of these is P. Zadeikis, who continues to act as Washington Minister of a non-existent Lithuanian “government.” In a letter to Alexander Kerensky, Zadeikis takes Kerensky to task for endorsing Stalin’s incorporation of Lithuania into the borders of Russia. Who is Kerensky and what is this all about?
 
Kerensky’s Past
Alexander Kerensky was head of the provisional [1] government of Russia which was overthrown when the Russian workers and peasants, under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky took power and set up the first workers’ government in history. He was from that day on an enemy of the Russian Revolution. Of course, he was a supporter of the first revolution which overthrew the Czar and put him (Kerensky) into office at the head of a capitalist government. But the second revolution, which overthrew the power of the capitalists and landlords, he opposed most bitterly. Eventually Kerensky became an exile from Russia.
In the intervening years he remained a bitter, opponent of Soviet Russia, when the workers really ruled. His opposition to Russia cooled considerably after Stalin and his bureaucracy seized power. The more nationalist Stalin became, the warmer did Kerensky feel toward Russia. And when Stalin cast off all his pretentions of being a socialist, when he destroyed the Soviets, the bolshevik party, the communist international, the rights of the workers and peasants, and enslaved them, Kerensky began to find many things to admire in Stalin and Russia.
Thus, when Stalin was forced into the present war by his erstwhile partner, Hitler, Kerensky came to the defense of Mother Russia. And while he continues his holiday outbursts against Stalin’s totalitarian regime, Kerensky hails the wartime achievements of the Kremlin oligarch and calls upon all Russians to give the latter complete support, especially on the destruction of the independent states of Latvia, Lithuania, Esthonia, and the now threatened loss of independence to Poland.
 
How Imperialists Reason
And when Mr. Zadeikis asks Kerensky how he squares this with the Atlantic Charter, and the whole cause for which the war is fought, what answer does he receive? A deceitful one. But one which is gaining favor in the diplomatic chambers of the Allied powers.
Kerensky supports Stalin since Hitler’s attack, because Stalin “had ceased all Communist Propaganda inside Russia at the time of the Hitler invasion and put forward only such slogans as were in harmony with the national sentiments of the people and the national interests of Russia.” Secondly, the war with Hitler “was proclaimed a defensive war ... and the war aims were given as defense of the motherland ....”
And “insofar as Russia continues to fight for these aims I continue to support them. These aims have nothing to do with the form of government existing in Russia.” He doesn’t go for the government, but “none of us, however, can alter the pattern of history as it has shaped itself at this moment.”
But what about Lithuania? “As regards the 6,000,000 inhabitants of the Baltic states, their incorporation within the federation of Russian states likewise has nothing,to do with the character of the existing political regime in Russia or with the political regime now installed in the Baltic states.” Some mighty fancy jabbing and side-stepping, this answer.
But Kerensky is coming to the point, in his own round-about and ponderous way. Was this incorporation a violation of the Atlantic Charter, as Mr. Zadeikis insists? No, says Kerensky. Just listen!
“I contended it did not (violate the Charter) ... One may consider the incorporation of the territories in question as unjust; one may try to persuade the Soviet government to revise its action, but no one can justly accuse the Soviet government of having violated the Atlantic Charter.”
And why not? Well, you see, the Atlantic Charter, which bars such incorporations, was “promulgated by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill on Aug. 14, 1941. The representatives of the Moscow Government signed the Charter on Jan. 1, 1942. The reincorporation of the Baltic states (you see, the Czar, once plundered these peoples, too – AG), Western White Russia and Bessarabia, and the incorporation of western Galicia and northern Bukovina into Russia, took place during the period between the end of 1939 and the middle of 1940 (during the Hitler-Stalin Pact – AG) one year before the promulgation of the Atlantic Charter.”
There it is. The Atlantic Charter is not a doctrine, after all. It is a date. If before January 1, 1942, Russia gobbled up a number of states in violation of the will of the peoples of these states why, – it has nothing to do with the Atlantic Charter, because when Russia seized these territories it had not yet signed this noble document
England and the United States, of course, will support Russia in this. After all there are India and Puerto Rico. There is, however, a name by which all this goes. It is not unknown, either. It is called “imperialism!
Alexander Kerensky hasn’t changed at all. He was a great Russian Nationalist and imperialist when he headed the Provisional Government in 1917. He remains that today. Stalin has changed. He was once a revolutionary socialist. Today he is a great Russian nationalist and imperialist.

Footnote by ETOL
1. In the printed version the word “provincial” was used instead of “provisional” – this was obviously a typesetting error.
 



A New York Times dispatch of January 21, reports that Maurice Thorez, generalissimo of the French Communist Party, announced a change in that party’s position on disarming the armed resistance movement. He has now ordered his party to support the government of General de Gaulle in its measures to disarm the fighting legions of the people who maintained a running’ four-year war against Hitler’s armies of occupation.
 
De Gaulle vs. Communists
It wasn’t so very long ago that a sharp struggle broke out in France between the government of de Gaulle and the leaders of the resistance movement, many of them members of the French Communist Party, over the government’s decree ordering disarmament of the Patriotic Militia. The action of de Gaulle’s cabinet reflected the demand of the Allies, whose puppet he is, that the armed people must be disarmed.
Why did the Allies make this demand in France, Italy, Belgium and Greece? Why are they prepared to disarm the people in every country which will be “liberated” by their military forces? Did not the armed people play a tremendous role in the fight against Hitler’s occupation, troops and keep alive the flame of revolt against the Nazi oppressor? Of course they did, and none paid higher tribute to the armed resistance movements than the leaders of the United Nations, Roosevelt, Stalin, Churchill, et al.
The reason for the demand of disarmament arose because the Allied leaders realized that the resistance movements were not merely seeking their national emancipation from fascist Germany, but were social movements of people tired of the slaughter and the way of life of capitalist imperialism and its recurring wars and starvation. The people want more than just liberation from the Nazis. They want punishment of the big business men who collaborated with the Nazis during occupation and preferred the victory of the former over their rebellious people, who might destroy the profit system. They want a social change, genuine freedom and security.
 
Communists with de Gaulle
Naturally the people resisted and continue to resist their new “protectors,” who wish to take their weapons from them. The Communists were in the beginning the loudest in their opposition to de Gaulle’s scheme. But, as indicated above, Thorez, in his report to his party’s central committee, completely reversed this position. In shamefaced praise of the Patriotic Militia, now called the Civic and Republican Guard, he said that they had served their mission against the Germans, but the situation had changed and “public security should be assured by the regular police forces.” Why the change?
The original opposition of the French Stalinists to de Gaulle’s order was based on a plan to bargain for greater representation in the government and to strengthen Russia’s position in France. Since the conclusion of the Franco-Russian twenty-year pact, Stalin has obtained at least one of his aims – to neutralize any Franco-British or Franco-American treaty. De Gaulle granted Thorez amnesty from his conviction for deserting the French army when France was at war with Germany when Russia and Germany had a non-aggression treaty, the infamous Hitler-Stalin pact.
Communist policy in all countries is dictated by Russian interests. Stalin does not want an armed people in Europe. He wants to solidify his own power. Having achieved one aim in France through the Franco-Russian treaty, his servants in that country turn tail and now agree to the disarming of the People’s Militia. The Communist Party in France, like the Communist Parties of all countries, has become respectable. By that is meant that they support capitalism and the pre-war status – so long as it serves Russian interests. But they stand against the people at all times!
 



The President has shuffled his infield around, but the players are still the same. Judge Fred M. Vinson has been moved up from his post as Director of Stabilization to the place once held to by Jesse Jones as custodian of the billion dollar loan agency of the government.
Lawyer William H. Davis first limbered up a little and took Vinson’s place as Director of Stabilization.
Dr. Charles W. Taylor then stepped into Davis’ post as chairman of the War Labor Board.
 
Nothing Has Been Changed!
What, if anything, has been changed by the new set-up? Nothing!
Before departing his post as Director of Stabilization, Vinson, who had already barred any increase in the basic wage rates of the American workers, made rulings on fringe demands which have approximately the same aim: preventing an equitable adjustment in wages. That makes it a little easier for Mr. Davis, Who can now excuse himself on the ground that Judge Vinson has firmly established the policy of his department. But Mr. Davis does not need any excuse.
Before he departed his post as chairman of the WLB, Mr. Davis handed in a report to the President advising no revision in the Little Steel formula – no increase in the basic wages of the workers, even though he and his cohorts admitted that the cost of living was at least eleven per cent above any wage increases granted workers. To make certain that no fight over his new appointment would arise, he made a public statement upon his nomination that he was not in favor of wage increases!
And now we come to the new chairman of the WLB, Dr. Charles W. Taylor. He is well qualified to fill Davis’ shoes, since he is the author of the infamous Little Steel formula which is destroying the living standards of millions of American workers. Dr. Taylor further distinguished himself by helping to write the report to the President urging the maintenance of the wage freeze and no change in the Little Steel formula.
 
Labor’s Path
Thus the men now responsible for maintaining the President’s stabilization program (read: wage freeze), are two gentlemen who have made it all too clear that they are against any upward revision of the Little Steel formula, against any increase in the basic wage structure and for the maintenance of the wage freeze!
Bad men, say the labor leaders. “Intolerable,” says Phil Murray, head of the CIO. But Davis and Taylor are not acting on their own! They are acting in the name of President Roosevelt!
President Roosevelt appointed these men to their posts!
President Roosevelt appointed them because he knows they will be faithful to his program and will carry it out completely!
The lesson is clearer than ever, even if the labor officialdoms prefer not to see it:
LABOR SHOULD GET OFF THE WLB.
LABOR SHOULD RESCIND THE NO-STRIKE PLEDGE AS AN INSTRUMENT WHICH BINDS ITS HANDS AND MAKES IMPOSSIBLE A STRUGGLE FOR HIGHER WAGES AND THE MAINTENANCE OF A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING.
 



Most of the chips were put down at Crimea in the game of power politics between the Big Three, with their agents and hired hands, politicians, journalists, commentators and opinion-makers. The stakes they played for were empires and spheres of influence. They told the people, however, that they were attempting to assure peace and world organization.
No matter where you turn, you are confronted with the query: Are you for or against Crimea? By that is meant, do you accept or reject the decisions adopted by Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill. The most vociferous people are, of course, the Communist Parties of the world, agents of Stalin, whose policies are always easy to foretell: whatever the Stalin regime in Russia does, they are for.
Thus the world is being divided between those who accept the decisions of Crimea and those who are critical of them or reject them out of hand.
What does it mean to accept the decisions of the Yalta conference and what does it mean to reject them?
 
Teheran
To understand Yalta it is necessary to go back to the Teheran conference of a year ago. At that conference the aim of the Big Three was to cement their internal relations and to establish the military course in the prosecution of the war and to reach a preliminary agreement on the political questions arising out of an end to the war, namely, how to partition Europe.
There is no doubt now that Russia’s demands on Poland were presented to Roosevelt and Churchill at Teheran and that a general agreement was reached. Eastern Europe was accepted as a Russian sphere of influence. At the same time, and in return for this agreement, England’s pre-eminence in the Mediterranean area was established; that is, she was to have a dominating role in Greece, Italy and the islands which dot that great sea. America was to obtain an open door to Western Europe. Germany was to be handled as a joint problem. While it was not fully decided what to do, the main policy undoubtedly was discussed and adopted.
The pace of the war quickened after the Teheran conference. Political explosions occurred in Greece, Poland, Italy, France. The course of Allied liberation did not run smoothly. The area of agreement between the Big Three seemed to narrow and another meeting between its statesmen was indicated. How were these problems resolved?
 
Horse-Trading at Yalta
At Yalta, Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill settled down to some old-time horse-trading. What united the three countries, all striving to dominate the world and therefore mutually antagonistic, was the common war against Germany. What determined the concrete decisions made was the power of arms.
The United States and Russia were the big powers. Both had tremendous military forces and arms. The Russian army had already swept over a good part of Eastern Europe. The American armies were in the West and in Italy. England was also there, but in relatively small numbers. So they proceeded to solve the problems of the control of Europe in a manner dictated by their individual military power.
1. RUSSIA. Stalin obtained control of Eastern Europe.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which were incorporated into Russia during the Hitler-Stalin pact, remain incorporated. These countries, which are officially recognized by the United States and for whom Roosevelt spoke so eloquently before Germany invaded Russia, were not even mentioned by the conferees.
Poland, over whose borders England and France went to war, was split up. Stalin took all the territory east of the Curzon Line. Poland is to be compensated by German territory.
The Stalin creation, the Lublin Committee, is to rule the country with a few additions from abroad.
A “democratic" election is to follow to select a new government. But in the meantime, the Stalinist-Lublin government has practically completed a purge of all socialists, trade unionists, democrats, peasants, etc., who were against Lublin and against Russian domination of Poland. When the election is held the opposition will have already been destroyed: and a “Ja" vote will take place.
Stalin, who seized other territories in Eastern Europe, also obtained the “right" to dominate Romania, Jugoslavia, Bulgaria, Hungary and possibly Austria.
In all of these deals the people of the countries involved had nothing to say. Three men, representing their respective classes and their respective national interests, decided the fate of millions and millions of people.
2. GERMANY. The country will be dismembered. Its people will be enslaved. The advocates of a “hard peace" are now busy at work to justify their plans by depicting all Germans as beasts, sensualists, criminals, murderers and warriors.
If all the Germans are these things, then it becomes right to enslave millions of German workers (Stalin’s demand). In all the threats to punish the Nazi “war criminals", not a word was said about the German industrial and financial ruling class, the capitalists who paid for Hitler, put him into power, and really laid the plans for this war for profit.
Germany will be occupied by the three great powers, with France invited to occupy the Rhineland. The country will be divided into three zones, occupied by American, Russian and British troops, with a representative ruling commission to reside in Berlin. A reparations commission will sit in Moscow!
3. UNILATERALISM. The Big Three also decided that from Yalta on there should be no more unilateral actions. Since this means none of the Big Three shall act independently, the U.S. will intervene in decisions affecting other countries.
4. JAPAN. For the concessions made to Stalin in Eastern Europe, Stalin agreed to give assistance to the war against Japan. Exactly what this assistance is to be remains to be seen.
5. WORLD SECURITY. The conferees then sat themselves down to resolve their differences on Dumbarton Oaks. The stumbling block to the Dumbarton Oaks decision to set up a new world organization was the manner of voting by the chief council. At Yalta the “architects of a new world" gave in to the Russian demand that any one of the five leading powers making up the main council of the new world organization would have the right to veto any military action for which the security council might vote against an aggressor who sits on the council.
In other words, if Russia were deemed an aggressor and the council should vote to take military action against her, she could veto this action by her vote. Thus the whole farce of voting on war is completely revealed. Besides, war was never halted by a vote. When imperialist powers are ready to go to war, nothing but the united strength and opposition of the masses of people can stop them. The great discussion on the voting of the Dumbarton powers is merely wool pulled over the eyes of the people to disguise the fact that no serious steps have been taken to halt another war!
6. FOREIGN MINISTERS. The Crimean conference also decided that the Foreign Ministers of the United States, Russia and England shall meet regularly. The purpose in this is to prevent “misunderstandings" which arise from the unilateral actions taken by each of them, no matter what their agreements may be.
7. SAN FRANCISCO. Crimea also decided to convene a United Nations conference in San Francisco to endorse the agreements of the Big Three. Since the other United Nations have only an advisory role, they can in no way seriously interfere with the decisions of Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill. Churchill has already made it clear that in the present world one must accept the fact that big powers rule, little powers obey!
The San Francisco gathering is itself the sharpest condemnation of Crimea and its decisions. Three powers have decided in a completely dictatorial way the kind of world organization there should be. These three powers select two additional members (France and China) to sit on the permanent council. The same Big Big Three, or Big Five, select the lesser nations to sit on the non-permanent six-nation council.
Before any of these nations can come to San Francisco, they are being forced to declare war on the Axis. Otherwise they will get no favors from the Big Three! But after they come to San Francisco they will have no real rights or powers, since all rights and powers are concentrated in the hands of the Permanent Council of Five!
8. THE ATLANTIC CHARTER AGAIN. Having settled the fate of so many peoples in Europe and the sovereignty of nations, without their consultation, the Big Three, with a fitting hypocrisy, re-endorsed the Atlantic Charter.
Before Crimea, Churchill had misrepresented the Charter and then declared it has no other significance than that of a hope or a guide. Roosevelt joked about the Charter, didn’t even know where it was, described it as a piece of paper having no official standing. Stalin signed the Charter too, but that didn’t stop him from incorporating countries into the borders of Russia without consulting their peoples. But now, they have all re-endorsed it after having torn it to shreds and violated every one of its principles!
 
This was Yalta! A meeting of three powers which decided the fate of Europe and the world and laid the seeds for the Third World War!
Behind their actions is a determination to prevent the European peoples from deciding for themselves what kind of governments they want, what kind of economic, political and social systems they want.
Behind their actions is a determination to destroy the German nation and to wreak revenge on the German people.
Behind their actions is the determination to keep in existence a rotten and decaying capitalist system, to retain the profit social order at the expense of hundreds of millions of people.
Behind their actions is a plan to split Europe between the Big Three to guarantee the regimes of the big powers and to split the booty of the world between them.
The decisions of Yalta, arrived at in a completely autocratic, big-power fashion, have nothing in common with democracy or a democratic peace which can come only from the people of the world.
The decisions of Yalta laid the basis for a new occupation of Europe, a new race of arms, a new subjugation of the peoples of the continent.
The decisions of Yalta bar the way to emancipate the millions and hundreds of millions of colonial peoples now living under the heel of Allied imperialism.
But the decisions of Yalta are not everlasting. They will not last for the several generations hoped for by Roosevelt. They will last only as long as the present relationship of forces, the strength of arms of the contending powers will last – and no longer.
The way to peace and the way out for Europe, as for the rest of the world, lies with the peoples of the world, with their efforts to establish a new society of genuine freedom, peace and security. That kind of society can only be a socialist society, free of exploiters and profiteers who feed on national antagonism, race hatred, war and imperialism.
 



There is hardly a worker who will not rejoice at the news that Jacques Doriot, ex-Stalinist-Communist leader and more recently the little fuehrer of a French fascist party, was killed during an Allied plane attack on Germany. The only regret in the manner of his death is that the French working class did not have the opportunity to deal with this foul creature, who learned his totalitarianism in the school of Stalin:
We could end this item right here and say “good riddance,” were it not for the fact that Robert Minor, that notorious liar, officer of the Communist Political Association and writer for the Daily Worker (pronounced union-wrecker), saw fit to make some of his usual ignorant and false comments on Doriot’s death.
Minor takes this opportunity to say that Doriot was an associate of Leon Trotsky, the outstanding fighter for world socialism and the oppressed of all countries, before an agent of Stalin’s GPU assassinated him.
 
A Scribbler at Work
Says Minor: “Doriot was once a member of the French Communist Party but expelled in 1936 when it was discovered that he was secretly allied with Trotsky.” The purpose of this lie is obvious. Since Doriot was an avowed fascist, you prove that Trotsky was one by asserting that he was allied with Doriot! What are the facts? Doriot and Trotsky were never allied. On the contrary, they were bitter enemies, when they were both in the.Communist International and out. What Minor, the journalistic prostitute of the Hearst-like Daily Worker, deliberately fails to mention is:

Doriot was not merely a member of the French Communist Party, but one of its leaders, a member of its central committee and one of its representatives on the executive committee of the Communist International.
 
He was also one of the leaders of the French Young Communist League and its representative on the executive committee of the Young Communist International.
 
Doriot resided in Moscow for a long time, during which period he was one of the outstanding opponents of Trotsky and a Trotsky-baiter. His role in the French Communist Party was to frame up the left-wing elements of the party, the true followers of socialism. This he did at the behest of Stalin. But in doing that he only did what Minor, Foster and Browder did in the American Communist Party. They were all associates-in-crime, the best of friends. Doriot, Minor and the other puppets of Stalin help to make a shambles of the once revolutionary Communist International built by Lenin, Trotsky, Bucharin and other leaders of the Russian Revolution.
 
What the liar Minor deliberately omitted from his account is that Doriot had a fall-out with the Stalinist clique which ran the Communist International and the French Communist Party and quit. He did not become a fascist all at once, but only after a period of “development.” But this transformation was not difficult, since he merely exchanged the totalitarianism of Stalin for the totalitarianism of Hitler. Having been schooled in Moscow, he merely took a post-graduate course in Berlin. As an outstanding pupil of the anti-Trotsky school, he only took another step forward in his degeneration. The really sad thing about it all is that he lived so long.
 

New Capitalist Defenders
But look at the course of Minor and his associates. Once they were socialists, too. Now they are Stalinists, acting in his name in this country. Once they fought in the interests of all labor and against capitalism. Today? They are anti-socialist and anti-labor.
The outstanding supporters of capitalism and big business in America is the Communist Party (now called “Political Association”). They have more faith in decaying capitalism than the big business men themselves. They now stand for an aggressive imperialism in which American big business can exploit the world.
They are against any movement or individual which genuinely fights for socialism or a real improvement of the lives of the people.
They are for a permanent post-war no-strike pledge and against militant unionism, pleading for capital-labor peace which is another means of killing the labor movement.
 
Scabs of the Labor Movement
Even at this late stage, when the WLB has been unmistakably stamped as an anti-labor body, the Communists and their Daily Wrecker rises to its defense, blaming Vinson, who is in turn an appointee of Roosevelt, warning labor not to fight for its elementary rights.
The Stalinist-Communists scabbed on the Montgomery Ward workers in their fight against Sewell Avery. This was merely the practical result of their policy, which would reduce the unions to agencies of the government, relying solely on handouts from cheap capitalist politicians. They are the scabs of the labor movement.
No, Doriot was not an associate of Trotsky, but his violent enemy. But he was an associate of the Minors, Browders and Fosters. If you think his transformation was strange, just think of the policies the Stalinist-Communists pursue today. And remember, too it wasn’t so long ago that the Minors were defending the Hitler-Stalin pact, saying that fascism was “a matter of personal taste.”
 



President Emil Rieve, head of the Textile Workers of America, in resigning from the War Labor Board, took a step which should have been taken long ago. Following the action of the Textile Workers’ executive committee, which scrapped the no-strike pledge for thousands of its workers, Rieve vacated his post as an alternate member of the WLB. His reason for resigning was that the WLB, since its powers have been curbed by Director of Stabilization Vinson, was no longer able to function and that he, as a labor member, had no recourse but to resign.
In resigning, Rieve called for the reconstitution of a WLB on its former basis "when it had the power to act," This is the position of most of the leaders of the CIO. and it is a mistaken position.
Vinson’s decision to hold Up increases granted by the WLB until examination of the price situation and the effect of such raises upon it was made by the OP A is not fundamentally different from the previous position of the WLB.
 
Was the WLB Different?
As a matter of fact, the WLB has held up hundreds and hundreds of cases on this very ground and has persistently refused to grant justifiable wage increases because it adhered to the President’s wage stabilization program.
What the CIO leaders are doing is offering a lot of excuses for the WLB. The WLB was no better during the years of its existence when it had no Vinson to approve its wage decisions. Vinson, for example, had nothing to do with the refusal of WLB to raise wages for the auto workers, rubber workers, textile workers, mine workers, packinghouse workers, etc. And the cases of these workers have been before the WLB for as long as two years or more.
The labor leaders refuse to recognize the fact, although it stares them in the face, that the WLB was organized for the specific purpose of holding back wage increases and to see to it that; the principle of the Little Steel formula is strictly adhered to. It was and is the graveyard for labor’s wage demands.
The labor leaders refuse to recognize the fact, although it stares them in the face, that the WLB is a body appointed by President Roosevelt to carry out his policies.
The labor leaders refuse to recognize the fact, although it stares them in the face, that Stabilization Director Vinson is an appointee of President Roosevelt, selected for the purpose of adhering to the wage freeze which FDR inaugurated. The President did not select Vinson to approve of wage increases for the majority of workers, who need them, but to prevent such wage increases!
 
FDR Misled the Labor Leaders
What the labor leaders like to forget, is that the President promised, when he: made the Little Steel formula the law governing wages, that it would be hitched to the cost of living and would be revised correspondingly – every rise in the cost of living would be accompanied by pegging up the formula. But the President did not really mean it. He misrepresented the whole situation to the labor leaders, who swallowed it. He meant to mislead them!







Some True Figures (Not WLB):
How Labor Enriches Capital



 





Do the labor leaders continue to swallow it today? How can they, when the facts are so clear? The trouble with the labor leaders is that they replace militant unionism and the interests of the millions of rank and file workers with bad politics. Not with independent labor politics, based on a Labor Party and a militant labor program, but with capitalist politics based on no program except support to President Roosevelt. This unquestioned support to Roosevelt has resulted in defeating the most important demands of labor made since the war began!
What conclusions do the labor leaders draw from all this? They haven’t yet decided to quit the WLB in a body when this is the indicated course. Instead, they denounce Vinson, Roosevelt’s appointee. They still continue to speak strongly in favor of the no-strike pledge; when it has long ago become a dangerous farce.
The WLB report on, wages sent to the President is an insult to every person in the country who works for a living. Thee CIO and the AFL reacted quite sharply to the report of the WLB. They properly denounced it. But, what conclusions do these labor leaders draw? None.
The conclusions, however, are indicated: GET OFF THE WLB! RESCIND THE NO-STRIKE PLEDGE!
These are the things which bind labor’s hands, make it the easy prey of the bosses and the government, who are allied for the purposes of destroying the standard of living of the workers, while they guarantee the greatest profits in history to the bosses!
LABOR, GET OFF THE WLB!
RESCIND THE NO-STRIKE PLEDGE!
 

  (Continued from last issue) Elsewhere in his “victory speech” Stalin reached, a new low in nationalist degeneration when he identified himself and his government with the imperialist-expansionist policy of Czarism. He said: “... the defeat of Russian troops in 1904 in the period of the Russo-Japanese War left grave memories in the minds of our peoples. It was a dark stain on our country. Our people trusted and awaited the day when Japan would be routed and the stain wiped out. “For forty years have we, men of the older generation, waited for this day. And now this day has come.” All of this is untrue. The Russo-Japanese was extremely unpopular in Russia. The masses hated the war and hoped the Czar would be defeated. Hundreds of thousands went into hiding and additional hundreds of thousands left the country to avoid military service. The Bolshevik Party of which Stalin was a member opposed the Russo-Japanese war, denounced Czarist and Japanese imperialism, and hoped for the defeat of Russia in the war! Stalin supported that policy, identified himself with it completely! The Mensheviks (right-wing socialists) also opposed the war and, like the Bolsheviks, were defeatists! In a word, the whole Russian labor movement opposed the war and called for the defeat of the Czar, holding Russian imperialism primarily responsible for the war, but describing it as imperialist on both sides. But not only the labor movement opposed the war and was defeatist. The new capitalist class which was just emerging in Russian society also opposed the war and was defeatist, hoping that a Japanese victory would destroy the hold of the nobility and the landlords on the nation. In other words, the overwhelming majority of the country, the organized labor movement, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, and the new capitalist class opposed the war and hoped for a Russian defeat. It is a typical Stalinist lie to say that the defeat of Russian troops in 1904 “left grave memories in the minds of our people.” It is an even greater lie to say that “for forty years have we, men of the older generation, waited for this day.” The workers did not wait for it; the peasants did not wait for it. No, not even Stalin waited for this day. For during the many years that he was a Bolshevik, that is, until Lenin died, he held the same position on the Russo-Japanese war as did the Bolsheviks, namely, that the war was an imperialist war, that the masses of people should oppose it, that the Czar ought to be defeated in it.  Stalin, a Reactionary When Stalin speaks as he does today, it is because he has ceased to be a Bolshevik, that is, ceased to be a socialist, an internationalist completely devoted to the interests of the world emancipation of all exploited and oppressed people. Stalin has become a Great Russian Nationalist, an imperialist. That alone explains why today, forty years after the Russo-Japanese war, he identifies himself and his ruling class with the imperialist interests of Czarism and the landlords in that war and the most extreme right wing of that bloody gang, to boot.   
  Attended by 125 delegates, alternates and visitors, the second Active Workers Conference of the Workers Party, held in Detroit, the industrial heart of the United States, on August 18 and 19, was a signal success. The great majority of the members present were industrial workers, active in the leading mass unions of the country. They represented twenty-one branches from seventeen cities and eleven states. Fraternal delegates added to this list. The Active Workers Conference, organized by the National Committeeand held between conventions, called together the party functionaries and activists to review the work of the organization, examine how the party is functioning, take an inventory on the tasks executed and to recommend proposals for the extension of party work based upon reports of members of the National Committee. In the case of the present conference, the activists of the party gathered to review the period since the convention of February 1944. They received a series of reports and recommendations from national officers, discussed them at great length, acted on these recommendations and made proposals of their own to the National Committee. All of the actions of the conference were in the nature of shaping up the work of the party in the next period prior to the forthcoming convention of the organization.  Tasks and Perspectives Highlighting the conference reports was the presentation by Max Shachtman, national secretary of the Workers Party, of The Next Tasks and Perspectives of the Party. This report dealt with the necessity of developing a party cadre, a firm party core as “the indispensable spinal column, heart and mind of a revolutionary movement.” Comrade Shachtman reported on the solid progress made by the party during the war years when it stood out fearlessly as the outstanding antiwar organization in the country, a party which told the truth when war broke out and which carried out an implacable defense of the working class in the United States, as well as the workers and oppressed of all countries. Citing the various stages of development through which the Workers Party has gone, Shachtman stated that: “The principal task of the organization is AGITATION, that putting forward of single ideas or slogans to the largest possible section of the working class. They are aimed atraising the class consciousness of the proletariat and thereby making it more receptive to the idea of joining or supporting the revolutionary organization as its leader, first in the dally struggle and last in the final struggle for socialism.” Shachtman discussed the present position of the Workers Party in a situation where it operates among a politically unorganized working class. That the necessity of developing a mass revolutionary party of masses is the prerequisite for the emancipation of all the people is not even debatable, he stated. At what stage of development do we stand? “Should we ‘convert ourselves’ into a mass party?” asked Shachtman. “Yes, we shall do so. But not by arbitrary decision. Not by any mechanical devices. Not by putting on a label which calls us that. Not by self-deception which deceives nobody else because it cannot (and should not!). We will never recruit a worker on that basis, or, if we do, we will never keep him in the party. We INTEND to become and act like a mass party. That is our firm aim. But that requires work; that is a struggle, and a long and complex one; that is an aim realized at the end of a road of fusion and splits and regroupments into a big movement in which we expect the elements of our present party will constitute the decisive political force (provided we continue to prove worthy of such a position). Nothing can substitute for this work, this struggle and the endurance and patience and self-confidence it presupposes.” The report by Shachtman made a profound impression upon the delegates. It elicited a long and fruitful discussion in which the leading activists participated with their own ideas and proposals aimed at strengthening and building the party on the basis of its political program which in the next period is to concentrate on the agitation for the party’s reconversion program find the need for an independent Labor Party. The organization report by Albert Gates followed the main report. It concerned itself primarily with the state of the party branches, the execution of the program of action adopted at the November 1944 plenum of the National Committee and the main tasks of the party in the next period. Among the various activities reviewed in this report, was the party’s campaign for a Labor Party, the recruitment drive, the Labor Action subscription campaign, the intensification and extension of mass work and the varying successes enjoyed by the organization in this past period. One of the main tasks of the party, Gates reported, is the need to strengthen branches which are the basic units of the organization. The general activity and life of the party depend largely on the health condition of the branches. Therefore attention must be constantly given to the healthy functioning of these units by selecting the strongest organizers and executive committees who have the main responsibility for carrying out decisions of the party. The report dwelt at some length on the problem of integrating new members into the organization, citing a series of problems which are created by party growth. The party made enormous progress during these war years, he stated, despite the fact that it has lost scores of comrades, among them leaders of the party, who became members of the armed forces. With all these handicaps and without any need to exaggerate, it can be said that the organization as a whole did a splendid job in maintaining the party, extending its activities and increasing its membership.  Program of Action In closing his report, Ga5es presented to the conference thefollowing program of action:  The main political campaigns of the party will center around (a) the reconversion program, which is to be inseparably linked with the Labor Party campaign and (b) the defense of Europe and the European Revolution from Allied imperialism, in line with the political analysis and position of the party.  The party will issue a series of pamphlets and booklets, among which shall be: (a) Program of the Workers Party, (b) Reconversion Program, and (c) The Labor Party.  A concentration will be made on colonization of party activists in leading party centers and the party will aim to have a full-time party organizer in every party center within six months to one year.  A provisional youth conference will be held following the AWC, the aim of which shall be to set up a national youth organization at the earliest opportunity.  A subscription campaign for Labor Action will begin October 1, to last for three months. A recruitment drive will follow at the conclusion of the subscription campaign.  An attempt will be made to build Labor Action clubs for the purpose of broadening the base of support to the paper and establishing additional sources of financing.  A national educational department will be established which shall organize the training and education of the party.  The organization report was followed by a long discussion in which almost every delegate participated. As part of the organization question but presented in a separate report was the state of the finances given by the financial director of the party, Mary Bell. This report paid tribute to the splendid response of the party to the financial needs of the organization. Every party member, almost without exception, gave a good account of himself, Miss Bell remarked. It was evident in the way the organization was able to issue a mass Labor Action, a monthly magazine, maintain a national staff and issue literature. All of this was made possible by the fine efforts of the party membership. It was now necessary, she pointed out, to broaden the base of financial support to the party by calling upon the assistance of patty sympathizers and supporters of Labor Action.  Gates Reports for LA The report by the editor of Labor Action, Albert Gates, on Labor Action as a Recruiting Agent testified to the effectiveness of the paper, which now has a stable circulation of between twenty and twenty-five thousand. The report indicated the many ways in which the paper could be used for party recruiting purposes. Labor Action has a wide following, he stated. Many workers call themselves “Labor Actionists.” There is no reason to lament this fact; On the contrary, it is an excellent situation, for it affords the party an opportunity to do some real recruiting among hundreds and even thousands of union militants who accept and follow the program of Labor Action. The report dealt with the meaning of Labor Action clubs, built up of readers and sympathizers of the paper. These clubs could become an invaluable source of support to the paper and an arena for recruitment to the party. Following the report and discussion on this point, comrade Gates gave a report on the circulation and promotion of Labor Action and The New International, with stress laid on the necessity of increasing the circulation of the theoretical magazine. Two major reports then rounded out the conference. The first of these was The Tasks of the Party in the Trade Unions, given by its national labor secretary, David Coolidge. This report revolved around the developments in the American labor movement, citing the great militancy of the rank and file unionists who fought desperately against a common obstacle represented by the government, big business and the labor officialdom.  Coolidge on Unions Coolidge’s report showed that the Workers Party is a party of workers in the real sense of the word. The overwhelming majority of its members, he pointed out, were in industry and in the trade union movement. They didn't just pay union dues and sit in at union meetings. They took the lead in the fight for unionism and in defense of the working class. The militant policies pursued by our members won them great sympathy and support and the party has established a base for itself in the labor movement. He summarized the experiences of the party in this most important field of party work, especially as it developed in the main CIO unions. Coolidge’s report was followed by a number of regional reports by field workers. The latter included the rubber unions, railroad, shipyard, electrical, steel and auto. The discussions underscored the progress of the Workers Party in its union work, its political work in the unions and the recruitment of worker-members. A new program of action adopted by the conference can only hasten the progress of the party in its main activity among themasses. The final report made to the conference dealt with educational work and was given by Comrade Ernest Lund, author of Plenty for All. Lund, who is now the educational director of the Workers Party and managing editor of The New International, reported on the general problems of education in a socialist party, especiallythose which relate to the education of new members. He outlined aseries of proposals for the organization of schools, classes,outlines and pamphlets which would all result in raising the theoretical and political level of the party and its membership. Most important among these proposals is one which calls for the issuance of a series of twenty-five educational pamphlets to be put out at the rate of one a month.  Party’s War Dead Before closing the conference, the delegates, alternates and visitors rose to give silent tribute to five party members who fell in the imperialist war which they hated so much, and to others who were wounded in the same bloody carnage. In general, the Active Workers Conference was a tremendous success. It revealed a healthy, maturing, disciplined and enthusiastic party membership, earnest in its convictions in the political program of the party and eager to execute that program.   


The announcement by Lieut Gen. John R. Hodge, commander of the American occupation forces for Southern Korea, that he will administer that part of the nation through existing Japanese officials, has aroused the widest protests by the Korean nationalist organizations. An additional statement that these Japanese officials will merely carry out directives of the United States has not served to lessen the protests.
Recent news dispatches have revealed that the heroic Koreans’ hatred of Japanese imperialism was such that they revolted and seized the factories. Thousands were jailed by the Japanese officials who quelled the revolt. Now, these same officials who only yesterday ordered shooting at a demonstration of Koreans who thought they were really liberated and came to welcome American occupation troops, are to administer American policy.
The New York Times reports that:
“... the General said that Korea’s desire for immediate independence could not be granted. It is necessary, he said, to maintain the Japanese administrative officials, from Governor General Noboyuki Abe on down, to prevent the chaos that probably would result if they were summarily ousted.”
 
No Independence
This is the language of imperialism. One of its arguments is that independence cannot now be granted because there exists more than one organization fighting for independence, three to be specific, each desiring a major part of a Korean government. It does not occur to the American imperialists that an immediate election in Korea could easily settle this question.
The American action, however, is typical of the policy of all the powers in the United Nations who fought this war shouting the slogans of the Four Freedoms which they never meant and never honored. The “liberation” brought to Europe by victorious Allied arms has yet to be achieved. The continent was divided into “zones” and “spheres of influence.” After six years of bloody war, the real independence of Europe has still to be fought for.
It is no different in the Far East. Korea is a good example, but it is not the only one. This nation of more than 22,000,000 people has long been coveted and subjected by imperialism. Domination of Korea was one of the reasons for the Russo-Japanese war of 1904–05. The victory of Japan gave her dominant influence over the country. In 1910, Korea was annexed by Japan and since then has been ruled in a ruthless and bloody manner by Japanese imperialists.
For more than forty years the independence movements of Korea have fought valiantly for their country’s freedom. This time they believed that a Big Three victory over Japan would result in immediate and unquestioned independence. The announcement of American policy by Lieut. Gen. Hodge was a sharp blow to the aspirations of the Korean people, but it revealed the essentially imperialist policy of the American ruling class whose general program for Japan is to keep in power the feudal-capitalist ruling class over the bent backs of the heavily exploited Japanese people.
 
Fear of Revolution
This fear of revolution in the colonial world is what dictates American as well as British and Russian policy in the Far East. Genuine independence of colonial peoples in the Far East runs counter to the aims of Allied imperialism which is now busily engaged individing amongst themselves the possessions of defeated Japanese imperialism.
Imagine! The Koreans cannot have their independence and right to rule themselves because “chaos” might ensue. The imperialist rule by the gun and bomb is not chaos. The imperialist exploitation of the colonial people for super-profits is not chaos.The imperialist policy of keeping the colonial world hungry, poverty-stricken, illiterate and backward is not chaos. Only the independence of these peoples and their own governments would create chaos!
Think back, American workers, and remember all the things that were said about Japanese people – not their brutal capitalist rulers – but the people,. Think back about what our own imperialists said about the aims in this war and square them with the present action in Korea.
American labor, the whole people, must answer this slur on the Korean people, this policy of collaboration with the Japanese militarists and capitalist rulers by demanding:
Immediate Independence for Korea!
For the Right of the Korean People to Rule Themselves!
For a Free and Independent Asia!
*




The Military Mind at Work
“We are trying to get Korean police,” said General John R. Hodge, commander of the American forces occupying Korea, “but they are not as effective as the Japanese. They are too excited to get much work out of, and we will have to wait until they calm down ...
“There’s political chaos here. The new parties have no central theme except desire for immediate independence and to get hold of Japanese property ...
“The trouble is that the Koreans thought they were independent as of August 15 ...
“They had better get busy on their homework or I’ll crack some heads together.” – Herald Tribune, Wednesday, September 12.
Imagine wanting freedom and independence after chafing for forty years under Japanese rule! Imagine Koreans wanting to claim the Japanese-run industrial properties which exploited them all that time! Imagine wanting a goyernment of their own instead of Japanese imperialist rulers!
What do they think the war was fought for, anyway – democracy?



*
Hong Kong
 

  Every speech made by Generalissimo Stalin during the war indicated a progressively increasing adoption of the language of reactionary imperialism. For the new “Czar of all the Russias” this is inescapable. Pursuing an imperialist policy of aggression, expansion and exploitation, the language used by Russia’s ruler necessarily conforms to the practice. Therefore, each speech on Russian foreign policy is filled with lies and falsifications of history to justify an imperialist policy. The latest evidence of this fact is Stalin’s “victory address” announcing Russia’s intention to seize the whole of Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands. Following Stalin’s announcement, Secretary of State Byrnes in a neat exhibition of doubletalk, disclosed that these seizures were agreed upon at Yalta. No, they were not really agreed upon, but an understanding was reached and a final decision of Russia’s permanent occupation of the islands is still to come. One by one, the secret compacts of Yalta, which the Big Three leaders declared did not exist, are coming to light. What is of tremendous interest to the world political labor movement, however, is not so much the imperialist division of the world decided on at Yalta, as the reasons Stalin gives for Russia’s share in this division. The politically advanced and conscious worker knows what to expect from the capitalist imperialist rulers. He is not surprised by anything they do. But Stalin still has a reputation as the leader of “socialist” Russia, a leader of the oppressed and exploited people of the world, a man who wants to establish the true freedom of world socialism.  The New Nationalist The reactionary, extremist spokesmen of capitalism help to strengthen this fiction. But that Stalin and his Russia are not socialist can be proved in a hundred different ways. He represents the power of the new class of exploiters in Russia. He is the spokesman and personification of this new class which lives by exploiting Russia’s millions of workers and peasants and now seeks to extend this exploitation beyond the borders of Russia. Russia has ceased to be internationalist in its aims and policies. Why is nationalist policy reactionary? Because it is based upon the retention of national borders, national antagonisms and national exploitation in a world which has outlived national boundaries, where the retention of national boundaries and all the antagonisms they evoke are a hindrance to the future development of human progress. The Bolsheviks under Lenin’s great leadership were internationalists. They understood that the future of the world, the progress of civilization and the advancement of mankind depended uponthe eventual abolition of national boundaries in order to guarantee international collaboration of the peoples of the world. Another reason why the international socialists were ardent internationalists is that the continued existence of national boundaries, national antagonisms led to jingoism, reactionary sentiments in the thinking and feelings of the people and, in turn, strengthened the rule of capitalist imperialism. Lenin never subordinated the international interests of the workers to any national party. Specifically in the case of Russia after the Revolution of 1917, he did not subordinate the interests of the workers of the world to narrow Russian interests. On the contrary, Lenin always declared that the long-term aim of the Russian Revolution was to advance the international struggle for socialism.  Falsifying History Does this contradict the support socialists give to movementsof national independence? Not at all. Movements for national independence are progressive in that they represent the struggle of oppressed peoples against their oppressors whether such struggles occur in Europe, Africa or Asia. A victory of nationally oppressed people against imperialism is a defeat for and weakening of imperialism. Thus it advances the struggle for socialism. It is impossible for nationally oppressed peoples to fight for socialism without fighting for national independence. National independence of nations is a preliminary condition for the true international freedom of all humanity. Stalin’s aims and practices are directly opposed to those of Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Listen to what he said about the Russo-Japanese war, the Sakhalin and Kurile Islands. “Japan began her aggression against our country as far back as 1904, during the Russo-Japanese War ... “As is well known, at that time Russia suffered defeat in the war with Japan, and Japan took advantage of czarist Russia’s defeat to wrest southern Sakhalin from Russia, to strengthen her hold over the Kurile Islands ...” Stalin, speaking as a great Russian Nationalist, identifies himself with the imperialist history of Czarism. The falsifications are many. 1. The Russo-Japanese war was not the result of Japanese aggression alone. That Japan was an aggressive imperialist power at that time is, of course, true. But so was Russia. So was England, the United States, France and Germany. They all sought to carve up the Far East, principally China, in their own national interests, that is, in the interests of the profits of their financial and industrial ruling classes, In the case of Russia and Japan, Russia was clearly theaggressor. Her expansion into China and Korea threatened the imperialist interests of Japan. Japan’s attack on Russia came only after months and months of negotiations between these two imperialist powers and at a time when the czar stalled negotiations in the hope of seizing disputed territory and confronting the Japanese with accomplished facts. The Japanese countered with an attack on the Russian fleet and then declared war. Supporting Japan in this war against Russia were England and the United States who then greatly feared that Czarist Russia would establish such powerful interests in China as to bar them. Japan was not only fighting in her own imperialist interests; she was fighting for England and the United States. That is why, despite the obvious exhaustion of Japan in this short war and the threatening mobilization by Russia of all her resources which would have resulted in a defeat of the Nipponese Empire, England and the United States forced peace upon the two contenders for Empire. That Japan acted the hog in the peace negotiations and demanded more than the other imperialists thought she should have, is not in the least surprising or interesting. In doing that Japan acted as do all imperialists. What is important is that the Russo-Japanese war was not a local war between two countries. It involved all the big powers at that time; the peace treaty was underwritten by all the powers.  Two Horse-Traders In the case of the Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands, we are dealing with pure and simple horse-trading by two imperialist powers. Sakhalin and the Kuriles did not belong to either country. Their occupation by the Russians and the Japanese came as a result of empire race between them. The Sakhalin Island which lies off the coast of Siberia and is part of the Japanese archipelago, and Kurile, which is also an extension of the Japanese archipelago, were for many centuries, so far as is known, inhabited by native islanders, neither Russian nor Japanese. In the peace treaty of Portsmouth in 1905, the Japanese based their demand for Sakhalin and the Kuriles on the ground of geographical identity with the homeland. With regard to Sakhalin, they demanded the island on the basis of prior exploration and settlement. This was disclosed in the peace negotiations. The Japanese presented the uncontradicted position that they had settled on the island in 1624 while the Russians in their eastward expansion did not reach it until 1803. Count Witte, head of the Russian peace delegation, stated that: “... in the main Russia could do without Sakhalin, but as a matter of principle she could not make territorial concessions.” (Pre-War Diplomacy, by J.J.Korostovetz) The peace negotiations following the Russo-Japanese war, revealed that 30 years before, in 1875, Russia and Japan had reached an agreement which permitted the Russians to occupy Sakhalin, while the Japanese annexed the Kurile Islands. Thus, two imperialist powers trade off territory which belonged to neither of them! The Japanese diplomats, answered Count Witte by saying that in the thirty years during which the Russians held Sakhalin, they had not decided what to do with it, while the Japanese felt it necessary to own the island as a matter of national security. These then are the facts about the disputed islands. None belonged to Russia or Japan. They were seized by them and changed hands in accordance with the changing fortunes of war. The workers and peasants of Russia and the workers and peasants of Japan had no interest in these territories, gained nothing from them and had only to shed their blood in two wars. The only ones to gain from these imperialist rivalries and wars were the ruling classes in Russia and Japan, when Stalin claims them as Russian territory he is merely falsifying history in order to justify his imperialist policy. (Concluding article next week)   
  More than enough time has passed since the war ended in Europe to reveal the real Allied policy for the Continent. A glance at thedaily press shows that the great “ideals” which the Big Three constantly referred to as their purpose in the war, the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, not only do not exist, they are not even mentioned any more. What was absolutely clear from the moment it became certain that the Allies would defeat Germany, namely, that Europe would bedivided into spheres of influence among the big powers under a super-Versailles Peace Treaty, is now a reality. Europe lives under the conditions outlined by Potsdam decisions, which, although they deal primarily with Germany, also ratified the Yalta agreements, which divided Europe among the Big Three. At that time, we wrote that these agreements were power agreements. They were based on the respective strengths of the Big Three and had nothing whatever to do with honor, justice, freedom, the rights of the people, self-determination, national independence, peace or security.  The Imperialist Peace William Henry Chamberlain, noted correspondent and author, called the Potsdam decision the worst in all history. Whether it is the worst or not is not too important. What is important is that imperialist decisions were made at Yalta and Potsdam which exchanged territories, uprooted millions of people and instituted police, military or supervised regimes in most countries. Russia, which had already seized parts of Finland, incorporated the Baltic states into its borders, revised the Polish borders and set up a puppet regime there in agreement with her allies, seized other territories which “voted” to join the “Soviet Union.” She has also been given spheres of influence in Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. In addition, Russia occupies the largest zone in Germany. Great Britain has dominated Greece since the Germans were driven out of the country. Her main object is to prevent the workers from seizing the reins of government and thereby ousting the royalist gang in power. She has maintained a tight control on Italy, jointly with the United States and also occupies an important industrial area of Germany. The United States maintains a sharp interest in all the areasof Europe. American imperialism wants to prevent any single country from dominating the continent. She hopes to do this through her enormous economic, political and military might and by establishing a powerful base for herself in Western Europe through Great Britain and France. So long as the war in the Far East remained to be fought, great concessions were given to Stalin. Great Britain and the United States undoubtedly hoped that this would not mean complete Russian domination of Eastern Europe or the Balkans. But the Russians proceeded quickly to reduce their “spheres of influence”into puppet states.  Democracy for Whom? In the case of Roumania, the Red Army installed the Groza government, proceeded to smash all anti- and non-Stalinist elements in the country and to insure a complete pro-Russian regime with the aid of the Russian army, and the native Communist Party. In Bulgaria, the Fatherland Front, dominated by the Communist Party and assisted by the Russians, runs the country. The elections planned for August 26, against which the United States and Great Britain protested so vehemently, were postponed with the promise that they would be made really democratic. Special election laws were in operation which would have disqualified opponents of the Stalinist Fatherland Front from voting. When Byrnes and Bevin made representations that they would not recognize the Georgieff government on the basis of undemocratic elections, the Bulgarians, under advice from the Russians, who first opposed the British and Americans, finally conceded to their demands. Lest anyone think that the situation in Greece is fundamentally different than in the Russian-occupied Balkans, remember that the demand of the Voulgaris government for Allied supervision of the  election is made for the purpose of intimidating the anti-royalist sand the resistance movement. Russia declined the invitation to supervise the Greek elections on the ground that it would be an undemocratic act and would mean interference in the affairs of another country. This really takes the banner for hypocrisy. The nation which has already destroyed the independence of so many countries declined to supervise the elections in Greece because it would mean “interference in the affairs of another country”!  Liberation? Where? What is this all about? The answer is really very simple. We are observing a clash of interests in Europe. England and France, for example, have important economic interests in Romania and Jugoslavia which Russia dominates. They want to protect those interests. The Western powers want free access to the whole of Europe, something which is denied them by Stalin. Previous to this, the United States and England had made a deal over the Balkans and the Eastern Mediterranean, Churchill likewise made a deal with Molotov extending to Russia a zone of interest in Romania. But Russia took the whole country. The United States and Great Britain want to curb Russian power in Europe. Hence all the talk about “democratic elections.” It has nothing really to do with FREE elections, national independence or democracy. The quick end of the war enabled the Western powers to intervene more actively in the European theater, each promoting her own imperialist interests. Europe, after the “war of liberation,” is a conquered land. Genuine peace, freedom and security for the Continent have still to be achieved.   
  The treaty between Russia and China is another chapter in the long history of imperialism. It is accompanied by the same kind of misrepresentation and hypocrisy which attend the signing of all treaties between antagonistic powers. In the case of China and Russia, the antagonism is of long standing. It dates back to the days when Russian Czarism warred upon China and obtained territory and special privileges from the disunited and weak Asiatic country. For a brief period of years, when Russia under Lenin and Trotsky abolished all Czarist privileges in China, relations between the two countries were marked by mutual understanding. They began to deteriorate in the Stalinist epoch when the present “ruler of all the Russias” resurrected the imperialist aims of Czarism. There are several aspects to the present Russo-China relations which have been obscured by the signing of the treaty. The treaty, for example, recognizes the “sovereignty” of China. It recognizes that the government of Chiang is the legitimate government. Russia obligates herself not to interfere in the internal affairs of the country and not to do anything that would violate Chinese integrity and sovereignty. Among other things, Stalin has agreed to withdraw Russian troops from Manchuria as quickly as possible. Coming simultaneously with the increasing tension between Chungking and the Communist armies of Yenan, the treaty was hailed asa forerunner of genuine internal peace, since Russia’s recognition of Chiang would halt the impending civil war. Thus, we are told, the Atlantic Charter and its principles triumphed in Asia, just as they did in Europe. Stalin has shown his good will to China, just as he did to Poland, Eastern Europe and the Balkans!  A Tremendous Fraud But all of this is a frightful deception of the peoples of Russia, China and the whole world. If one peers behind the obvious in the treaty, that is, the decorations which were cited above, it will be revealed that Stalin’s treaty with China is similar to the Russo-Chinese treaty of 1900. It reflects the same greed, expansion and imperialist aims of Russia’s old ruling class.  The promise to recognize the sovereignty of China, to recognize the existing government and to refrain from interfering in the nation’s internal affairs has been given to China by every imperialist power which obtained special privileges and territory in that vast country. Great Britain, the United States, France, Czarist Russia and even Japan in 1931 have all, at one time or another, invaded the country to guarantee its integrity. In exchange for such “guarantees” China has always paid a price.  Russia’s agreement to withdraw her troops from Manchuria after eleven days of war has its humorous side. But, of course, without an agreement and concessions from China; these troops would stay there as long as Russia’s new ruling class, desired.  The recognition of the Chiang government is only formally a repudiation of the Chinese “Communist” regime of Yenan. Actually, the treaty said nothing about the Yenan regime or the Chinese Communists. Even if Stalin had formally repudiated his Chinese agents, it means absolutely nothing. Stalin once said to Pierre Laval, in reply to the latter’s question on the role of the French Communists during the Franco-Russian pact: “Shoot them!” This only means that Stalin may SAY anything about the parties. What he DOES is quite another matter. The dissolution of the Communist International in 1944 in no way meant the dissolution of the Communist Parties of the world, or their severance from Moscow, whose policies and interests they serve. No such formal ties are required by parties and movements which are the creation of the Kremlin. They have long ago learned to act automatically in Russia’s interest. As we shall show, the Chinese Communists did get a substantial concession from Chiang.  But in exchange for these formal concessions to China – concessions made in agreement with Great Britain and the United States and mindful of the latter’s interest in China – Russia received some handsome payments.  Old Czarist Russian interests in Manchuria have been re-established. The Chinese Eastern Railway and the South Manchurian Railway will be operated jointly by China and Russia under the name of the Chinese Changchun Railway. The re-establishment of Russian interests in the railways means an influx of Russian railway men, officials and the secret police. As in all such cases, that means special privileges for the foreign power.  China grants special rights to Russia on Port Arthur, which will be used jointly as a naval base ‘‘at the disposal of the battleships and merchant ships of China and the USSR.” As everyone knows, Russia’s battle fleets will hardly be crowded out by the Chinese “navy.” But it does mean in real life, the control of Port Arthur by Russia. In addition, the port of Dairen is to be “free ... to trade and shipping of all countries.” The primary interest there will be Russian. Both Port Arthur and Dairen are a long distance from Russian borders. When Czarist Russia obtained these ports in her treaty of alliance with China, the latter represented the imperialist expansion of Russia and led directly to the war with Japan. This time, Russia entered the war against Japan in its final weeks for the purpose of re-establishing the claims of imperial Russia.  In addition to these concessions given to Russia, Chiang has agreed to allow in his government representatives of the Chinese Communist government.  Basis of Treaty What pressures were exerted on China to sign this treaty? Undoubtedly Russia’s threat to take Manchuria and to support the drive of the Russian-subsidized armies of Yenan to seize other territories and centers in Northern China. These pressures came not only from Russia, but from the United States and Great Britain as part payment for Russia’s entry into the war against Japan. The recognition of Chinese “integrity and sovereignty”and the renunciation of special privileges and territories in China by Russia is, of course, a fraud. Special interests in Manchuria, re-establishment of Russian interests in Port Arthur and Dairen belie any non-intervention in China. If you want to know what such concessions really mean, think of what integrity and sovereignty would mean if an American government signed a treaty with anotherpower granting it full and exclusive rights in New York harbor, special rights in the port of Boston and joint control over the New York Central Railroad! That is exactly what the Russo-Chinese treaty means. Such an imperialist policy was what Lenin and Trotsky fought against. It was one of the reasons for the outbreak of the Russian Revolution. Czarist Russia’s imperialist policies led to the Russo-Chinese War of 1904–05. Stalin’s imperialist policiestoday led to Russian entry into the recent war with Japan. When the Russian workers took power in 1917 they renounced all special privileges in China and tore up all the Czarist treaties. Lenin called the seizure by treaty of Port Arthur, predatory Czarist imperialism. Russia under Lenin defended semi-colonial China against all the big powers. The famous slogan issued by Workers’ Russia was “Hands Off China!”  Russian Nationalism Stalin has reversed all of this. He is today the great Russian nationalist, the purveyor of the imperialist demands of Czarism, the representative of a new class of bureaucrats who rule Russia in their own interests. Just as they exploit the Russian workers and peasants and falsely call this exploitation socialism, so they seek now to exploit European, workers and peasants, colonial peoples in Asia and call this exploitation “recognition of sovereignty,” “freedom and democracy.” In all of this, Chiang acts as the servant of imperialism in helping to subordinate China to the great powers of the world. It is time again to cry out: Hands Off China! Drive the imperialists out of the country! For a free and independent China! For a Workers and Peasants China!   
  “The impact of the bomb was so terrific that practically all living things, human and animal, were literally seared to death by the tremendous heat and pressure engendered by the blast.” This is the way one Tokyo broadcast described the havoc created by one atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima by a Superfortress. In a split second the Wellsian world became a reality. Years of research and the investment of billions of dollars, finally brought to one stage of development the harnessing of the atom and control of the enormous energy created by splitting it. The most carefully guarded secret of the war was released when the announcement came over the wires that the one atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima had destroyed the city for a radius of four and a tenth miles, with an explosive power equal to 20,000 tons of TNT. The crew which flew the plane reported that they could feel the concussion miles away and that the light of the explosion was brighter than the sun. The whole city of over 300,000 people was covered by smoke to the height of 40,000 feet and for some time afterward reconnaissance planes were unable to survey the damage. But the Japanese authorities have already announced that almost everything was destroyed, that Hiroshima was practically wiped off the face of the earth. There is no doubt that the war in the Far East will be shortened by the use of the atomic bomb. The Administration is already preparing another demand on the Japanese for unconditional surrender. In the event of refusal the plan is to destroy the whole nation, for that is what continued atomic bombing will mean. We can now very plainly see the meaning of modern war. Revolutionary socialists have warned long ago, that the continuation of imperialist-capitalist society and its recurrent wars which harness science will produce weapons of destruction of incalculable proportions. While the war of 1914–18 was the first in the era of world wars, the loss of life was great and the destruction enormous, it did not compare to the power of destruction in this war. The Second World War was organized along mechanized lines, employing tanks, airplanes, robot bombs, magnetic mines, and hundreds of other instruments of death and chaos. The military casualties for the European war alone is estimated at 60,000,000 persons. The destruction of wealth and property runs into the hundreds of billions. And when the war ends in the Far East and the calculations of casualties and wealth destruction are made, it will stagger the imagination. Toward the end of the European war new and deadlier instruments of warfare were developed. It is now acknowledged that the Germans were working on their own atomic bomb. Had they succeeded, the employmentof atomic bombing by both sides in the war would have devastated a good part of the world and its population.  Capitalist Barbarism It is also clear that the description of the destruction power of the atomic bomb is no idle talk. Capitalist society is rushing headlong into a form of barbarism. So long as the mad struggle for profit in this private property economy exists, and it must exist as long as capitalism exists, war is forever the prospect of life. Chaos and destruction are forever the reward of the overwhelming majority of the peoples of all countries. While all the capitalist nations are incapable and unwilling to produce in the interests of the common good of the people, while production is organized solely in the interests of profit, invention in the interests of society as a whole remains stagnant. Invention, which could lighten the lives of the people and produce enough to have plenty for all, is impossible in an economy where the main aim of those who own the industries, mines, transportation and utilities is production for profit. Everyone agrees, however, that the power of destruction is only one of the uses to which the control of the atom can be put. Of far greater importance is that the harnessing of atomic energy can permit such a tremendous rise in the production of the necessities of life as to increase the standard of living of all the people in the world far easier than all the mechanical and technical advances that have been made by society up to now.  Future for All Possible The story of how research was carried on in the production of the atomic bomb as a joint enterprise, a collective effort, is interesting and instructive. But the fact to be borne in mind is that all the time, money and human energy expended was for the purposes of destruction. It emphasized again that for the purposes of destruction capitalism will go to any length. But it is just as obvious, that had all this time, energy and money been expanded in the same experiments for the purpose of harnessing power for peaceful purposes, for the purposes of improving the life of all humanity, the same progress could have been made. We do not know all the possibilities inherent in the control of the atom. But all of science agrees that its possibilities are infinite and that we have just witnessed a revolution in science equivalent to previous revolutionary discoveries, which in turn revolutionize the whole of society. The most important question is this: is it possible for capitalism, a society organized in the interests of profits for a handful of people who live off the exploitation of the overwhelming majority of the people of the world to use this discovery for constructive purposes in the interests of mankind? The answer is, of course, no. Already, the government in Washington, which is a capitalist government, makes ready to turn over this revolutionary development to private business, those vultures who gorge themselves on profit in war, as in peace, whose main occupation is to exploit workers for their own class benefit.  Socialism Necessary The scientists who directed the experiments are commonly known as capitalist-minded servants of the big corporations. In past years they have been associated with the big monopolistic corporations, all of them giving testimony in their behalf. Science, which can be of such benefit to society, is, under capitalism, the servant of the financial and industrial bandits who rule society. Right now, the rulers of society speak of the atomic bomb in terms of controlling it so that they might control the world. The real sham of their arguments is that they point to the possibility that it may be used by “a Hitler” or “a Germany,” both destroyed and defeated in the war, at some future time. As a matter of fact, what they are trying to say, what they are actually saying, is that “we,” the capitalist rulers, must control the atomic bomb not for the purpose of improving society and the life of all the people but to dominate the world, control its riches, in their own private class interests. The most important thing about this revolutionary discovery is that it cannot and must not be controlled by private capitalism. Society is doomed to destruction if this happens. Only a socialist society, a society without classes, without war, without competition, without unemployment, and poverty can properly utilize the harnessing of the energy power of the atom. A class society which lives by exploitation can only subordinate such discoveries to the interest of private profit. Yet the atomic bomb invention, and the progress made in atomic researchdemand that it shall be used for constructive purposes. Let the people ponder this fact. Let them understand that when the press and the radio orators talk about the destruction of the world, they are not joking at all. The destruction of the world is a grim reality unless the social order of capitalism is abolished and replaced by socialism, the society of all the people. (Next week we will carry detailed stories on the development of atomic research and its social implications.)   
  The Japanese acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration brought an end to the war in the Pacific. Thus, six years after the German army crossed the borders of Poland to begin the bloodiest and most destructive conflict in world history, an armed peace has been achieved. For the second time within the memory of living man the world has an opportunity to create a lasting peace, but with the destiny of mankind in the hands of the same rulers who plunged the world into this global slaughter, prospects of such a peace are even less than they were after the First World War. This war too began as a “war for freedom.” Twenty-two years after the “war to end all wars” the peoples of the world were asked to support the slaughter of uniformed men, the extermination of tens of millions of civilians and the destruction of hundreds of billions of dollars in wealth, because this time the rulers of all countries gave their final word to end war for all time, to insure freedom and security for the whole world. If these pledges were made and unredeemed at the First World War, this time they were to be kept. All that was asked of the peoples of the world was to give their unstinted support to the ruling classes as they waged a war of extermination of these same peoples. The promise of a lasting peace, of true freedom and democracy and genuine security came not alone from the rulers of the Allied camp. These were also the promises made by the totalitarian rulers of the Axis countries. Each imperialist power was, in the words of its capitalist ruling class, fighting for life, the opportunity to expand, to win peace, freedom and security for its peoples. Strange world? No, not strange at all. This is the capitalist  world. This is the world of competition, of exploitation, ofproduction for profit. This is the world of imperialism. The great powers must ever wage war against each other for possession of the riches of the world in the form of markets, raw materials, cheap labor and territory. The victory of the Allied  powers over Germany, Japan and Italy will not and cannot guaranteethe peace of the world because the same causes which brought about this war continue to exist and to create conditions for a Third World War.  What They Promised the People Even before the United States entered the war in December of 1941, it was already a participant in the fight against the Axis. Roosevelt had already helped to draw up with Churchill, that arch-imperialist, the famous Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, which was a declaration of the intentions of the Allied powers. This statement of principle was a necessary element in Allied strategy of winning the support of the peoples in their own countries as well as those living under the heel of German, Italian and Japanese rule, to support a war which they regarded with great suspicion as another imperialist war for profit. A new world was promised the peoples of all countries. The  Allies would, upon the victory, guarantee democratic rights, truefreedom, security and lasting peace for all people. All the people would have a right to their national freedom, to choose their own  governments, and to determine the future of their lives. Allcountries would be given equal access to the riches of the world; all nations would be given the opportunity to produce and trade in order to raise the living standards of the whole world. At the time when these grand promises were made the Workers Party  branded them as cynical lies. In its manifesto against the war, theWorkers Party declared that this was fundamentally the same kind of war as that fought in 1914–18, that it was an imperialist war for empire, aggrandizement and profit. The Workers Party stated that the propaganda of the Allied rulers was merely a restatement in new forms of the propaganda of the Allied rulers in the First World War in order to deceive the people and win their support to the bloody carnage which threatened to wipe out civilization. Even before the war had ended in Europe, but at a time when the military fortunes of the Allies had changed to a point where victory was a certainty, the “noble ideas” announced by Roosevelt and Churchill were completely forgotten. Hitler had enslaved almost all of Europe on his road to the  conquest of the world. He destroyed the independence of nations. Thefascist beasts ruled the Continent with naked force, destroying what they could not subject to their brutal rule. During the early years of the war, German fascism seemed  all-powerful, incapable of destruction. But its immense power couldnot prevent the emergence of a new force on the Continent, the mighty resistance movements of the people in all countries fighting for their liberation from all tyrants, fighting for their national independence, for free speech, free assembly, free press, free organization and the right to choose their own governments. The  people were fighting for a new way of life. They did not and do notnow want to return to the bankrupt social order under which they lived before and during the war.  They Turned Europe into a Wasteland The European masses cry out for real freedom, security and peace!  But these are, in truth, non-existent. Europe is a continent divided.It is divided into zones, spheres of influence and subjugated territories. Each power, in agreement to be sure, has allocated to itself a particular area or zone. A glance at the European map will reveal the utter cynicism with which the Allied powers have divided up the Continent – all of it in the name of the great principles of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms! Finland had to cede territory to Russia and to enter within Russia’s sphere of influence. The Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were seized by the Russian armies, incorporated into and made a part of Russia against the will of the peoples which inhabited these countries. Poland was reduced to a Russian vassal state under the rule of the Russian secret police (NKVD) operating through Stalin’s Polish agents. Czechoslovakia has a nominal independence, but is under the heel of Russia and only recently ceded to the latter the territory inhabited by the Ruthenians. The Balkan states are under Russian domination. The some is true of Hungary. All of these countries live under the vise of Stalinist totalitarianism. There is no freedom, peace or security in any of these countries. Great Britain dominates Greece against the best interests of the Greek people. The British army keeps in power reactionary, royalist forces which not only have no support of the people but are hated by them. Italy, two years after the armistice, remains an occupied country whose destinies are determined by its real rulers, the Anglo-American military government. If we did not already know all these things, Allied policy toward Germany gives the crowning touch to the imperialist program they have pursued throughout the war. The German nation, with its enormous productive apparatus, which could do so much good for Europe, has been divided into three zones occupied by the Big Three. But the country has been dismembered and thus thrown back many decades. Its industries are being reduced. The Germans are told that from now on they must feed themselves by increasing the agricultural character of their country. The standard of living of the German people, ever low under the heel of fascism, will be even lower under the rule of the Big Three. The diminution of its industrial capacity will make Germany a prey of the productive might of the United States and her allies. What will follow from this conquerors’ peace is the annihilation of the German people, accompanied by the annihilation of the peoples of all of Europe. Europe is a wasteland! Its great cities lie in ruins. Its industries are in large part destroyed. Transportation is in chaos. Hunger, disease and death stalk all the peoples of the Continent. The capitalist rulers in Europe, those brigand’s who helped bring about the war, will not suffer. No, they are already in the process of repairing their fences. They are joining hands with their class brothers in Great Britain and the United States; they are joining hands with Stalin, who fears the revolution of the masses more than he fears the capitalist rulers in Europe, to retain their riches and their profits. They are preparing to continue to earn more riches and more profits with the aid of the Allies. But the great mass of workers and poor peasants who hod nothing to do with bringing about the war, but were its victims; the downtrodden and suffering people who have paid for the universal slaughter with their lives and labor, who suffer starvation, homelessness and disease; the exploited, harassed and suffering people – they are being made to pay for a war which they did not want! This is the real meaning of the Allied victory. All else is mere words.  Imperialist Exploitation of Asia Remains What has happened in Europe will happen in Asia and the Pacific. Japan will get a vanquished’s peace. Not the Japanese financiers and industrialists, not the Emperor, Hirohito, but the poor, exploited and victimized Japanese workers and peasants. To be sure, the Japanese military clique will be uprooted and destroyed, but they, after all, are only the representatives of the real interests of Japan’s capitalist-imperialist ruling class. The real bandits, those responsible for the totalitarian-feudal regime which grinds profits out of its own people as well as the colonial subjects whom it rules, they will not be made to suffer too much. As losers in the war, they will pay for losing. But their social position as the dominant class in Japanese society will not be changed. They will remain the capitalist ruling class of Japan in full control and ownership of their enormous properties and wealth to go on exploiting and profiting from the labor of their people. The end of the war will not change things in Asia or the Pacific. The great colonial empires of the Allied powers will remain. Great Britain, even under Labor Prime Minister Attlee, will retain a stranglehold on India. There will be no freedom for its hundreds of millions of people. The same is true for Ceylon, Burma, Malaya and the other colonial territories of British imperialism. The great East Indies will be returned to the Dutch rulers, that nation of eight million people who exploits more than sixty million colonial slaves. France will retain Indo-China, to exploit its many millions. Russia has already been promised her “spheres of influence” in Mongolia, China and perhaps Korea. American imperialism will dominate the great Chinese nation with its hundreds of millions of people. It has already spread its interest in oil to other parts of Asia and has announced its intention of keeping Pacific islands necessary as military bases, as well as any other territories which it deems indispensable for its future defense. As in Europe, there will be no peace, freedom or security for the hundreds of millions of peoples who inhabit that vast Continent. They will remain colonial or semi-colonial slaves of Western and Russianimperialism.  Organizers of Chaos and a Super-Versailles This war has not yet produced its “Versailles Peace Conference,” but it has already produced a San Francisco Conference and the super-Versailles peace. If the Versailles peace was a brutal, cynical, imperialist and profiteer’s peace, the peace imposed in Europe today and the peace to be imposed in Asia tomorrow will be a hundred times more brutal, cynical and imperialist. This was guaranteed by the successive conferences of Moscow, Teheran and Yalta. It was crowned in San Francisco, which was not a peace gathering of the nations of the world but a Big Three show held for the purpose of organizing the small nations of the world for support to the Conqueror’s Peace. The very organization of the San Francisco peace machinery, wherein all the power was placed in the hands of the Big Three and their satellite states, the powerlessness of the small states, their lack of rights, the failure even to discuss disarmament, are all evidence of the fact that the “peace” conference had nothing whatever to do with peace. The small nations were called upon to ratify the decisions of the big powers, to accept whatever was decided for them. But out of San Francisco emerged a new armed world divided into contending groups, all of them powerful, all of them prepared not for a lasting peace but for an armed truce until the next war of devastation breaks out. This great war, which engulfed the whole world and all of its inhabitants, demonstrated the production miracles inherent in the productive apparatus of modern society. New methods of production, new machinery, increased efficiency and improvement in transportation and communication and a tremendous rise in the productivity of labor showed what can be done Under a different society with a principle of production based upon the needs of the people. Under imperialism all of these advances in science and production are for the purposes of mass destruction. The development of the atomic bomb, based upon control of the atom, is a revolutionary discovery of infinite magnitude capable of raising  society to new heights. In the hands of the capitalist ruling classits main achievement is, however, destructive. In the hands of the capitalist ruling class it is used for leveling cities and destroying populations. The war began with a one-ton bomb. It ended with a twelve-ton bomb and an atomic bomb. Each year of the conflict witnessed new and more terrifying means of destruction. Is it any wonder that the estimated number of military casualties in the European war alone has reached sixty million? What, then, will the toll be when, after the war, a reckoning is made of all the dead and wounded, military and civilian? What will be the loss in property and wealth? What will the war have cost in money? In all cases the figures will be astronomical.  America’s War Economy: Enrichment of the Rich Four years ago, Americans began to live under a war economy. Everything, literally everything, was subordinated to the war effort. The government established controls over machinery and raw materials. It set about the reorganization of production, issued contracts, decided what was needed, guaranteed profits, set a ceiling on wages, froze labor to jobs and in general set about planning for war. What it could not do in peace, namely, end unemployment, it did in war. Less than a year after war was declared, there was a shortage of labor in the country. Under Roosevelt, on “equality of sacrifice” program was adopted. This program guaranteed big business its contracts and profits. In exchange for a no-lockout (!) pledge from business, labor  gave a no-strike pledge. In exchange for the freezing of jobs andwages, the Administration had promised to keep the cost of living down through equality in rationing and price control. It is clear now that the “equality of sacrifice” program was one of the greatest shams in the war. Instead of a curb of war profits, big business was given the greatest profits in its history. Unemployment was ended but the relative share of the workers in the tremendous war production was less than it ever was before. The increased payrolls which arose from full employment, overtime and holiday work and the increased work week were neutralized by high prices, huge taxes on wages and an overall increase in the cost of living which far outstripped any gains made by labor in this country. Taking advantage of the no-strike pledge, which acted as a straight-jacket around the powerful arms of labor, big business carried on an incessant war against unionism and began to destroy, slowly but surely, many of the gains the labor movement had made after many years of trying and heroic struggle. The end of the war finds the capitalist ruling classes organized and ready to carry on a war against the labor movement with many advantages in their favor. Not the least of these advantages is the certainty of mass  unemployment not next month or next year, but today, one day afterthe announcement of the surrender of Japan. The specter of unemployment haunts the people of the country. They remember only too well the long and dreary years of the thirties. They remember how the government could not solve the problems of jobs during peace; that it could only offer them unemployment relief and WPA jobs. But they also remember that when the war broke out, the government was able to organize the vast productive machinery of the country for the greatest production program ever witnessed in this world. They remember how, for war, the government was able to end unemployment! But millions of Americans will not stand for long years of poverty and unemployment. This war has taught them many lessons, and this is one of them: it is possible with the enormous industrial expansion of the war and the many improvements and discoveries that were made to have full employment and a high standard of living. They will not take less. But they also see how the capitalist government in Washington prepares for peace. They note how the capitalist politicians go off on vacation when it comes to voting legislation to take care of jobs for peace and unemployed compensation for those who are being thrown out of work by cutbacks in war contracts. And they are learning fast, especially since the elections in Great Britain, that labor needs a party of its own, an independent Labor Party that will fight for the interests of labor and the common people generally. Such a party is indispensable to the future welfare of the American workers and all the people of this country. But a party is not enough. A party needs a program and the independent party of the American working class will need a fighting, militant program based upon the needs of the overwhelming majority of the people and not the profit interests of a handful of financiers and industrialists. Such a program is the program advocated by the Workers Party, which appears on page three of this issue. That program needs a party of labor to enforce it. Together, they would advance a thousandfold the interests of the people of America and prepare a new and better life for the tens of millions of peoples. Thus the Second Imperialist World War has ended. It has ended without solving the great social tasks which confront humanity: the establishment of permanent peace, freedom and security for the whole world. The capitalist world remains an armed camp awaiting only the passage of a few more years before it is ready to plunge into another bloody carnage to determine which of the great powers shall dominate the world in the interest of profit. There is no freedom for the people of Europe, Africa or Asia. There is no true freedom for the peoples of the Western Hemisphere. There is no peace for the peoples of the world. The world remains armed to the teeth, each great power struggling, now quietly, now more openly, for advantage over the other. There is no security for the people of any country. All the peoples of the world face hunger, poverty, unemployment and overall misery. Capitalism outlived its usefulness long ago. It is no longer capable of progress, of raising the standards of living of the people. Capitalism is only capable of guaranteeing new wars, mass unemployment and misery. But the people of the world want an end to this system. They want jobs, peace, freedom, security. They want a new life; they want a change from the chaos of the profit system, that system of “free enterprise” which has proved its incapacity to maintain a high level of peacetime production in the interest of the people. The struggle of the peoples of the whole world, the workers of the advanced capitalist countries, the poor peasants and farmers of all countries, the colonial peoples for freedom will go on. It will go on no matter how many new forms of oppression capitalism and imperialism devise to keep the peoples in subjection. If this war has brought civilization to the brink of disaster, if the world cannot stand another such war, and we believe that it cannot, then such disaster can only be averted by the abolition of the social order that is disintegrating before our very eyes. A new life, a new social, system, that is, socialism, is the only hope for humanity. With irresistible logic and force, the peoples of the world are truly fighting for this kind of order. When they fight for peace, freedom, security and plenty for all, they are fighting for socialism, which alone can guarantee these blessings.   
  The new Big Three (Truman, Attlee and Stalin), but the old one in terms of its aims, finally concluded its meeting at Potsdam held for the purpose of implementing and working out the decisions made by Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin in their successive meetings at Teheran and Yalta. There was nothing new that came out of the meeting. Everything that we said about the meeting turned out to be true. The big powers met for the purpose of destroying the most advanced economic nation of Europe and to complete the division of spoils among them. The most important decision of the conference is the one which aims at the destruction of the industrial might of Germany and the transformation of the country into a primarily agrarian nation. The other matters dealt with at Potsdam fade in significance when compared to the decisions on Germany. The fact that the foreign ministers of the United States, Great Britain, Russia and France would meet and work out the peace treaties for the other ex-Axis nations was actually decided at Yalta. But no report was made on the planned measures for these countries. Obviously they are still far away from agreement on the question of Russia’s demands on Turkey, the Middle East situation, or how to divide up the Far East. While nothing was said about the Far East at the conference, there is no question but that this was fully discussed. The Big Three are equally interested in the Far East and the demands of each are commonly known. Great Britain, even under the Labor government, wants a retention of her colonial possessions. The United States is eager to advance her interests (domination of China) in that part of the world. And Russia has already made known her demands: re-establishment of her interests in Manchuria in line with the old Czarist treaty of 1904; re-establishment of her interests in the railroad passing through Manchuria, and possession of Port Arthur. Stalin’s agreement to permit reporters from Allied nations into Poland to observe conditions and events in that country, as well as in other countries under the domination of Russia means little. The work of transforming these nations into puppet states of Russia was accomplished already in the months when Stalin’s army occupied these lands and moved in the secret police (NVKD) along with a host of experts and functionaries of the defunct Communist International. The decision on Germany, however, is the real purpose of the Berlin meeting. The “peace” treaty was a revenge treaty. The powers proceeded on the principle that the German people were responsible for the war alongside of the Nazi leaders and party. Little or nothing was said about the German financial and industrial ruling class which was responsible for the very existence of the Nazi Party and which put that party of fascist beasts into power. It was this class, the capitalists of Germany, which really ran the country, prepared for and prosecuted the war. But these enemies of the German people and all humanity remain untouched as a class. It would be folly to think that the capitalist governments of the United States and Great Britain, and the counter-revolutionary government of Russia would do anything that might lead to establishment of a workers’ government, that is, a truly peoples’ government in Germany that would reorganize the country in the interests of the workers, poor middle classes, and poor farmers of the nation. Germany will remain divided into three zones, say the Big Three. Each of the powers will rule for an indefinite period of time in their respective areas. There will be no national unified government to rule over the whole of Germany. Naturally, each of the powers will rule their respective zones differently. In the British and American zones, fascists, ex-fascists, reactionaries of all kinds are employed by the occupying authorities to administer the country. No political activities of the people are permitted, No real measures are being taken against the remnants of the old regimes, or the monopoly capitalists of their areas. In the Russian zone, there is only an apparent revival of political activity. In the Berlin area the old, corrupt Communist Party which helped the fascists into power has been re-established with the aid of Stalin. The aim of the Communist Party of Germany is to prevent the rise of socialism. It has already officially stated that it does not seek the establishment of a “soviet republic” in Germany. Why this should occasion surprise is difficult to understand when it is remembered that the soviet system was long ago wiped out in Russia. What Stalin’s aim in his part of Germany is should be clear from the actions taken by him in other countries. It is to make a puppet state of the section of the country under his control. True, there is political activity in the Berlin area, but it is political activity in behalf of the occupying Russian forces and completely supervised by them. In other words, the political activities in the Russian zone will be Stalinist activity which is another way of saying it will be anti-socialist, anti-working class activities. While a great deal is said about retaining the identity of Germany as a nation, the fact is that a partition of the country has already taken place. France will occupy a western zone and will annex a part of Germany. Poland has been given outright German territory and Russia has already taken East Prussia and annexed it. A mass deportation of German people is now taking place. That this time itis carried out by Stalin and not Hitler, does not make the crime any less. Thus, what we have in Germany is the “Hitler plan” carried out by the Allies in a revenge peace which is directed in the first place against the mass of people. The lofty democratic principles for which the war was fought have been quickly forgotten. On top of all this, heavy reparations have been adopted for Germany. The plan calls for $20,000,000,000 payment to the Allies, half of which is to go to Russia, $4,000,000,000 each to Great Britain and the United States, and the remaining $2,000,000,000 to be divided among the other United Nations. How Germany is to pay this, that is, how the people are to pay this is not detailed. In addition to the huge reparations bill, industry will be split up, with machinery and plants going to Russia in the main and to other countries. The aim of the powers is to reduce the Germany to a farming country – if not completely, then in large measure. This treaty, if carried into effect, will not serve to stop war, but will serve to lower the living standards, not only of Germany, but of the whole of Europe. The reactionary nature of the Potsdam decisions is reflected in the fact that what Europe needs is unification. It needs a planned economy based upon the industry and agriculture of the whole continent? It needs to break down the borders of the many countries which militate against an orderly and prosperous economy. It needs a socialist continent based upon the common interests of all humanity, where production and distribution is carried on the interests of the people. It needs an end to the profit system. What the Potsdam Conference has done is turned the clock back. Its decisions are not based on the rights of the people to govern themselves and decide their own governments and economies. The Potsdam decisions are those of conquerors seeking revenge. It will hurl Europe back to pre-war conditions of insecurity for the mass of people, new inter-state conflicts, new wars. One thing is certain, however, Europe cannot and will not live under the conditions created by the Allies any more than it could or would have continued to live under the same conditions created by a Hitler. The struggle of the masses for a new life, for a socialist society of plenty for all, will go on until victory is won.   
  The Russian declaration of war against Japan was without surprise. Once Foreign Minister Molotov announced last April the Russian intention of abrogating the treaty with Japan, it was only a question of time before Stalin would join his partners in the Far Eastern conflict. The history of the Russian break with Japan is interesting only in the sense that it adds another chapter in the long history of imperialism. Russo-Japanese conflicts in the Far East were of long standing. Battle skirmishes were fought as late as 1939. When the Second World War became imminent, Russia and Japan arranged for an armistice which coincided with the Hitler-Stalin Pact of September 1939. The armistice was followed by a neutrality pact signed in April 1941, shortly before the invasion of Russia by Germany. These diplomatic maneuverings were not accidental. They were part of Russia’s orientation toward the Axis nations, an orientation which arose from the certainty that the Allied powers would be unable to prevent the victory of Germany-Italy-Japan. The turn in the war, however, did not change Russian-Japanese relations. On the contrary, Stalin did everything in his power to maintain peaceful relations with the latter as long as he was deeply committed in the European theatre of war.  Diplomatic Misrepresentation The certainty of a German defeat, coming on the heels of the Italian collapse, changed the whole relationship of forces in the Far East. It was not the sudden discovery that Japan was an ally of Germany, or that it was ruled by a reactionary government which prompted Russia’s actions in the Far East. When Molotov stated in April that “Germany attacked the Soviet Union and Japan is helping Germany in the war against the Soviet Union. In addition, Japan is at war against Great Britain and the United States who are allies of the Soviet Union. In such a situation the neutrality pact between Japan and the Soviet Union has lost its meaning and the prolongation of this pact is becoming impossible,” he spoke in the tradition of imperialists. Why? Russia had been at war with Germany for four years! Russia had been allied with Great Britain and the United States during the same four years! And Russia maintained its neutrality treaty with Japan during those same four years. Did it take Mr. Molotov four years t oascertain facts which were accessible to any school boy? Obviously not! Russia retained her pact with Japan so long as her relations with the United States and Great Britain were not fully ascertained. First, she did not want to fight a two-front war. Secondly, she wanted guarantees from her Allies on European questions (what territories Russia shall receive) and guarantees in Asia. Russia is as much an Asiatic power as a European. Her imperialist interests cover not only Eastern Europe, the Balkans and the Mediterranean, but also China, Manchuria, and a Pacific port. Recently, it became known what Russia’s demands in the Far East were. Stalin demanded the re-establishment of the 1906 Russian influence in Manchuria, creation of a sphere of influence in Mongolia, return of her interests in the Russo-Chinese railway, and the Port of Dairen.  Russian Entry Decided at Yalta These were the “practical” matters discussed in Teheran and Yalta. But it has also been disclosed that Russia’s entry into the war against Japan was decided in “principle” when Roosevelt was alive. The questions discussed at the Potsdam meeting related only to the date of Russia’s entry, number of troops to be used, materiel to be employed and material assistance to be rendered by the United States. These supplemented the “practical” agreements referred to above. The anti-Russian press which endeavored to explain the belated Russian entry into the Far Eastern war as one of the results of the atomic bombing of Japan and the desire of Stalin to get in on the kill, reveal either political obtuseness or willful misrepresentation of the situation. It is not difficult to understand Russia’s action if one understands first of all that Stalin’s Russia is not a “workers’ fatherland,” not the “land of socialism,” and is no more interested in advancing the struggle of the people for true freedom and independence than the capitalist powers. Russia, under Stalin, that is, under the rule of a new bureaucratic class which bases itself on nationalized economy, pursues an imperialist policy of its own. Its role in the European war was as imperialist as that of all the other powers. It was not merely a “war of defense” as is so eloquently demonstrated by the manner in which Russia seized new territories, incorporated them in Russian borders, violated the independence of other nations and instituted imperialist rule over other countries. Stalin’s policy in Europe has been to re-establish the territorial borders of Czarist Russia which was based upon the oppression of other peoples. Having achieved these aims in Europe as a result of the successful war waged in coalition with the Allied powers, Russia’s imperialist appetite is now being whetted for the Asiatic division of spoils.  Russian Imperialism Molotov’s announcement that Russia entered the Far Eastern war to end it quickly and destroy the fascist rulers of Japan is so much nonsense when it is remembered that Russia signed a pact with fascist Germany which opened up the Second World War. At that time, Molotov found it possible to say that “fascism was a matter of personal taste!” Since the end of the European war, Russia continues to use fascist and reactionary elements to aid in her rule of Balkan countries and to advance her own interests in Europe. Certainly, Russia was not endangered by a Japanese attack. Japan had already lost the war. That much was already clear even before the Potsdam meeting. Japan’s fear was that Russia would enter the war against her, much in the same manner as Italy entered the war against France in 1940. It will be interesting to hear what the Allied “moralists” will say about this when the war is finally over. It will be even more interesting to hear from those who defended Russia’s role in the European war (the Socialist Workers Party), called for the defense of Russia while denouncing the war as a whole as imperialist, and hailed the advance of Stalin’s army in Europe as a victoryfor world socialism. We can understand why it is difficult for peoplewho have been so wrong on every important event in the war years to speak up frankly. But they owe it to the workers of this and all other countries to tell the truth, not only about the past, but the present as well.   
Gates: James P. Cannon as Historian (1945)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
James P. Cannon as Historian
Or How to Tailor Facts to Fit Politics
(October 1945)

From The New International, Vol. 11 No. 7, October 1945, pp. 207–212.
Transcribed by Ted Crawford.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

This work will not rely in any degree upon personal recollection. The circumstance that the author was a participant in the events does not free him from the obligation to base his exposition upon strictly verified documents. The author speaks of himself, in so far as that is demanded by the course of events, in the third person. And that is not mere literary form; the subjective tone, inevitable in autobiographies or memoirs, is not permissible in a work of history.  Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution.
In the light of the above what is one to say about James P. Cannon’s,The History of American Trotskyism? [1] It violates Trotsky’s whole method of historical writing, i.e., the Marxist method. The book would be bad enough if it were presented as memoirs or autobiography. But as history it is almost worthless. Had the head of the Socialist Workers Party written his memoirs, a review of his book would have to take that into account in surveying critically a series of anecdotes which are highly personalized and subjective. One could show where they were factually or interpretatively wrong and dismiss the rest as opinions of the author and the book as the product of particular views which the author held.
Since the book is presented as a history such a conclusion is out of place. The author has a totally different responsibility for his work. As a history, Cannon’s book is shallow, totally devoid of ideas, of theory and the politics which flow from it. The only politics which concern Cannon are inner-party, factional politics.
There is hardly a page in the book which does not contain a false reference, a partial fact, an incomplete tale, a conspicuous omission or direct misrepresentation. Coupled with these is a complete lack of objectivity and historical grasp.
The most important objections to the book relate to its omissions. These are of such magnitude as to condemn the author for the butchery he committed to a theme which is so rich and instructive. Cannon replaces ideas and theory with platitudes, clichés and homilies which make wearisome reading. He replaces analysis and history with disconnected but selected events in which the author plays the role of hero against opponents who are all villains.
A reading of the book will make it immediately obvious why it is impossible to review it in the ordinary sense of a book review. A whole book is required to reply to this misrepresentation of the history of Trotskyism in America. But it is necessary to indicate more precisely what is wrong with Cannon’s work. And we shall do this in several ways. It is important first, however, to understand something about the author in order to understand why he wrote this kind of history.
Cannon entered the workers’ movement when he was quite young. He was a member of the pre-war Socialist Party; the IWW, a founder of the Communist Party and one of its early leaders. He immediately revealed a distinctly revolutionary temper and desire. His interest and understanding of theory aside, Cannon was one of the pioneers of the revolutionary Communist movement in this country. Cannon exhibited an easy talent for leadership and a deftness at inner-party politics. This he joined with good native instinct and experience. In the infant days of the Communist movement, these qualities enabled him to rise to the top leadership of a growing party.
Cannon’s knowledge of revolutionary theory and history is primitive and cursory. Of and by itself, this is fatal in one so anxious to be acknowledged as the leader of the Fourth International, the inheritor of the role of Trotsky. When it appears in combination with a deep-rooted antipathy to theoretical study, a “know-nothing” attitude toward history and politics, it is extremely dangerous. Inside the movement, it takes the form of open and covert attacks on people who are interested in theory and who realize that without proper theoretical training and understanding, it is impossible to build a revolutionary party.
Cannon covers up his attacks on theory and study with slashing indictments of “intellectualism,” that paralyzing form of dilettantism which very often makes its appearance in the movement. The movement sometimes attracts intellectuals who have no solid interests in the program of the Party but who find membership in the revolutionary party a form of intellectual exercise. When Cannon attacks such elements it is, of course, impossible to disagree with him. But behind these attacks against intellectualism, he always wages a campaign against serious intellectuals capable of giving inestimable service to the movement.
Even more important than this, his attacks on “intellectualism” often cover up his attacks on ideas and theory and those who champion them inside the party. In so doing, Cannon, by his role and place in the movement, raises ignorance to a high plane and feeds the most backward prejudices against theory and theoretical pursuits. No wonder that at the 1939 convention of the Socialist Workers Party, one of Cannon’s most trusted aides made a speech in which he demanded that the theoretical organ of the party, The New International, be abandoned because it was of no interest or value to the workers in the party and the working class in general. That this speech went unrebuked by the leader of the party is not accidental. It was widely known by many party members that Cannon had little or no interest in the theoretical press.
These characteristics of the author are not recently acquired. They were present from the days when he was a leader in the Communist movement. There too, Cannon became known as an “expert” in factional conflict, inner-party politics. The “organization question” always held a fascination for him. It was so much like politics in America in general and it offered him a field of activity to compensate for his disqualification from more important fields of revolutionary thought. In the long run, Cannon’s adeptness at organization politics has always proved his undoing. He was trained in the wrong school, the Zinovievist-Stalinist school of organization.
Time alone has served to smother the fact that Cannon was one of the exponents of “Bolshevization” in the American movement—that corroding and degenerating influence on the Communist International. The “Bolshevization” of the Comintern was the means by which the whole International was bureaucratized. The parties lost their independence of thought and action; they became dominated by the ruling group in the Russian party. It was the product of Zinoviev’s fertile imagination, cunningly assisted by Stalin. It later served to hasten the downfall of Zinoviev as party after party was drawn into the net of an organizational system which bureaucratically subordinated them to the Stalin regime in Russia.
Cannon became known as the “captain of Bolshevization” in this country, just as in other countries the reporters and advocates of this theory and practice were to become known. The “Bolshevization” theory merely paid lip-service to Lenin’s concept of democratic centralism. The essential idea of the “Bolshevization” program was the creation of “monolithic parties,” without factions and disputes—that is, without life. Bolshevism as a great theory and practice was reduced to a simple system. The young Communist parties came to learn now that Bolshevism did not mean essentially correct theory and practice, but “toughness,” rigidity, inflexibility—in a word, bureaucratism. 
Cannon and Zinoviev’s Congress
In October, 1924, Cannon made a report to the New York Workers’ School on The Bolshevization of the Party. He was then heralding the decisions of the 5th Congress of the Comintern, sometimes called “Zinoviev’s congress.” Referring to the question of Bolshevization, Cannon said:
A particularly dangerous form of confusion and irresponsibility, which we must conquer by frontal attack without delay, is the formal and even frivolous attitude which is sometimes manifested in regard to the relations of our party and our party members to the Communist International. We hear the Bolshevization of the party spoken of here and there as though it were a joke, not to be taken seriously. The very utterance of such a sentiment is in itself an evidence of theoretical weakness ... The very fact that any party members are able to regard the slogan of the Fifth Congress as a joke is a great proof of the need for this slogan in our party.
And what is this most important decision of the Fifth Congress? It relates to the Bolshevization of the party in this respect, which Cannon quotes approvingly:
It [a Bolshevik party] must be a centralized party, prohibiting factions, tendencies and groups. It must be a monolithic party hewn of one piece.
It would, of course, be unfair to say that Cannon subscribes openly to this theory and practice today. But it remains true that he was educated in this school, became saturated with its ideas and its practices and has never fully thrown off their detrimental influence. In one form or another, the Trotskyist movement, from its founding days, has had to struggle against Cannon’s bureaucratic organizational practices which resemble so strongly those of the Zinovievist-Stalinist school. It is, for example, one of the strongest factors in the present struggle now taking place in the Socialist Workers Party.
With these preliminary observations, it is easier to understand how Cannon came to write this kind of history. But one other element is missing: it is Cannon’s concept of his own role in the movement and his evolution toward Trotskyism and in the Trotskyist movement. We refer to the not-so-celebrated “gestation” theory Cannon propounded during the early factional struggles in the Communist League in which he developed the theme that, since “there are no accidents in history,” his emergence as a Trotskyist and as founder of the Trotskyist movement was logically necessary and inevitable. Needless to say, this theory was rejected by the Communist League in 1930, ’31 and ’32, but Cannon has never given it up nor his determination to dominate bureaucratically the affairs of his party.
We have no doubt that in the SWP of today, the “gestation” theory is accepted in fact as one of the great contributions to Marxism, when as a matter of fact, it is merely the theoretical justification for Cannon’s leadership under any and all or circumstances.
 
The History of the CP
Cannon’s chapter devoted to the great historical period after the First World War, when Communist parties emerged all over the world, is shallow. Here his lack of accumulated knowledge and an inability to carry out indispensable research has resulted in a completely jammed-up picture of those days, just as every other important stage of development in the history of American Marxism is jammed-up. What is now “telescoped” in the book, and which takes many pages, is the anecdotes, the platitudes and the clichés.
Certain events in the early history are accurately portrayed and the general problem of the young Communist Party are, correctly stated. They give an inkling of deadening effect of the protracted factional struggles which paralyzed the party. But an objective analysis of the great issues of the time is missing. As in all other chapters, the theoretical and political questions are not even referred to. Obviously, Cannon  never made a full estimate of the period which so heavily influenced his own thinking and practices.
He speaks of the early struggles against the right wing group of Ruthenberg and Lovestone. It was, without doubt, progressive struggle on the whole. Until the end of 1923 this struggle was decided on the basis of the respective strengths of the Foster-Cannon faction and that Ruthenberg-Lovestone. Relations with the Communist International were then still primarily political. The struggle against Trotskyism had only begun and the transformation of the Comintern into an instrument of the Zinovievist-Stalinist bloc was still incomplete.
In 1924, however, a great change had taken place. From then on the lives of the parties in the Comintern were completely controlled by the Kremlin bureaucracy. Leaderships and policies were determined in Moscow and very often by the mere transmission of a cablegram. The American party was no exception, and one of the leaders of party expressed it accurately when he said that the party was “suspended by cables from Moscow.” The Foster-Cannon leadership was itself removed by a cabal at a convention where it had the support of the overwhelming majority of the delegates and the party membership. This did not end the factional struggles in the American party. They continued to be fought more sharply. But henceforth, no matter what the relationship of strength was between the factions, the leadership of the party was determined by the Kremlin. Except that where there had been two groups contending for the leadership of the party, after the transference of this leadership to Ruthenberg, there were now three.
Cannon makes note of this change in the factional line-up but he deliberately avoids the explanation of how it came to pass that the Foster-Cannon group split immediately after the Comintern decision which handed over the leadership of the CP to the right wing. He must evade this question because it conflicts with other things he writes about his role in the CP, and his theory of gestation.
How does Cannon explain his split with Foster? Well, the Foster group was made up primarily of trade unionists, people unschooled in Marxism and Bolshevik politics. The Cannon group was more a pioneer Communist group with a stronger Communist tradition. In a way, this is true. But during those stormy days Cannon justified the faction because in the party it represented the fusion of the Communist elements with native American revolutionary trade unionists. The fusion of these two basic elements which made up the Communist movement was necessary to the future development of the party.
By purely objective reasons, Cannon’s explanation of the split is a mystery. He cites the difference in character between the two elements of the faction and then abruptly says that this “implicit division became a formal one.” And that is all. Cannon passes on to other matters.
 
How Cannon Split with Foster
But the split in the Foster-Cannon group occurred over the attitude to be taken to the bureaucratic action of the Comintern (Zinoviev-Stalin bloc) in turning the leadership of the party over to the right wing and doing so in defiance of the will of the party membership and a convention of the party. For all its primitiveness and backwardness, the Foster group’s reaction was healthy. It said: We will not accept the decision, but fight it.
Cannon thereupon split, not the party, but the faction. Cannon personally played the leading role in the fight to have the decision accepted. “You cannot fight the Comintern,” he thundered at the Foster group. His fight was so determined that he finally broke down the resistance of the Fosterites who, in turn, gave in to the persistent pounding of one of their ex-leaders.
Is Cannon to be condemned for having played a role which, when reviewed in the light of history, was wrong, but which at that time he could not have fully understood for a number of good reasons? No. But then he owes it to the movement to tell the truth about that period now when all the facts are known not only to him but an entire new generation of revolutionaries who did not live through the old days. This marked the beginning of the great degeneration of the Comintern and the American movement. Yet Cannon, in the role of myth-creator, cannot tell the whole truth about it lest it reflect upon past, present or future glory.
The story of the CP from that point until the expulsion of the Left Opposition is hastily sketched. Some of it is accurate, other parts are suspect. The factional struggle continued unabated. The split in the Foster-Cannon group was repaired by the final establishment of a new bloc against Lovestone who had taken over the leadership of the party following Ruthenberg’s death. Prior to the reestablishment of the bloc, the Cannon group had made a short-lived but intimate bloc with Lovestone, and then another with dissident elements of the Lovestone group. The great problem in the party always remained: how to get rid of the deadening leadership of the right wing. It could never be effected even with a majority because the “Comintern would not permit it.”
It became clear to all the factions that the way to change the leadership and policies of the party was by courting the “proper people” in Moscow. That meant continued rivalry and mad dashes to Moscow by the leaders of contending factions. There was obviously something wrong in Moscow. All the groups felt that way. What it was, namely, the struggle against Trotskyism and the rise to power of Stalinism, none of them knew fully and some not all, neither Lovestone, Foster, nor Cannon.
By implication, Cannon would now have us believe that in those years of 1925, 1926 and 1927, he was gradually moving toward an acceptance of Trotskyism. In describing some attack of the Comintern upon him for reasons which he could not understand, Cannon writes: “They must have suspected something.” What? Perhaps Cannon was reading Trotsky’s writings and talking about them in the Party? Perhaps he was developing views approximating those of Trotsky? No, he cannot say these things because too many people know otherwise, knew that he was ignorant about the fight in the Russian party and cared even less. And when he adds that the Comintern: “... went far out of their way to take cracks at me ...”, he is merely “suggesting” a legend.
 
Cannon and the Left Opposition
On another page he describes how he came across the 1926 Left Opposition document on the Anglo-Russian Trade Union Unity Committee and favored its position. How? Was it publicly manifested? Did he present his views to his faction? Or, is this an afterthought which occurred in the writing of this book? No one in the party knew of this “opinion”; more important, none of his intimates in the faction was aware that Cannon had any thoughts whatever on Trotsky, the Left Opposition, or the International. As far back as in the CP Cannon’s “international” interest was the subject of humor.
By 1928, however, Cannon was completely fed up in the CP. He wanted to get away, he said, to get “a bath in the mass movement.” So he went on a speaking tour for the International Labor Defense. He went, he added, because he wanted to “think out ... the Russian question which troubled me more than anything else.” So far as was known then, the only thing that troubled Cannon and which had anything to do with the Russian question was how to get the Russians to stop supporting Lovestone. If he had any ideas about Trotsky and the Left Opposition, they were kept completely secret from the party, from his faction and from his most intimate collaborators. But, if Cannon did go on the tour to think out the Russian question, nobody was ever informed what it was he had thought out.
As a matter of fact, the leaders of the American party and the party as a whole were completely divorced from the politics of the Kremlin. They were really political neophytes. The struggle against Trotsky was to them quite remote and never to be taken too seriously. Certainly no one then believed that Trotsky would be expelled from the Russian CP and subsequently deported from the country where he had helped to make the revolution. Nor did the American leaders understand the international ramifications of that struggle. They were completely absorbed in their own factional conflict and what troubled them was the solution to this fight rather than the struggle against Trotsky.
The struggle against Trotskyism in this country took the form of “enlightenment campaigns” initiated in Moscow and carried out by the factions in an effort to show the Comintern bosses which was the more loyal faction and worthy of Moscow’s support. The individuals in the Cannon group did less than those of the other factions in these “educational campaigns, as they were also called, but they participated too.
The real truth about Cannon’s role in those days was that he had lost all heart for the struggle. He had no wish to continue it further. He even refused to go to the Sixth Congress and it was only after the most persistent urging by the faction leaders that Cannon agreed to go to Moscow. His position was that the whole business was hopeless and a waste of time. But if he had any thoughts about Trotsky before his departure to the Sixth Congress in 1928, this too was unknown to anyone in the faction.
There has been a great deal of speculation on how or why Cannon became a Trotskyist. To us, this of no fundamental importance. Whether he discovered Trotskyism in Moscow for the first time, or whether he had secret views on it before he left in no way invalidates the fact that he was the first in this country to accept the views of Trotsky and was the individual responsible for the establishment of a Trotskyist movement in America. This much is history already and for that alone, if not for his role in the CP, Cannon has earned his place in the history of the Marxist movement of America. What is objectionable, as objectionable as the speculations of those who wonder why and how he did it, is the attempt to create a legend about something which is really not mysterious, in order to strengthen a theory which is utterly false and contains dangerous implications.
 
The Formation of the CLA
We come now to the actual formation of a Trotskyist organization in America. It was necessary to deal at some length on the antecedent period in the Communist Party because those events led directly to the subsequent emergence of a Trotskyist group in this country and because they shed light on Cannon’s background, his activities and his outlook. These had an important influence on the events of the future.
The most important period in the history of American Trotskyism is the worst part of Cannon’s book. The period between the wave of expulsions in the CP and the formation of the Communist League of America at its May 1929 conference in Chicago is dealt with adequately for a book of this type. But the actual formation of the Communist League, which was indeed a historic day, since it marked the organization of the Trotskyists in this country, is dealt with in less than two and half pages! The conference was of enormous significance. It gathered the scattered elements throughout the country, welded them into an organization, adopted a program which was based on a Marxist estimate of the world situation, elected a National Committee, made a decision to issue a weekly Militant and to initiate a campaign for it. Most important of all about this gathering is that it presented the platform of Trotskyism to the American labor movement.
And of this conference, Cannon has little or nothing to say. The great ideas which inspired our small movement are hardly even referred to, or where reference is made, there is no intelligent discussion of these ideas. Those questions which Cannon does discuss briefly relate to the trade union issue, or the question of whether or not the Left Opposition should have become a party or remained a faction of the Communist Party.
The period between the conference in May 1929 and the issuance of the weekly Militant in November of 1929 is omitted in Cannon’s book. These were “dog days” too. But it was a period when Cannon’s interests and activities had flagged. It transpired that shortly after the founding conference, he had little faith in the future of the organization. At that time he wanted to retire and leave the job to the “younger elements.” Only the strongest pressure of his collaborators prevented “America’s No. 1 Socialist” from leaving the organization in the hands of these “younger elements,” and retiring to the Middle West. Thereafter, he opposed the establishment of the weekly Militant and expressed his opposition by taking leave completely for a period of time. He was not even present at the affair which greeted the weekly in those dog days.
Yet with the same suddenness that he departed, he reappeared. He returned to carry on a fight against the “youthful leadership” which had not heeded his counsel that the organization ought to “retrench.” He organized his group of “older and maturer comrades” to fight against every bold step made by the Communist League. He won over to his side Dunne of Minneapolis and Webster, who were ready at one time to go ahead without Cannon, the latter even proposing that organizational measures be taken against Cannon.
 
Some Important Omissions
Cannon was against the issuance of a youth paper; he opposed the publication of Jewish and Greek papers. All three of these were issued. He fought against Shachtman’s trip to Europe to establish our first contact with Trotsky and to seek aid of the European movement for the weekly Militant which he insisted should become a bi-monthly or monthly. Every step of progress made in the CLA had to be fought out against Cannon. Is it any wonder that all of these important stages in the development of the CLA find no place in Cannon’s book?
Every successive period in the development of the Trotskyist movement is similarly treated. The great ideas of the movement, the great struggles of international Trotskyism are replaced by anecdotes and platitudes and by patronizing references to his “boys.” For example, Cannon has no place in the book to mention the editor of the Militant or the real secretary of the League. But he wastes space to tell an old tale about the linotype operator! He makes no reference to the first contact made with Trotsky by Shachtman and his first tour in this country which had such a profound effect on our movement and an important influence on its followers. He says nothing about Glotzer’s visit to Trotsky and his national tour in 1932 which covered Canada and the United States as far as Kansas City. But he does mention Webster’s tour in 1934! Why? A slight omission? No, Webster is one of his “loyal” supporters. Webster is one of the comrades who, together with the men of Minneapolis, “always supported me, they never failed me, they held up my hands.” There is the finished bureaucratic outlook!
Now you can understand more fully the absence of objectivity and history in the Cannon book. His observation of events is subjective, based solely on his participation in them, and whether his participation looks good in print. Everything else goes out. His treatment of individuals follows the same pattern. Those who are his supporters are fine comrades. Everyone else is a scoundrel.
 
Cannon’s Views on New York Organization
Throughout the book there is a running attack on the successive New York organizations of the CLA, WP and SWP. The impression created is that the New York organizations were a haven for Greenwich Villagers, intellectual snobs, careerists, etc. It goes without saying that this was untrue. It is true that the Trotskyist movement attracted a number of alien elements who either had to leave the movement when they found it to be a serious revolutionary organization and not merely a stamping ground for “anti-Stalinists”, or were expelled from it. But the New York movement was always the political, organizational and financial backbone of the Trotskyist movement in America.
It is true that in later years the Minneapolis organization rivaled it in numbers and financially, but by no stretch of the imagination could Minneapolis be said to be the political and organizational center of the movement. On the contrary, under Cannon’s direction and his policy of sheltering it from “Eastern intellectuals and ideas,” Minneapolis was always one of the most backward sections, theoretically and politically, in the party. The main reason for this was Cannon’s leadership in that city.
The policy Cannon pursued there was consciously predicated on keeping Minneapolis uninformed about the great ideas and inner struggles in the movement; the aim was to prevent the “workers’ branch” from becoming infested with ideas, to keep it politically backward. Instead of raising the Minneapolis movement on par with the most advanced sections of the party, Cannon actually sought to reduce the party to the political level of Minneapolis.
Cannon’s repeated sneers at the New York movement are based on one fact and one fact only: The New York movement usually opposed Cannon. Cannon could not cope with the most politically advanced section of the Party and that is why he spends so much time and effort in the book in tearing it down.
It is true that the years between 1929 and 1932 were dog days, but no small reason for it was the sharp internal struggle waged by Cannon against the aggressive policy pursued by the CLA in opposition to his conservative program of “retrenchment.” His only explanation of how our small band issued the weekly Militant is that “somehow the paper came out.” But there was more than “somehow” to it. The paper came out because of the great sacrifices of all the members of the organization and those who directed the work of the League in those days.
One could write at great length on every chapter of the book to show how Cannon has not represented the history of the Trotskyist movement. Page after page can be read without finding out, for example, where the Trotskyist movement stood on a series of world-shaking problems. There is not even a single statement of what Trotskyism stands for, what its main ideas are. All we get from Cannon is that “Trotskyism means business.” This is, of course, hardly an enlightening description of the theory and politics of Trotsky; it is “revolutionary” rotarianism.
Just as the early history of the CLA is represented as a great struggle between Cannon and men who wear corduroy trousers, who talk a great deal, and argue even more, the later history of Trotskyism in this country, represented by the turn in policy with the coming of Hitler to power, the fusion with the AWP, the entry into the SP is also personalized. Always it is Cannon versus villains.
The struggle over entry in the Socialist Party was an extremely important struggle. For my own part, it is difficult to determine who was right or wrong. It is obvious too, that one cannot argue at this day: would we have gained more by entry or by the independent road. Entry for this writer was not then, nor is it today, a principled question, but rather a tactical one. But we find in Cannon’s book a new reason to justify the entry, a reason obviously developed as an afterthought. Following a gratuitous admission that perhaps a number of errors (opportunist) were committed in the Socialist Party, Cannon makes the utterly monstrous statement that:
It was required of us historically, at that crucial moment, to be members of the Socialist Party and by that to have closer access to elements—liberals, intellectuals and half-practical people — who were necessary for the great political task of the Trotsky Defense Committee.
This is, of course, a political libel against Trotsky who opposed many of the policies pursued inside the SP which he thought might be developed on the grounds of expediency relating to his case. So far as was known in the Party, the Trotsky case had nothing whatever to do with the entry!
 
The Tid-Bits
We have said that the book lacks theory, politics and ideas in general. This criticism is validated by Cannon himself. Let in take a few examples, from the many which fill his history.
On page 81, the great man writes: “It is just as impossible to bluff in the political movement as in war.” Why Cannon’s own book is a refutation of this platitude. And politics and war are filled with bluffs, a countless number of them. But it sounds good to Cannon to write this. Makes a great impression on young people who are in the process of being miseducated by the kind of training given them by Cannon.
In reference to the hotel strike in New York and the role of the CLA Cannon writes: “That is one of the characteristics of Trotskyism. Trotskyism has never done anything half-way. Trotskyism acts according to the old motto: Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well.” Never does anything half-way! Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well!
On page 146 we learn again: “These Trotskyists mean business. When they undertake anything, they go through with it.”
Again on page 179: “Trotskyists mean business.”
And on page 198: “They always do things right in Minneapolis.” Always!
This is Trotskyism, according to the history written by Cannon, whom George Collins in the Fourth International described “as the historian of a movement that has swept the field of revolutionary politics of all rivals [!], it is a tribute the viability of his teachings and their adoption and application in life by the group itself.”
One member of the Cannon party said of the history “There was never a history like this!” We heartily concur. We cannot recall another like it.

Footnote
1. The History of American Trotskyism by James P. Cannon, Pioneer Publishers, 256 pages.
 



Benjamin J. Davis, Councilman of the City of New York and a member of the National Committee of the Communist Party, is again that party’s candidate for the City Council. He is using the label of only his party in the present election because the Democratic Party and Tammany Hall which had put him on their ticket withdrew their endorsement under severe pressure from powerful forces in the local and national organization.
What kind of candidate is Davis? He is represented as a leader of the Negro people, an outstanding Communist who is devoted to the struggle for the emancipation of all who labor and are exploited. The labor movement and the Negro people are asked to support him because he represents the best interests of American labor in general and the Negroes in particular.
If this were true, then Davis would be worthy of the support of all the workers in this country. But the record is otherwise.
 
Who Is Davis?
Davis is a leading member of the Communist Party in the United States, a party which is in reality one of the international agents of Stalin and the Russian bureaucratic ruling class. The Communist Party reflects the interests of this ruling class, helps to perpetuate its power, defends its international interests and supports all its crimes against the Russian and. international working class.
In acting as a servile follower of the Stalinist bureaucracy, Davis has endorsed the most totalitarian regime in the world, a regime which rests on police terror, the concentration camp, convict labor and the cruel exploitation of its own workers and peasants.
Davis has applauded and approved Stalin’s imperialist policy in world affairs, which has thus far succeeded in subordinating to Russia’s national interests millions of people in Eastern Europe and the Balkans.
In the United States Davis is associated with every crime which Stalinism has committed against American labor. He was a blatant supporter of the imperialist war, exhorting the Negro people to give up their struggle for full economic, political and social equality on the ground that such a struggle would interfere with the war effort.
In return for this, Davis told the big lie to the Negroes that this was a war for “democracy” and the “Four Freedoms” and that the welfare of the race depended on its support to the bloody carnage which saw Negroes discriminated against and Jim Crowed in the American armed services.
This was only one aspect of Davis’ activities. He advocated class collaboration, the incentive pay system, called upon labor to give, up its basic interests during the war, supported all the rotten war measures which placed the burdens of the war economy on the shoulders of labor and became a supporter of imperialism.
This same Davis, however, was caught up in one of the numerous “changes of line” which often strikes the Communist Party with great surprise since these changes originate in the Kremlin and come without prior notice to the American Stalinists. In the upheaval which saw Earl Browder, the party’s leader for about fifteen years, practically excommunicated for his faithful execution of the Kremlin’s policies, Davis joined the long list of confessors, admitting that:
“I applied it (the Browder line) in all my work and most specifically in the field of Negro work, with resulting serious weaknesses in that work ... I did not detect the errors because I was not sufficiently mature and equipped as a Marxist, an inadequacy brought sharply to my attention by the impact of the Duclos article ... It is my opinion that bourgeois ideology influenced all on the Board (National Board of the Communist Political Association) who bear responsibility for the error.”
Now this self-confessed betrayer of the best interests of the Negroes and the workers in general asks that he should be supported as a representative of labor and the Negroes. This is indeed a grim joke to vote for a self-confessed misleader and betrayer of the interests of labor and the Negroes, a man who supports Stalin’s totalitarian regime under any and all circumstances, no matter how terrible are the consequences, for all the . workers in this country.
Those who say that Davis should be supported because he is a Negro only help to muddy up the water. A vote for Davis is not a vote for a Negro representative or a vote for the interests of the disfranchised, exploited, discriminated and Jim Crowed Negroes.
 
Davis, the Stalinist
A vote for Ben Davis is a vote for a leader of the Communist Party, a Stalinist, a representative of the Kremlin, a misleader of labor and the Negro people. Davis’ allegiance belongs first and last to Stalinism. All his activities are based solely apd exclusively on that allegiance, an allegiance to a party and a movement which is communist only in name but which in theory and practice is the greatest enemy of communism, the great social system which would forever banish exploitation/ wars, poverty, racial discrimination and racism in general.
Bearing all of this in mind, what can one say about the Socialist Workers Party, which endorsed the candidacy of the Stalinist Davis because “he is a Negro candidate on the ticket of a working class party,” despite his crimes, which they listed in great detail. We do not now have the space to discuss in detail this specious but false reasoning, but the reasons given by the SWP for their support of this Stalinist betrayer are extremely dangerous to the best interests of the labor movement.
This position has led the SWP onto dangerous opportunist grounds. Immediately after the Socialist Workers Party endorsement of Davis reached the headquarters of the Communist Party and the editorial offices of the Daily Worker, the Stalinist leaders replied by denouncing the Socialist Workers Party as “Trotskyist gangsters” and “agents of fascism,” on the theory that the whole world accepts their lies and frame-up methods. The Stalinist hooligans charged the SWP with trying to “split the Negro vote” by its endorsement of Davis.
That was to be expected from the Stalinists. What was somewhat unexpected was the extremely stupid reply of the SWP. Not wholly unexpected, however, since the line it adopted in reasoning out its support of Davis determined the kind of reply it would make.
 
Tammany’s Man
In The Militant of October 20, the SWP states, in rejecting the Stalinist charge that they are splitting the Negro vote:
“The Stalinists are so deeply involved in a shady deal with the bosses of Tammany Hall that they dare not tell the truth.”
Elsewhere it states that the Stalinists failed to denounce Tammany “because they are in a shamefaced alliance with the Tammany corruptionists.”
Yet, despite the fact that the Communist Party and its candidate Benjamin J. Davis “are so deeply involved in a shady deal with the bosses of Tammany Hall,” and are “in a shamefaced alliance with the Tammany corruptionists,” the Socialist Workers Party calls upon the workers to support Davis! They endorse and support a candidate and party who are “up to their ears in a deal with the Tammany ward-heelers!” (All quotations are from The Militant of October 29.)
In taking up the denunciation of the Stalinists, that the SWP endorsement of Davis aims to “split the Negro vote,” the SWP is led to charge the Stalinists with doing precisely that because the latter have endorsed Eugene Connolly, the Communist follower in the American Labor Party, who “is the white candidate of the Democratic Party, in Manhattan.”
Then asks The Militant: “Why do the Stalinists designate the white democratic candidate Connolly as their second choice instead of the Negro Democrat, Whaley? Isn’t that splitting the Negro vote?” This is really supposed to get the Stalinists. Its purpose is to show that it is not the SWP which is splitting the Negro vote, but the Stalinists themselves.
The truth is that the SWP is following an opportunist course in this Davis business. The answer to their policy is clear. No support to Davis, the Stalinist betrayer, of American labor and the Negro people.
 

tes: Stalin’s Place in History (1953)








Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Glotzer (‘Albert Gates’)
Stalin’s Place in History
Assessing the Social Role of the Great Assassin
(May 1953)



THIS article originally appeared in the May–June 1953 issue of New International (pp. 144–167) under the name of ‘Albert Gates’, which was the pen-name of Albert Glotzer. Glotzer (1908–1999) was one of the leading members of Max Shachtman’s Independent Socialist League in the USA, which published the New International. The article was republished, along with an introduction by Paul Flewers, in New Interventions, Vol. 11 No. 2, Summer 2003. An obituary of Glotzer by Tim Wohlforth, outlining his long political career, can be found in Revolutionary History, Vol. 7 No. 3, 2000.



* * *
Editorial Introduction
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Josef Stalin. His rise from an obscure background in the Caucasus into the ruler of ‘the socialist sixth of the world’ is one of the more enigmatic episodes of the last century. How was it that a man who, as Glotzer notes, typified the Bolshevik ‘practicals’, or what are more generally known as ‘committee men’, and was intellectually no match for Leon Trotsky, Nikolai Bukharin, Lev Kamenev, Grigori Zinoviev and many other leading Bolsheviks, was able easily to outwit and defeat them, and within a dozen years of the October Revolution to assert himself as the undisputed head of the Soviet Communist Party and the Communist International?
Glotzer notes the importance of Stalin’s character, and draws upon some of Trotsky’s remarks about Stalin’s burning ambition, envy and determination to dominate, to show how this shaped his later career. It is worth looking a little further into this, as Stalin is a fascinating example of the role of the individual in history, showing how a certain person is shaped by his surroundings and experiences, and how, in turn, his characteristics can help to shape an entire society if he comes to its head, on condition that the structure of that society ensures that his rule is exercised in a very personalised manner.
Stalin grew up in a fairly dysfunctional family amid the rough back-streets of Georgian towns, the land of inter-clan blood-feuds, and was educated in the stultifying atmosphere of Orthodox seminaries. His background intruded upon his entire political life, and he was never able to shake off its baleful influence. As a person, Stalin was intelligent, but he was not an intellectual; his was the sort of sharp streetwise cunning that has characterised all manner of men from gangsters like Al Capone through trade union bureaucrats like Ernest Bevin to other national leaders, of whom Saddam Hussein is a classic modern example. Like such people, he was ambitious, vain and egocentric. He was suspicious, indeed contemptuous, of intellectual discussion, and preferred to ‘get things done’.
Stalin was a Bolshevik ‘committee man’ par excellence. ‘Committee men’, the professional revolutionaries within the Russian underground movement, were hard-working and utterly dedicated to the cause of the revolution and to the party, and they suffered deprivation and imprisonment and showed great courage in the line of duty. Nevertheless, they tended to downplay and even deprecate attempts to democratise and otherwise open up the party in order to broaden its base in the working class, on the grounds that it would put the party in danger of state repression and blunt its revolutionary edge. This reflected not merely an understandable concern for the physical and political integrity of the party, but also a jealous protection of their perceived key position within the party, as opposed to the isolated intellectuals in exile and the politically raw workers drawn towards revolutionary politics.
Like other ‘committee men’, Stalin’s commitment to revolution was centred upon a strong class-based hatred of those who had kicked, beaten and exploited the masses, yet he showed very little emotional commitment towards the oppressed. His hatred of the ruling class always overshadowed any allegiance to the working class. Yes, Stalin was a revolutionary socialist, but his idea of socialism was essentially élitist. A poor speaker, a clichéd writer and not a man to whom many people warmed (although he could and sometimes did exert a rough charm), he was nonetheless tough, not at all lacking in courage and commitment, and he was a capable organiser. He saw himself as an undisputed leader of men, and he saw the Bolsheviks in that light, an élite of tough no-nonsense practical revolutionaries who were to lead and direct the revolution and the masses. So did other committee men, but there was a peculiar primitiveness in Stalin’s concept of leadership, an image that sat uncomfortably with the modernising thrust of Marxism, that is best shown by his disappointment that Lenin did not sweep in as an imposing figure to an expectant audience of awe-inspired disciples at a party congress, but was an ordinary-looking chap talking quietly with an ordinary delegate.
There is no evidence that Stalin considered socialism to be the self-emancipation of the working class by means of its exerting its control over society through its own democratic institutions, but his lack of any conception of socialism as a democratic transformational process cannot be placed solely upon his specific characteristics. Firstly, the socialism promoted by the Second International, to which the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party as a whole was affiliated, was essentially paternalistic, and Marx’s precept that the emancipation of the working class must be that of the working class alone was a holiday and high-day dogma with little practical consequence. Secondly, it is very difficult to ascertain what the Bolsheviks expected from a revolution in Russia. Prior to 1917, the Bolsheviks did not constitute a revolutionary proletarian party. Lenin’s ideas, best expressed in his call for a ‘democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’ within the confines of a bourgeois republic in Russia in which, as he put it, the bourgeoisie would truly rule for the first time, were a hopeless muddle. This was the result of the opposing attractions of Second International orthodoxy which saw the forthcoming revolution in Russia as bourgeois, and his observations that the working class would be the leading elements in that revolution. Not until his April Theses in 1917 did he resolve the problem by adopting Trotsky’s concept of Permanent Revolution, that the working class would be obliged to seize power in Russia, but that its rule could only be guaranteed by successful revolutions in the advanced European countries. These two factors ensured that Bolshevism, no more than most other strands of socialism of the time, did not promote a genuinely democratic transformational form of socialism.
But there were other factors that marked off Stalin. Unlike with other revolutionaries, wherever he went there were suspicions by his political opponents and comrades alike of chicanery and even betrayal. Several writers have mooted that Stalin was an actual police agent, and although the evidence is sketchy and inconclusive, it is not beyond consideration that he shopped socialists to the authorities when their words or actions proved disagreeable to him. There was another indication of the nastier sides of Stalin. Whilst Stalin’s articles in the party press called out against national oppression and bigotry, a Georgian Menshevik claimed to have heard him shouting anti-Semitic abuse at the Mensheviks during 1905. Two years later, Stalin reported in his little Georgian paper of a Bolshevik, Gregory Alexinsky, saying that as there were more Jews amongst the Mensheviks than amongst the Bolsheviks, a pogrom in the party would not go amiss. Coming after the pogroms in which dozens of Russian Jews were killed and many more injured and rendered homeless, rather than scolding Alexinsky – who subsequently became a Whiteguard émigré – Stalin’s repetition, without a word of condemnation, of this foul joke, indicated a lot about his real feelings.
Stalin was a contradictory character; on the one hand, fired by a strong-willed hatred of his oppressors, and aligning himself with the most forward-looking ideas of the time, the cause of human liberation (notwithstanding the limitations of Second International Marxism); on the other hand, unable to escape the dismal influences of the society, in both the narrow and broader senses of the term, in which he grew up and lived as an adult.
To move on to the question of the exercising of power in a post-revolutionary society and the rise of bureaucratism within the young Soviet republic, it is interesting to note that Glotzer states that Lenin’s call in his Testament to remove Stalin from his post of General Secretary was too late: ‘Yes, too late, for already the bureaucracy inside the party and the state had grown too powerful and resistive to heed a proposal from the leader of the party and the state.’ However, although Glotzer understands the tremendous pressures imposed on the Bolsheviks during the period of the Civil War, he, like Trotsky before him, underestimates both the impact of their fight for survival and their political traditions upon their existence as proletarian revolutionaries.
The year of 1917 saw not only the Bolsheviks adopting the theory of Permanent Revolution, which permitted them to consider a bid for state power, but also their close political and organisational engagement with a working class that was building its own institutions – soviets, factory committees, etc – and it was through these institutions that the Bolsheviks took power later that year. However, it was clear that conditions existing within the new Soviet republic – a small working class, a huge peasantry, a war-ravaged and backward economy, and a generally low level of culture – were most unpropitious for any real advance towards socialism. The Soviet republic could act as the advanced guard of socialism, an example to workers and socialists elsewhere, but its existence as a workers’ state could only be guaranteed by successful workers’ revolutions in the more advanced countries of Europe and beyond. Bolshevism in power was therefore essentially a holding operation, a fight for sheer survival. The Soviet regime was confronted by tremendous difficulties, from economic collapse and the disintegration of the working class to sabotage by anti-communists and invasions from hostile foreign powers. Faced with this, political questions were subordinated to military and organisational issues. Despite the existence of considerable debate within the party – compare the high level and the wideness of the party congress and conference discussions during this period with those of a decade or two afterwards! – it was all too easy for the Bolsheviks to resort to administrative means to deal with political matters. The Bolsheviks established a political monopoly, and other political organisations were suppressed or endured a precarious semi-legal existence. The close relationship with the Russian working class which they enjoyed during 1917 was to dissipate as the proletariat disintegrated, and the soviets and other workers’ organisations increasingly became adjuncts of the party. The party started to substitute itself for the working class, and to fall back into a paternalistic conception of socialism. The recruits to the Communist Party during the Civil War received their political baptism in an atmosphere that was decidedly uncongenial to democratic processes, thus exacerbating the tendency towards substitutionism.
The Bolsheviks won their battle against internal counter-revolution and external intervention, but at a very high cost. Bolshevism could only survive by putting its essence as a revolutionary party deeply in jeopardy. The Bolsheviks emerged from the Civil War at the head of a wrecked country, leading (or attempting to lead) a bloated administrative machine, and ruling in the name of an exhausted and dispersed proletariat. Soviet democracy was increasingly submerged under the rule of a revolutionary party that was acting in loco parentis  for the working class. Under such conditions, it could hardly be expected that the Communist Party would remain immune from political degeneration.
Under other circumstances, had the Bolshevik project been successful, Soviet Russia would have become a relative backwater of the world drive towards socialism as other more advanced countries took the socialist road. Leading Bolsheviks – Lenin, Trotsky, Bukharin and other luminaries – would have played an important role in the struggle to develop a world communist society, alongside revolutionaries from other countries. Stalin, however, whilst undoubtedly playing an important governmental role, would have been very low down in the international movement so far as theoretical and political issues were concerned. In the cultural advance made under socialist regimes – who knows? – Stalin may have shaken off his uncultured traits, and become a communist worthy of the name.
This, of course, didn’t happen, and what took place was very much the opposite. With the dissipation of the working class and the growing bureaucratisation of the party-state apparatus, and in the absence of revolutions in the advanced capitalist states, some sort of degeneration was inevitable in the Soviet Union. And in these conditions, Stalin, the former committee man, was the ideal candidate to take the helm of the Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet state as the 1920s drew by. Who needed proletarian revolutionaries trying to set the world ablaze, or Marxist intellectuals and their complex arguments, now that the main task facing the Bolsheviks seemed to be the practicalities of national consolidation and development – ‘socialism in one country’?
From a position at the start of the 1920s of acting in the name of the working class, by the end of the 1920s the party-state apparatus, with Stalin at its apex, had developed into a social stratum with its own particular interests. The establishment of a vast étatised economic structure under the Five Year Plans enabled the apparatus to became a fully-fledged ruling élite, as conscious of its privileged position vis-à-vis the proletariat as the ruling class in a capitalist country.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to confuse Stalin the bureaucratic socialist of the early-to-mid-1920s with the full-blown bureaucratic élitist of 1929 and beyond, and Trotsky was not being unrealistic when he declared, as Glotzer notes, that had Stalin known at the start where his course would have ended, he would have stopped short. Although Stalin’s qualities of a canny manoeuvrer and a skilled machine politician enabled him easily to out-manoeuvre his party rivals, making and breaking blocs with one set of Bolshevik leaders after another, it was his advocacy of national development and his inability to foresee the consequences of this that guaranteed his rise to the position of leader and led to the victory of Stalinism with all its horrors.
Shachtman’s organisation had split from the Trotskyist Fourth International in 1940 for a variety of reasons, one of the more important of which was its disagreement with Trotsky’s analysis of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers’ state, which held that the étatised Soviet economy was essentially socialist in character, although the country was ruled by a totalitarian caste. Shachtman, Glotzer and their comrades considered that the Soviet Union constituted a new type of society, bureaucratic collectivism, that was neither capitalist nor socialist. This idea, which its proponents never really worked up into a rigorous analysis, had its strengths; the Soviet economy was definitely not capitalist, and neither had the working class had much to do with the establishment of the Soviet Union’s collectivist economy other than doing the donkey work and providing the social surplus for the ruling élite. However, by considering that the Soviet Union and other similar states represented a new form of society, one that was more repressive than liberal democracy, rather than a temporary and ultimately doomed social formation, Shachtman and Glotzer eventually came around to viewing Stalinism as a bigger threat to civilisation than capitalism. So within a decade of Stalin’s death, notwithstanding the liberalisation that had occurred within the Soviet Union after 1953, they had turned their backs upon any meaningful social transformation, and matched their calls for meagre social reforms with a staunch defence of US imperialism.
Nonetheless, the ignominious latter-day political career of Albert Glotzer and his mentor Max Shachtman should not prevent us from appreciating the incisive and rewarding commentaries that they and their comrades made in happier days, of which Glotzer’s obituary of Stalin is an example.
Paul Flewers
* * *
Stalin is the greatest man of all times, of all epochs and peoples. – Sergei Kirov
Stalin proves himself a ‘great man’ in the grand style ... Stalin is Lenin’s heir. Stalinism is Communism. – James Burnham
WHEN Lenin lay gravely ill, he gave much thought to the future of the revolution and the party which he, above all, helped to create. Fully aware of the dangers which surrounded the young, new state, uncertain of its future as an isolated and backward nation, he concerned himself with the internal situation in the party which now ruled the country alone. In his famous Testament he turned directly to the problem of relations within the leadership which he described in the following unequivocal manner:
By stability of the Central Committee ..., I mean measures against a split, so far as such measures can at all be taken ... Our party relies upon two classes, and therefore its instability would be possible and its downfall inevitable if there were no agreement between those two classes ... I think that from this standpoint the prime factors in the question of stability are such members of the Central Committee as Stalin and Trotsky. I think relations between them make up the greater part of the danger of a split ... Comrade Stalin, having become General Secretary, has unlimited authority concentrated in his hands, and I am not sure whether he will always be capable of using that authority with sufficient caution. Comrade Trotsky, on the other hand, as his struggle against the Central Committee on the question of the People’s Commissariat for Communications has already proved, is distinguished not only by outstanding ability. He is personally perhaps the most capable man in the present Central Committee, but he has displayed excessive self-assurance and shown excessive preoccupation with the purely administrative side of the work. These two qualities of the two outstanding leaders of the present Central Committee can inadvertently lead to a split, and if our party does not take steps to avert this, the split may come unexpectedly.
Lenin proposed that the Central Committee of the party be so enlarged in order to neutralise the relations of Trotsky and Stalin in the leading committee and, as he hoped, to serve as a unifying force in the summits of the party.
One year later, however, on 4 January 1923 [1] he added a postscript to the Testament saying:
Stalin is too rude and this defect, although quite tolerable in our midst and in dealings among us communists, becomes intolerable in a General Secretary. That is why I suggest that the comrades think about a way of removing Stalin from that post and appointing another man in his stead who in all other respects differs from Comrade Stalin in having only one advantage, namely, that of being more tolerant, more loyal, more polite and more considerate to the comrades, less capricious, etc. This circumstance may appear to be a negligible detail. But I think that from the standpoint of safeguards against a split and from the standpoint of what I wrote above about the relationship between Stalin and Trotsky, it is not a detail, or it is a detail which can assume decisive importance.
Shortly afterwards, and immediately prior to a turn in an illness that left him incapacitated until his death, Lenin, in a letter to Stalin, broke off all personal and comradely relations with him. A chain of events leading to this final act was followed with a proposal by Lenin to Trotsky for a political bloc against Stalin. The immediate cause for this was the sharp disagreement that broke out between Lenin and Stalin over the national question, particularly in Georgia, where the latter sought to Russify the country and had assumed bureaucratic control over the party.
The seriousness of that dispute is further revealed by Stalin’s attack on Lenin’s ‘national liberalism’ for advocating the structure of the new state on a basis of ‘federated republics’. One of the ‘peppery dishes’ this Georgian cook prepared in his triumph as an expert on the national question, was the subordination of all the minority nations to the supremacy of the Great Russians, in no fundamental sense different from the way great Tsars had ruled.
Our reference to the Testament is for the purpose of recalling Lenin’s extreme sensitivity to the problem of the encircling and strangulating bureaucracy in the state and party, his forecast of a split as a result of a peculiar constellation of forces in the leadership, and his appraisal of the two principal figures in the subsequent struggle, one of whom was world famous, the other, an unknown and obscure figure.
The Testament made clear that while Stalin was unknown to the world and perhaps to the Russian people and the party at large, inside the broad leadership of the organisation he was a prominent and dominant figure. Consequently, while it is true that he rose from obscurity, it was as a member of the leading cadre of the revolutionary party.
Lenin’s Testament became known only after his death. The persistent demands of the Trotskyist Opposition and its surreptitious circulation throughout the party forced an official admission of its existence. We shall refer to these episodes shortly. First, however, it is necessary to deal with the significance of Lenin’s reference to the ‘obscure’ Stalin who was the second ‘most able’ man in the Central Committee. Upon the publication of the letter many said: See, we may not have known this man. But evidently he was one of the giants of the Bolshevik party. Even Lenin couples him with Trotsky as the two most able men of the Central Committee. And that accounts for his place in the leadership and his rise to power. Trotsky was always wrong in calling Stalin a ‘mediocrity’. This misjudgement of Stalin, moreover, obviously led to an underestimation of his ability and the defeat of Trotsky and every other prominent associate of Lenin.
On the face of it, looked upon purely as a struggle between personalities, this view appears credible. For example, more than 20 years after the beginning of the struggle between Stalin and his opponents, James Burnham discovered that greatness really fits Stalin – greatness being equated with success.
Several things require an immediate discussion of this evaluation of Stalin. What exactly did Lenin mean, and could he have meant, in coupling the names of Trotsky and Stalin? Did Trotsky really underestimate Stalin’s ability and therefore err in his struggle to the point where he guaranteed Stalin’s victory? What place in history does Stalin have as a figure for progress or retrogression, for the advancement of humanity or its retardation?
* * *
The world socialist movement, from the time of Marx and Engels, has had two basic levels of existence: the level of theory, principle and programme; and the level of action, organisation and administration. In the best parties and individuals, a synthesis is established between these levels in a natural, synchronised manner, with all the unevenness, differences of quality, strength, weakness and capriciousness that attach to all movements and men. Under the most favourable social conditions, these movements and men progressed and produced results of high quality. At unfavourable historical conjunctures, they exhibited their weaker sides as theoretical, political and organisational-administrative crises arose.
Peculiarly enough, Tsarist society in the pre-revolution days provided a favourable arena for the development of revolutionary movements of a high order; many of them having men of considerable quality in their various leaderships. All the parties had their thinkers, writers, orators, organisers and practical men as distinguished from organisers. The Bolshevik party, as history has affirmed, contained them in greater abundance than any other party. For all the grave differences which separated these parties at varying times in their common development, the other parties had respect for the leading men of Lenin’s party. Throughout the bitter struggles between the Mensheviks and Bolsheviks, perhaps the most bitter factional struggle experienced by any party, many of the leaders on both sides had respect and even admiration for the abilities of their opponents.
The outstanding men of Lenin’s party were many-sided. They were theoreticians of socialism, great writers, orators, agitators and leaders of men. A mere mention of their names will recall their deeds: Bukharin, Preobrazhensky, Bogdanov, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Riazanov, Sverdlov, Rykov, Tomsky, Sokolnikov and Krassin. There was, of course, Trotsky, already a famous figure beginning with his youthful leadership in the 1905 revolution – an exceptional thinker, writer and orator – who joined the Bolsheviks in 1917; Rakovsky, from the Balkans, Chicherin, Lunacharsky, Piatakov, Serebriakov and others, each of them making invaluable contributions to the movement.
When Lenin said that the two most able men in the Central Committee were Trotsky and Stalin, he caused no little concern to those whose opposition to the latter was accompanied by a complete rejection of the man as having no qualities whatever. Trotsky, as we shall show, was not guilty of such an underestimation of the man; neither were some other opponents of Stalin. The basic reason for their defeat is to be sought in politics rather than psychology, important as the latter may be in trying to understand the personalities in the struggle. Thus, the Testament directed attention to the fact that Lenin, who was extremely perspicacious in his understanding and estimation of men, regarded Stalin as next to Trotsky the most able man of the Central Committee.
Stalin was an obscure figure of the party and the revolution, as history, despite its falsification in Russia, has firmly established. Prior to the revolution, through it as well, he wrote little or nothing. He initiated no great ideas or struggles, and contributed nothing whatever to the ideological life of the party, the most intense and active of any party we know. He was, and remained to his death, a speaker of poor quality in content and technique. While the party press contained the names of all leading men of the organisation, Stalin’s rarely if ever appeared. At party congresses he was usually a silent observer.
What attributes, then, did he have that recommended him to the leading staff of the party in the pre-revolutionary days, and caused Lenin to describe him as he did in 1922–23? The Bolshevik party, as an illegal party under Tsarism, had forced upon it methods of work, a character of life and a system of organisation which was in many respects peculiarly Russian, and, except in its centralism and forms of discipline, not unlike all the other illegal parties, including the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries. With its leading staff living in exile, the Bolshevik Party had to develop an illegal organisation in Russia, the same as the other parties. The party could not survive and develop unless it progressed on various levels, theoretical, political and programmatic (for the most part designed by the émigré leadership), and organisational, administrative and in the field of action inside of Russia. It required for the latter, men of exceptional courage, skill, tenacity, men prepared to give their lives in the struggle to free Russia from Tsarist oppression. There were many such men in the party; Stalin was among the best of that type, inadequately described as the ‘practicals’.
The post-revolutionary period brought with it a new selection of men demanded by the new conditions of revolutionary reconstruction. Many were found wanting; others displayed an expanding ability and capacity under the new state. In the case of Stalin, who was originally a coopted member of the Central Committee, the post-revolutionary period of the expansion of state power and administration gave him an opportunity he did not and could not have had before. The sudden death of Sverdlov, which robbed the party of its greatest organiser, elevated Stalin from a figure of second rank to one of first. He became, upon the recommendation or proposal of Zinoviev, Secretary of the party. Yet prior to that time, Lenin too had pushed Stalin, we believe with Trotsky, because he valued his ‘firmness, grit, stubbornness, and to a certain extent his slyness as attributes necessary in the struggle’, which the weak state was experiencing. It is certain that Lenin did not require or expect from Stalin ‘independent ideas, political initiative or creative imagination’.
In all ideological matters, other men made the necessary contributions which gave the party and the new state the rhythm required for consolidation of growth. A review of the various congresses, conferences and other gatherings show these men of ideas to be Lenin in the first place, Trotsky, Bukharin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Piatakov, Preobrazhensky, Sokolnikov, etc. They made the main political and policy reports. It would be wrong to believe, however, that the contributions of these men were ideological only. They were, all of them, men of great practical skill, too, heading the most important divisions of the state and the party as ‘practical’ men.
Yet, in the many-sided character of party life, a party which dominated the new state, the practical direction of its affairs required a man of no average skill in such matters. In the selection of Stalin for the post of party Secretary, there is no doubt that the Central Committee felt it had that kind of person, strong-willed, experienced and devoted to the party, one who could keep the organisation functioning at its highest capacities in the tests that seem to confront the organisation daily.
If this be doubted, one has only to ask: In what other sense could Lenin have termed Stalin one of the two most able men of the Central Committee? All of the biographers of Stalin and the Russian Revolution agree on this: that Stalin was in no sense, at any time, one of the ideological leaders of the Bolshevik party, neither prior to the revolution, nor after. There are no lasting theoretical contributions made by him. His writings are indeed exceedingly scarce in the years before he became the chief of the Russian state and party. What he did write was anything but outstanding or even worth remembering. Not even the Stalinist school of falsification has been able to resurrect any body of writings prior to 1924 to make a respectable volume of his collected works. Where other leaders of the revolution were widely known for their public activities as writers, speakers and organisers, Stalin was correctly described as an ‘obscure’ figure, strong only in the ranks of the leading cadres of the party, and not greatly loved among them.
Stalin was General Secretary of the party for only one year when Lenin wrote his Testament to warn about the dangers of a split. In another few months, he proposed the removal of Stalin as Secretary. Thereafter, he broke off all comradely and personal relations with him. These are the incontestable facts. They show that, if Lenin erred in his sponsorship of Stalin, it did not take him long to see the mistake and to attempt to remove him. He did not propose to remove Trotsky, or Bukharin, or even Zinoviev and Kamenev, to save the unity of the party and to fight every burgeoning bureaucracy. No, among the leading staff, he proposed to remove Stalin, and only Stalin. But, as history has shown, it was already too late!
Too late? Yes, too late, for already the bureaucracy inside the party and the state had grown too powerful and resistive to heed a proposal from the leader of the party and the state. This in itself is a forceful reply to the critics of the revolution that Lenin was dictator of the party and new state. It is an unusual dictator, indeed, who could not affect the removal of a subordinate official before he had fully consolidated his post. And yet, this, too, is the historical fact: Lenin’s request that Stalin be removed from his post as General Secretary was unheeded not only by the rising new bureaucracy in the party, but by what has been called ‘Lenin’s general staff’. Twice Stalin offered his resignation, once in anger, another time with indifference. On both occasions, he knew the results beforehand. A packed committee and a packed congress cried out: ‘No, No!’ That ended all proffers of resignation.
Behind this refusal to carry out Lenin’s proposal lies the whole story of the subsequent degeneration of the revolution and the leadership which made it. It is a story of inner-party intrigue, of political deals among differing groups, the achievement of momentary periods of internal peace, the outbreak of new inner crises resulting finally in Stalin’s complete victory as the undisputed, single leader, the dictator of party and state. It ended in the defeat, dispersal and physical annihilation of all other leaders of the party, his inferiors as well as superiors, personal friends as well as enemies.
Lenin was fully aware of the forces of degeneration which were operating in the nation during the years following the Civil War. He was deeply concerned with at least two of the most powerful expressions of this degeneration: the rise of bureaucratism in the state and party, and the growth of ‘Great Russian chauvinism’ in the national question. When he said ‘We have bureaucratism not only in the Soviet institutions but also in the party’, he had in mind Stalin and his new administration.
Lenin was outraged at the Georgian affair, as we indicated before. He wrote to Trotsky:
It is my earnest request that you should undertake the defence of the Georgian case in the Party Central Committee. This case is now under ‘persecution’ by Stalin and Dzerzhinsky, and I cannot rely on their impartiality. Quite to the contrary. I would feel at ease if you agreed to undertake its defence.
To Mdivani and Makharadze, victims of Stalin’s machinations, he wrote:
I am following your case with all my heart. I am indignant over Ordzhonikidze’s rudeness and the connivance of Stalin and Dzerzhinsky. I am preparing for you notes and a speech.
Simultaneously, Lenin advised: ‘The political responsibility for all this truly Great Russian nationalist campaign must of course be laid on Stalin and Dzerzhinsky.’ He prepared material for Trotsky to use as his ‘bomb’ since he was too ill to be present at the Twelfth Congress. When Trotsky wanted to inform Kamenev, once involved in Georgian matters, Lenin said: ‘Under no circumstances. Kamenev will immediately show everything to Stalin and Stalin will make a rotten compromise and then deceive us.’
The Georgian affair was the final straw for Lenin. It brought about the end of any comradely and personal relations between Stalin and Lenin, and while it in no way determined what happened in the post-Lenin history of Russia, in the Stalin era, it did establish what were Lenin’s true relations to Stalin. History shows Stalin to be anything but Lenin’s disciple.
* * *
Trotsky once wrote:
Those theoreticians who attempt to prove that the present totalitarian regime of USSR is due not so much to historical conditions, but to the very nature of Bolshevism itself, forget that the Civil War did not proceed from the nature of Bolshevism but rather from the efforts of the Russian and the international bourgeoisie to overthrow the Soviet regime.
The chaos visited upon the new regime resulted from the long years of Civil War, the stress, poverty and disintegration which it provoked. The decline of the revolutionary curve in Europe resulted in enforcing the isolation of the revolution, an isolation fortified by the technical and cultural backwardness of the country. The cultural backwardness of the country made reconstruction more difficult, many of the tasks posed to the new state appearing insurmountable. Lenin once remarked that ‘their culture [the old classes] is at a miserably low and insignificant level. Nevertheless it is higher than ours. Miserable and low as it is, it is still higher than that of our responsible communist administrators.’
The factor of cultural backwardness piled on to the isolation of the country, the decline of the revolutionary curve, the growth of weariness throughout the land, the change in the composition of the party through the influx of tens of thousands of new members, and the loss of the revolutionary cadre, made it easier for the new bureaucracy and the new leadership under Stalin to progress and consolidate its rule. These are the objective social factors which acted as favourable forces in Stalin’s rise to power.
The story of Stalin’s victory in his long-drawn-out struggle for power has already been set down in history. It is marked by endless duplicity, retreats, advances, ideological dishonesty, directionless, except as to the goal of complete power, unprincipled blocs and counter-blocs. It would seem that his victory was the product of pure individual superiority in all spheres of human activity in which all opponents are defeated precisely because of their corresponding inferiority. If history was solely the story of individual endeavours and conflict, the story of Stalin’s rise would be simple indeed. But it is anything but simple. His victory came after long struggles characterised by momentary victories and defeats, fears, hesitations and new advances, followed by stalemates, new blocs, new battles won and new exaltations over the prostrate body of a new opponent, or personal-friend-turned-enemy-overnight.
Trotsky was willing to grant that he made mistakes in the fight against Stalin. We believe he made grave ones. But in re-evaluating that struggle in the light of the objective social situation in the country, it is impossible to gainsay Trotsky’s thesis that the world situation more than any other factor made Stalin’s reactionary victory certain. As he wrote in Stalin:
My illness and my subsequent non-participation in the struggle was, I grant, a factor of some consequence; however, its importance should not be exaggerated. In the final reckoning, it was a mere episode.
Stalin’s bloc with Zinoviev and Kamenev was made at a time when they, not he, were prominent and favoured public personalities. Together they began the filthy campaign against ‘Trotskyism’ in an effort to destroy Trotsky and prevent his replacement of Lenin at the helm of the party and the state. The campaign succeeded in Russia and in the world communist movement. The shameless aim of Zinoviev and Kamenev succeeded too well; it prepared their own downfall. For the defeat of Trotsky did not result in the rise of Zinoviev and Kamenev to new heights, but rather thrust Stalin forward as a new national and international figure and hero.
The party machine was already Stalin’s. From 1922 on he had been building carefully, expanding the apparatus with his hand-picked functionaries and old cronies, all of them distinguished by similar traits, practicals without great learning, anti-intellectual, untrained in the great world socialist school, provincials, more at home in day-to-day political affairs on a lower plane. They were old party members, it is true, but a wide gulf separated them from the great figures of the party.
Though the first struggles saw Stalin’s bloc with Zinoviev and Kamenev dissolved and a new struggle arise between a bloc now of Stalin-Bukharin-Rykov-Tomsky against the Trotskyist left opposition, joined by Zinoviev and Kamenev – the new blocs being dissolved as soon as this battle was won by Stalin – the great figures were already undermined in the party.
If the Twelfth Congress in 1923 was a packed congress, the subsequent congresses, Thirteenth, Fourteenth and above all, the important Fifteenth Congress in 1927, were Stalinist congresses in the true sense of the term. The Fifteenth Congress, the most vulgar in the history of the party, expelled the Left Opposition and resulted in Trotsky’s exile to Alma Ata in 1928. Thus, 10 years after the revolution, the organiser of the Red Army found himself once more in Siberia.
Stalin had emerged, as Trotsky said, ‘with increasing prominence as the organiser, the assignor of tasks, the dispenser of jobs, the trainer and master of the bureaucracy’. No sooner was the Left Opposition disposed of than he began the task of destroying the ‘Right Wing’, the Bukharin group. In another year, they too would go. It would all end in the Moscow Trials as his crowning achievement. For in the full glory of his ‘greatness’, in his unchallenged and unprecedented power, Stalin had to destroy physically every old leader of the party and the state including his own original group of political and personal friends.
Political factors alone cannot explain everything about Stalin’s career. They provide the general setting in which he functioned, but he contributed to these his specific personality which has been so difficult to penetrate. The enigma of Stalin is in part due to the fact that he ‘seems to have no prehistory’. Trotsky wrote:
The process of his rise took place somewhere behind an impenetrable political curtain. At a certain moment his figure, in the full panoply of power, suddenly stepped away from the Kremlin wall, and for the first time the world became aware of Stalin as a ready-made dictator. All the keener is the interest with which thinking humanity examines the nature of Stalin, personally as well as politically. In the peculiarities of his personality it seeks the key to his political fate.
Trotsky proceeds to provide a key to this personality:
It is impossible to understand Stalin and his latter-day success without understanding the mainspring of his personality: love of power, ambition, envy – active-never-slumbering envy of all who are more powerful, rank higher than he. With that characteristic braggadocio which is the essence of Mussolini, he told one of his friends: ‘I have never met my equal.’ Stalin could never have uttered this phrase, even to his most intimate friends, because it would have sounded to crude, too absurd, too ridiculous. There were any number of men on the Bolshevik staff alone who excelled Stalin in all respects but one – his concentrated ambition. Lenin highly valued power as a tool of action. But pure love of power was utterly alien to him. Not so with Stalin. Psychologically, power to him was always something apart from the purpose which it was supposed to serve. The desire to exert his will as the athlete exerts his muscles, to lord it over others – that was the mainspring of his personality. His will thus acquired an ever-increasing concentration of force, swelling in aggressiveness, activity, range of expression, stopping at nothing. The more often Stalin had occasion to convince himself that he was lacking in very many attributes for the acquisition of power, the more intensely did he compensate for each deficiency of character, the more subtly did he transform each lack into an advantage under certain conditions.
* * *
The most difficult thing to comprehend in Stalin’s rise to power is his triumph over all the great leaders of the party and the revolution. One shakes his head at the incredibility of the results – one after another, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, Tomsky – all of them superior men – are defeated. The empirical observer shies away from the necessary and difficult task of explaining an event or a series of them in an all-sided manner, in their relation to objective social factors, as events in motion, at a given time and place. He short-circuits these requirements for a judgement based on the simple criterion: success or non-success. Where Stalin was concerned, the views of his victory and his role has been as variable as the political views of the observers.
No explanation of Stalin’s victories makes any sense to them except that Stalin, the unknown, was obviously superior in all vital respects to his opponents. The proof? He won in all the internal struggles in the post-Lenin era, and rose to be the supreme leader of Russia, achieving a status that even Lenin never enjoyed. In a country where theory and generalised evaluations have small currency, but where success is the measure of achievement and truth, this view of Stalin’s rise to power is highly prized.
Whatever one’s private opinions may be about the personal characteristics of the men engaged in the great internal struggles of post-revolutionary Russia, the fact is that Stalin’s rise to power did come with a decline of the revolutionary curve, in a period of mass reaction not only against the policies of the old revolutionary leadership, but against the instability, insecurity and conflict of society itself. The continued chaos of Europe, not a revolutionary chaos, but the conservative chaos of capitalist stabilisation, enhanced the conservative tendencies within the Russian society. The Stalinist faction rose with this conservatism, this desire for peace and work. To say this is not to imply that the leaders of the revolution sought to continue the policies of 1917. An examination of the discussions in the Russian party and the Communist International shows that main orientation was toward an accommodation to what was called the ‘stabilisation’ of capitalism, with all its contradictory rhythms. But it is obvious to the student of the revolution and the internal struggle, that the masses, generally, and the ‘new’ party, did not, as it were, trust the old revolutionary leadership. They put their faith in the rising Stalinist faction which never ceased to attack its opponents as international ‘adventurers’ who threatened the very existence of Russia. The nature of this kind of an attack against the Opposition coincided with both the nationalistic bias of the Stalinist faction and the strong nationalism of the masses against the ‘foreigners’ (the exiles in the leadership).
Next in importance to the change in the objective conditions of the revolution is the change in the party itself. Stalin’s victory in the old Bolshevik party, we have a right to believe, would have been impossible. Stalin’s faction, an immense layer of the new bureaucracy, ignorant of theory and caring less, without a strong tradition, impatient with genuine politics, could win only in another kind of party.
Five years after the revolution, the party’s composition had completely altered. The revolutionary generation which gave the party its absolutely unique character, had all but disappeared. Where it remained, it was overwhelmed by the new layers of the post-revolutionary generation, drawn to the party because it had been victorious. These new party masses had chosen a winner. Like the Stalinist faction, they were impatient with theoretical and political discussion, indifferent to the traditions of the party, and unconcerned with its long and varied history. In Lenin’s party, Pravda  could never have said as it did in 1926, that ‘the party does not want arguments’. For in Lenin’s party, the revolutionary party, there were nothing but arguments, that is, there never was a period in that party in which great theoretical and political disputes were not current, political factions did not exist, function and carry out struggles for their views.
Ten years after the revolution there remained in the party less than one per cent of the membership of the pre-revolutionary days. Stalin’s reactionary struggle rested upon 90 per cent of the new membership, the representatives of the new bureaucracy, which thrust him forward as their outstanding representative and leader. It was to this new movement to which he lent his character.
Stalin’s early victories brought with them a complete transformation of the Russian and international movements. The first victim of his rule was not the old leadership. The first victim was the idealism of the movement, its socialistic mores. The whole great goal of man’s liberation from oppression and exploitation gradually disappeared in favour of an exaltation of ‘practical’ successes, until the goal was lost completely. The revision of theory and programme which accompanied the change was so complete in its scope that the great democratic and liberating traditions of Marxism disappeared entirely from this movement. The concept of socialism took on an entirely new meaning under Stalin.
Immediate aims, industrial indices, ingot production, increasing state power, nationalisation and collectivisation of property became an end in themselves and forced upon the new bureaucracy new goals and theories that no longer had anything to do with socialism. Under socialism, industrial advance is inconceivable without the simultaneous rise in the standards, economic, political, social and cultural, of all the classes. For socialism, all-sided progress means the gradual decline of the forces of coercion, the state and its armed forces. For socialism, social advance means the gradual rise of an ‘administration of things’, an increasing democracy, and a gradual disappearance of the old classes and the class society. The reality and the tendency of Stalinist society are not merely different from socialism, but more in another direction.
Under Stalin, the revolutionary party disappeared, and with it went all the forms of the independent intervention of the working class in the social process. The soviets as soviets disappeared. The trade unions became transformed from the independent economic organisations of the working class into state organisations for the purpose of chaining more securely the masses to the needs of the bureaucratic state. In the factories, the managers, making up an enormous section of the bureaucracy, ruled unmolested, and workers’ control disappeared even before it had an opportunity of fully expressing its economic role.
Party life was completely transformed. The old free party, already suffering malformations because of the long-drawn-out civil war and economic distress, had lost all of its old traditions and characteristics. There were no longer any free discussions, no factions except that of the new leadership, no elections of importance and few if any congresses of delegated bodies. The point was finally reached when congresses began to be held five years apart, and then 10, and even more. Leadership of the bureaucracy, if not the individuals, became permanent without any possibility of intervention by the party ranks. Yet this condition suited the new membership of the new party.
* * *
The critics of Bolshevism seem not to understand the above transformation. In referring to it, the whole nature of the objective situation which had contributed so much also to the destruction and degeneration of the social democratic movement, and of what remains of capitalism, is rejected in favour of a simpler thesis: Stalinism grew out of Bolshevism and was its natural heir. Even more intelligent historians who readily assert that Stalinism and Bolshevism are antagonistic, antipodean, destroy their own valuable contributions by a psychological inability to draw the inevitable conclusions to their own material. Thus, at the end of their excellent studies, protrudes the simplistic idea that Stalinism is not so much a new phenomenon as it is the natural, evolutionary product of Leninism. Why? Because Lenin’s conception of a centralised party when carried out in life, had  to produce Stalinism. These historians, too, leave the field of objective analysis, for in arriving at this conclusion, they express not the results of their studies, but their own political bias as it has developed over the years and, whether they understand it or not, conform to a particular world political situation of which they are an active part.
There is no doubt that a highly centralised party such as Lenin created to meet the conditions of struggle against Tsarist absolutism also created tendencies toward bureaucratisation, no more nor less, however, than the other parties which functioned in the same milieu (the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries). If the party of Bolshevism contained the seeds of bureaucratic degeneration, so did all the parties in Russia, and so do all parties or organisations, per se. The degeneration of the Bolshevik party, however, did not come as a result of an inner-logic of a specific organisational concept or practice, but as a result of historical factors. The test of that truth is that the victory of Stalinism came only after years of the most intense internal struggle and in the form of a counter-revolution inside the party and the society. Or, to put it more accurately, the social counter-revolution in the party which is supposed to have produced the phenomenon, logically and inevitably. What is more, these same critics are forced to admit, in contrasting the two epochs of the movement, that Lenin was a democrat and that the party was free despite the conditions of illegality and the sea of backwardness in which it had functioned. It was obviously not the discipline of the party, nor the system of cooptations which paved the way for Stalinism, but for the more important factors already cited. [2]
The advocates of the aforementioned theory are left somewhat helpless to explain why, under the conditions of bourgeois democracy, especially in the United States, practically all organisations, political and economic, are either totally or partially bureaucratised. They run the gamut from AFL craft unions to the bourgeois political parties which are run exclusively from above, or by factions of the big bourgeoisie. Not even the smaller political parties are exempt from this process.
To say, as some do, that organisation (any organisation) means bureaucracy is again a simplification that confounds rather than explains. Bureaucracy is a social phenomenon which can only be explained most satisfactorily on the basis of objective historical factors. Yet it is a phenomenon which is so filled with the personal element, the involvement of people, that it is not enough to pass it off by the above generalised statement. The factor of culture, a low or backward culture, contributes much to our understanding of the phenomenon. So long as society is not free, so long as factors of exploitation and oppression remain, that is, so long as human society remains backward in relation to the attainment of total democracy, culture will remain backward, and bureaucracy will be an ever-present phenomenon.
The bureaucratisation of Russian society, then, can be best understood, not as a chemically-pure product of a certain type of party, but the expression of a counter-revolution, in a backward country, whose culture has lagged historically behind even the Western world. Stalin is no more the heir of Lenin than a Hoover or an Eisenhower is the heir of Lincoln, no more than Morris Hillquit was and Norman Thomas is the heir of Eugene V. Debs. On the other hand, John L. Lewis, William Green and David Beck are the heirs of Samuel Gompers. And Joe Ryan is a kind of heir of American craft unionism. They reflect the long bureaucratic tradition of the AFL. In saying this, however, we are describing only the surface aspects of the phenomenon, and do not touch the heart of the bureaucratic problem which demands a study all its own.
Lest anyone protest at these analogies to point out that there is a substantial difference between the examples cited, we may add that the difference is primarily quantitative rather than qualitative. That which the Stalinist, bourgeois, union and political bureaucracies have in common is their indifference to the desires and needs of the masses and their right to decide their own fates. Stalinist bureaucratism, coincident with state power in a one-party nation, gave way to a totalitarianism which, if not more extensive than others we have known, is certainly a more extensive system of rule than those of the fascists. What makes it so is the character of the social order which governs in Russia, the system of bureaucratic collectivism as an anti-capitalist, anti-socialist society. It is not the Russian climate or the organisation of Lenin’s party which made it so.
This Russian society did not emerge at once with Stalin’s victory. Trotsky once wrote that if Stalin knew where he was leading, he might have hesitated in his drive for power. This is, of course, purely speculative. But it is certain that Stalin had no idea in the 1920s where his rule would end. Stalin was above all a political improviser, whose policies developed from day to day, without long-range perspective. If he is to be credited with the revisionist and nationalist theory of ‘socialism in one country’, a reading over of the disputes on this question show that neither he nor any of his followers knew exactly the significance of the theory or its practical possibilities for transforming the whole character of the revolution.
Once in power, Stalin, driven on by the logic of his dictatorial rule, had to wipe out every trace of the old party. As Isaac Deutscher vividly described it:
He knew that the old generation of revolutionaries, though weary and humiliated, would, with very few exceptions, never be wholeheartedly converted to Miracle, Mystery and Authority [Stalinist leadership – AG]; and that it would always look upon him as a falsifier of first principles and usurper. He disbanded the Society of Old Bolsheviks, the Society of Former Political Prisoners, and the Communist Academy, the institutions which the spirit of Bolshevism had as its last refuge. These moves indicated the stretch of the road he had travelled since he had begun his struggle against the ‘ex-Menshevik’ Trotsky in the name of the Old Bolshevik Guard. He now appealed to the young generation, not, of course, to its restive spirit, but to its more timid and yet very important mass, which, though eager to learn and advance socially, knew little or nothing about the pristine ideas of Bolshevism, and was unwilling to be bothered about them. This younger generation, as far back as it could remember, had always seen the leaders of the various opposition in the roles of either whipping boys or of flagellants. It had been accustomed from childhood to look up to Stalin wrapped in Mystery and Authority.
To enforce his rule, Stalin introduced the police regime into the life of the nation and the party. Discussion ceased as the method of resolving differences. There was no need for it since differences were ruled out by decree. Only the Boss had the right to changing views, and only he had a right to change what was once adopted. Hooliganism and rudeness replaced the old inner life of the party. Souvarine points out:
The annals of Bolshevism contain plenty of bitter fights, barbed polemics and noisy and passionate episodes. But in this party, where Lenin practically never used the familiar ‘thou’ to anyone, the strictest courtesy was always the rule, even in the midst of the Civil War, and exceptions strike a jarring note. The era of Stalin inaugurated new usages.
The snide critics of Lenin, who take political revenge on Bolshevism and the Russian Revolution by likening the leadership of Lenin to Stalin, overlook this simple truth: While Lenin was the authentic leader of the Bolshevik party, there was no end of differences, violent disputes and even at times splits. Lenin was more than once a minority in his party. This happened not only prior to 1917, but after 1917, and most prominently during the discussions of the Brest-Litovsk treaty. Nothing like that can be said about the era of Stalin’s dictatorship, for the simple reason that no differences were permissible and no discussions possible. In the Stalinist era, not even agreement and abject fealty to the Boss was a guarantee of one’s activity or life. In Souvarine’s words:
It would be difficult to distinguish in Stalin’s professions of socialist faith at that time, the varying proportions of hypocrisy and ignorance. But as one watches the sacrifice of the individual workers to the parasitic state, and that of the revolutionary generations to the myth of the too-fascinating Plan, one cannot doubt one primary fact: five years after Lenin’s death, Leninist notions of socialism had no longer anything whatever in common with the doctrines put forward under the same label ... Russian history throws a better light on the Soviet regime devoid of soviets, than the arbitrary references to Marxism, of which Stalin actually represents the antithesis.
* * *
The falsification of history ordered by Stalin had as its aim the elevation of Stalin to greatness, nay, to the rank of genius. The whole history of the party and the revolution was rewritten not once but many times. Since each new year required a new myth, since each new history could not match the imperative psychological yearnings of a Stalin in absolute power, the rewriting of history became a permanent profession while the lives of successive historians were quite temporary. Where ordinary mortals develop from childhood to manhood in accordance with objective circumstances and opportunities, to which they lend their real and potential talents, Stalin had to be transformed into a semi-God, a genius from childhood, the first disciple of Lenin, and not merely the first disciple, but Lenin’s lifelong friend and counsellor. No truly great man would, of course, require or permit the transparent hypocrisy of the fawning adulation expressed for Stalin in the 25 years of his rule. There was absolutely no precedent for it in the whole history of socialism. It was a part of Stalin’s vulgarity, and the length to which it went was obscene. Bertram D. Wolfe wrote:
 ... if we try to represent him ‘the best disciple of Comrade Lenin’ and to present all other leading ‘disciples’ as weaklings and foul and unfaithful traitors; if further we wish to portray him as ‘Lenin’s closest collaborator throughout the history of our party ... from the very inception of Bolshevism, Lenin’s co-worker in the building of the party’ (Molotov); if, despite the 10 years of difference in their ages, we would picture Stalin as advising Lenin from the start and ‘having no little influence on Lenin’ (Kalinin); if, moreover, he is indeed ‘the greatest of our contemporaries’ (Barbusse, Mikoyan, Beria, and others); ‘the most profound theoretician of contemporary times’ (Beria); ‘no one so able to penetrate into the most secret recesses of the human heart’ (Shvernik); ‘the God-appointed leader of our military and cultural forces’ (Patriarch Sergius); ‘the father of us all’ (Yaroslavsky); ‘the greatest man of all times, of all epochs and peoples’ (Kirov) – then the need to establish the precocity of his genius and the vast sweep of his early rebelliousness becomes more understandable.
In ordering the rewriting of his entire life, Stalin was fully aware that he had to rewrite, too, if it were at all possible, the history of all the other leaders. And this he tried by portraying every one of them as spies, saboteurs, enemies of the people, and foreign agents in the pay of bourgeois and fascist governments not merely in their latter-day lives, but practically from the first days of their participation in the socialist movement. Such a reckless indifference to truth and to life itself cannot be reconciled to the ideals of socialism, and attest in another way, and that there was not and is not now the slightest aspect of socialism to be found in the totalitarian regime of Stalinism.
In all history there has never been such obeisance paid a head of state – not even to Hitler or Mussolini. It would seem that even to a totalitarian leader, an ever-rising crescendo of hussahs to his political genius and leadership would suffice. But envy was not least of Stalin’s characteristics. He was envious of contemporaries who excelled over him in intellectual attainments. To be paid tribute for his leadership over an entire nation was not enough. Yet he needed just such expressions of servility. He not only tolerated but instigated the many expressions of praise to his genius. His hypocrisy was nowhere better expressed than in his display of modesty, perhaps the last, in Tiflis in 1926. Replying to the eulogies of his friends, he said:
I must, in all conscience, tell you, comrades, that I have not deserved half the eulogy that various delegates have here given me. It appears from them that I am one of the October heroes, the director of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the head of the Communist International, a peerless knight and all sorts of other things. This is mere fantasy, comrades, and a perfectly useless exaggeration. This is the way one speaks at the grave of a revolutionary. But I am not preparing to die.
But if Stalin protested against the ‘useless exaggeration’ in 1926, and described it as ‘mere fantasy’, which it was, he made no effort to stop the exaggerations which had become quite useful for his purposes.
He was all of these things: shock-brigader, legendary figure, a beloved commander, genial thinker, adored Stalin, the steel colossus, great engineer, great pilot, great master, great architect, the greatest disciple of the great master, the greatest of theorists, and the greatest of the great. The highest peak in Europe, Pamir, was renamed Stalin. Cities renamed after him were Stalingrad, Stalino, Stalin, Stalinabad, Stalinsk, Stalin-Aol, Stalinissi, Stalinir and Stalinogorsk.
Even this was not enough. He had to be great in all fields. So Revolution and Culture ranks him amongst the ‘profound connoisseurs and critics of Hegel’. Another journal calls him one of the ‘most authoritative specialists in contemporary philosophical problems’. Cultural Front writes that: ‘In reality, certain pronouncements of Aristotle have only been fully deciphered and expressed by Stalin.’ An instructor at the Communist Academy once said: ‘The full significance of Kantian theories can be fully embodied in contemporary science only in the light of Comrade Stalin’s last letter.’ – a letter attacking ‘putrid liberalism’ and ‘Trotskyist contraband’.
He became overnight a great literary man. At the Literary Post wrote that Stalin ‘has always been distinguished by his profound understanding of literature’. Another periodical, Literary Gazette, advised that: ‘It is up to linguistics and criticism to study Stalin’s style.’
We are not done by any means. The writer Demian Biedny counsels literary men: ‘Learn to write as Stalin writes.’ ‘Ask me who best understands the Russian language’, said Kalinin, ‘and I reply – Stalin.’ Poems extol ‘the great face, the great eyes, the great and incomparable brow of Stalin’, whose appearance has the effect of a ‘ray of sunshine’. These accolades are summarised in the panegyric of Henri Barbusse, who described Stalin as ‘the man with the head of a scientist, the face of a worker and the dress of a plain soldier’.
The scale of this lavish and disproportionate praise is in inverse ratio to Stalin’s real accomplishments. Whatever Stalin may have been, he was never a philosopher or student of philosophy; he was never a literary man nor had he ever displayed any unusual interest either in literature or art; he had never until the very last years of his life shown any interest or accomplishment in the field of linguistics or philology, or science. But the lavish praise reached a plane that defies criticism, indignation or irony.
The man knew little or nothing about science and philosophy, of literature and philology, and his command of the Russian language was notoriously poor. Yet the need for greatness was so overwhelming that he sought to make up for a real failure of intellectual accomplishment by the bureaucratic device of making of himself a genius by decree. And this was in keeping with his politics. He resolved all problems by police measures; he made himself great in the same way. For woe unto those who failed Stalin here.
Before the great campaign to extol his many and universal virtues, Stalin made demands of his own personal friends and political allies that they too recognise his non-existent qualities and talents. In a state of exasperation, his old crony Yenukidze once burst out to a comrade: ‘What more does he want? I am doing everything he has asked me to do, but it is not enough for him. He wants me to admit that he is a genius.’
Krassin, who knew him well, called Stalin an Asiatic, not as a racial characteristic, but for the ‘blending of grit, shrewdness, craftiness and cruelty’. Bukharin merely called him a ‘Ghengis Khan’. The foregoing examples of the long campaign to make Stalin a great man, a campaign initiated by Stalin, emphasises the accuracy of Trotsky’s analysis of his characteristics which we have quoted.
The campaign to make Stalin a genius could only have occurred after the annihilation of the old party and its leading staff. It was possible only on the basis of the universal ignorance of the new generations that had grown up under the dictatorial regime of Stalin, on a falsification of history that never ended, on revised histories become old before they were fully circulated, on the destruction of revisionist historians who had already destroyed truth and fell into limbo because they could not keep up with the insatiable and vindictive appetite of the Velikyi Stalin (Stalin the Great) for fame.
The result of the great falsification and the campaign to make Stalin a genius was a total intellectual stagnation of the country. Stalin’s mediocrity determined the standards in science, art and literature as the Boss intervened in all these fields.
‘Literature and art of the Stalinist epoch’, wrote Trotsky, ‘were to go down in history as examples of the most absurd and abject Byzantianism.’ Souvarine listed numerous examples of the utterly reactionary campaign in literature and art, a campaign comparable to the architect of that other great totalitarian state of our time, Hitler. In more recent times we are familiar with the Great Russian chauvinist campaign against ‘cosmopolitanism’ and the rise of Russian Slavic historiography which has discovered that the real beginnings of civilisation are Russian in origin, as are all advances made by man in science and invention.
As a result of all this, the great revolutionary beginnings in literature, art and science, produced by October, were halted in their tracks. Under the Stalinist dictatorship these fields of culture and individual attainment were subordinated to the needs of the political regime and therefore stagnated completely. No great works of literature, of painting, or of the cinema were possible as long as the quixotic moods of the Kremlin determined what should be written, painted or produced cinematically. Music has had a similar fate, and the leading Russian composers have been declared enemies of the people for not composing symphonies that could be whistled.
Stalin’s excursions into the fields of culture were not dictated by any immediate or direct needs of his regime. Whether a Shostakovich symphony could be whistled or not, whether he wrote a quartet, sonata or an opera, could in no way affect the state of the nation, although an anti-Stalinist opera might conceivably be written. It certainly never would have been produced, and it would have been the last known work of its author. Modern abstract surrealist or non-objective art certainly could not and did not threaten the regime, yet Stalin personally forced Russian painting back more than a century. Stalin’s intervention in these fields, as in philology, literature and science were the result not of any compelling political need as it was an inner hungry drive in a cold, calculating, narrow and revengeful man who wanted history to record his life as one of universal greatness, as an individual who attained the highest pinnacles in all fields of human endeavour, as a superhuman person. He believed he could do it by decree, at the point of a Luger, as he ordered all things done in his police state.
‘It is hardly necessary to prove’, wrote Trotsky, ‘that a man who uttered not a single word on any subject at any time and was automatically raised to the top by his bureaucracy after he had long passed the age of 40 cannot be regarded as a genius.’ To believe otherwise is to assume that in Stalin we have a case of arrested development, the man beginning his rise to knowledge and greatness after the age of 50.
Perhaps it is too early to make any definitive evaluation of Stalin’s place in history. But it is certainly possible and necessary to make at least some provisional comments on the subject, since everything that we can possibly know about the life of the man is known. There remains then the matter of giving judgement to his deeds and accomplishments, not as achievements independent of their time and place, but in relation to several important historical factors.
Stalin did not live and function in some abstract society, that is, a socialist society in a single country, walled off from the rest of the world, as Bukharin once argued on behalf of that revisionist theory. He rose to the head of a state, a one-time workers’ state, in a capitalist world in crisis. The collapse of capitalism and its weakness as a universal social order coincided with a tremendous crisis of the socialist movement and these contributed as much to Stalin’s rise to power as did his victory in the protracted factional struggles inside the Russian party and state.
His rise to power as the dictator of the country was accompanied by an increasing bureaucratisation of the land and its eventual totalitarianisation. Russia became the most complete totalitarian police state the world has ever seen. In this it was distinguished from the Italian and German examples because while they remained bourgeois states, expressing the same class relations that existed in the democratic capitalist nations, the state showed a greater mobility of the bourgeoisie and a certain independence of movement and action in the ruling groups which seeped down through the lower layers of the fascist structure. Stalinist society, in contrast, became completely sealed off and its masses were thoroughly atomised.
The objective reason for this important difference in the two types of totalitarianism lay in the fundamentally different social orders which prevailed in these countries. Stalinist society, which we have described as a bureaucratic collectivist state, arose on the foundations of a revolution which abolished the bases of capitalism and created the groundwork for a classless socialist society. In the abolition of private property in the means of production, that is, in its nationalisation of industry, the revolution merely set the direction for future progress.
The new state was not yet a socialist state; far from it, in fact. The socialist leaders of the new state understood full well that socialism could not arise on the basis of a working-class victory in a single country, especially one backward industrially and technologically, and above all, culturally. In the absence of a similar development elsewhere, they hoped they could strengthen the basis of the new state by adopting socialistic measures that would begin the long and difficult development toward a new and free society. The degeneration of the revolution is the story of Stalin’s victory as a counter-revolution.
Stalin’s counter-revolution was directed not merely against the old leadership. This is the falsification of history by Stalin, a falsification which has influenced all the critics of the revolution, as well as some of its friends. The victory of Stalin is still regarded as a ‘palace revolution’ in which Stalin won out against his rivals; this being the process of all revolutions which have the habit of devouring their children. Among these critics, Stalin represents Marxism, socialism and Bolshevism.
Every achievement of the Stalinist regime is a living symbol of its anti-socialism and anti-Marxism. It is not merely a question of Stalin erring in this or that direction, on this or that specific question. No, the anti-socialism of Stalinism is fundamental – in its basic conceptions, its practices and its results.
Socialism means the elevation of every man and woman to great social and cultural heights which are attainable only under complete democracy, economic and political freedom. Lenin’s opposition to bourgeois democracy was not that it was democratic, but that it was not democratic enough; it was a class democracy and therefore incomplete. ‘Whoever wants to approach socialism’, he wrote, ‘by any other path than that of political democracy, will inevitably arrive at the most absurd and reactionary conclusions both economic and political.’ The living proof of this is the Stalinist dictatorship. There is no question that the revolution had made mistakes and grave ones. These have been pointed out more than once in the New International. They were the mistakes of a revolution in a backward country which inherited all the retrogressive features of Tsarist absolutism. This alone might not have produced a one-party regime, were it not for the counter-revolution of Tsarism, the intervention of the United States, Great Britain, France, and their First World War enemies on behalf of the rotten old regime, and finally, the attempt to overthrow the regime by the Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, which were not outlawed after October. The subsequent degeneration, however, was not historically determined simply by the conditions produced by the revolution and the counter-revolution. It is more accurate to say that the degeneration of the revolution through Stalin’s rise to power, that is, the counter-revolution, never gave the new state an opportunity for peaceful reconstruction over an extended period of time.
In erasing the achievements of the revolution, the Stalinist regime did not return to capitalism, as some contend, nor did it extend socialism economically – unconsciously or historically – as others contend, but evolved an entirely new system. It retained nationalised property, collectivised agricultural, destroyed whatever remnants of a private economy remained, encompassed within the purview of the state all matters economic and political, and therefore social. In a word, the collective state became the collective owner of collective property. It became a bureaucratic collectivist state, characterised by the most inhuman exploitation of the Russian people, and by the introduction of slave labour as a highly important adjunct to the economy, an indispensable part of the new system.
Such a regime could not evolve as any but a police regime to keep the classes enslaved and to safeguard the all-powerful and omniscient state. The vagaries of its conduct, its brutally, its inhumanity are the product of the system which beholds man not as the most important factor in life and society, but as an instrument of exploitation for the progress of machine production. If the regime exhibits cruelty beyond even the needs of this kind of state, it is only the added fillip – the state expressing the personalities which dominate it.
This writer holds that while Stalin was attracted to Marxian socialism in his youth, remained a devoted revolutionary against Tsarism and a faithful party man all his life, he never emerged from the mould of backwardness of the eighteenth-century nation where he was born. A careful examination of his life and work show that in Stalin, revolutionary socialism was wedded to a powerfully ingrained nationalism. He sincerely desired the destruction of Tsarism and saw the liberation of Russia from absolutism as a socialist act. His hatred of the émigré leaders and the boast of his cronies that they had never left Russian soil contributed to this nationalist bias. The Stalinists were the true provincials of the Russian movement, and this provincialism forced itself into all their works, their theories, politics and practices.
Stalin was both the creation and the personification of the new bureaucracy. The bureaucracy had grown out of the conditions of backwardness in Russia. In the system of bureaucratic collectivism, its superior position in society, gave it the form and content of a new ruling class, a ruling class more ruthless than any we have known. This class not only owned the state as its collective property, but reorganised Russian society to guarantee and perpetuate its collective rule as a class. In doing so, it also introduced political and social mores hitherto unknown either in bourgeois society or the broad and general socialist movement which arose as an anti-bourgeois movement.
* * *
Analogies are often made between the Russian Revolution and its leaders and the French. The analogies are all faulty, helpful as some of them may be in understanding certain of the Russian events. But the essential differences between the Russian and French revolutions are decisive when analogies are made between the Thermidor and the Stalinist counter-revolution. The Russian Revolution was a product of modern capitalism, a machine society of modern classes. The French Revolution came as a rebellion against feudalism and the absolutist regime. There is no strong and instructive analogy between the groupings in the French Revolution and the single party in Russia. As a consequence, while it is possible to draw some likenesses between Lenin and Trotsky and some of the great French rebels, there is no one to draw from to help in understanding Stalin.
Stalin is a unique personality. It is not alone his personal cruelty, his sadism and his envy which is unique. Other men have had those traits. But his hurts, resentments, bitterness and attachments which ‘he transferred from the small scale of the province to the grand scale of the entire country’, are destructive. Actually the French Revolution, enormous as it was in influencing the rest of the world, occurred within a limited geographical area and encompassed small numbers of people. No great international movement embracing millions was associated with it. No figure in the French Revolution exercised power approaching Stalin’s. And finally, no other figure in history was able by his malevolence to alter and determine the course of a world movement and a state embracing tens of millions of people, to upset a system of ideas a century old, and to destroy such powerful traditions as were associated with socialism. And he did all of this in the name of socialism. When he said that socialism required a strengthening of the state, not its withering away, his followers nodded, amen. When he asserted that socialism means inequality (only complete communism would create equality), great hossanahs were sung in his name. When he proclaimed that Russia had achieved full and complete socialism, amid backwardness, poverty and exploitation, hallelujahs were sung around the world.
The man who was wrong in his estimates and tactics on almost every important world question, was declared the most practical of men. He helped destroy the German socialist movement by his betrayal of the revolution, paving the way to Hitler’s victory. He made a bloc with Chiang Kai-Shek in 1927 that destroyed that revolution and the old Chinese Communist Party. He promulgated the theory of social fascism, and the Third Period, which isolated the whole Communist International from the world working class. He failed in his policy of ‘collective security’, and took out his spite against Great Britain, the United States and France by signing a pact with Hitler. The pact with Hitler almost proved his undoing by starting the Second World War which led to the invasion of his domain. Were it not for American intervention in the war and its assistance to Stalin, he could not have saved his regime.
The extension of the Second World War to global proportions served to perpetuate his regime and to help it flourish and expand, not so much because of its own inner strength, but because the war, in destroying Germany, Italy and Germany, almost destroyed the whole capitalist world and gave Stalin a new lease on life. Thus a series of fortuitous world circumstances, the disintegration of capitalism and the weakness of the socialist movement, allowed for an extension of Stalinism. In permitting that extension, it likewise introduced new and powerful forces for the disintegration of that system, primarily in the national and social rebelliousness of the new states now ruled by the Stalinist empire. Stalinism can no more solve the problem of national independence than could Hitlerism, and the Stalinist multi-national state is as much a fiction as a Hitlerised Europe would be. The break with Tito, the dissatisfactions in the countries behind the Iron Curtain, the rebellions in Czechoslovakia and the uprising in East Germany are all the unmistakable signs of the grave weaknesses of Stalinism.
Stalin has left the legacy of a new exploitative society, the most reactionary and bureaucratic social order we have ever known. He headed that society completely without once loosening his authority over that state and the movement associated with his name. No more apt description of that role has been given than by Trotsky when he wrote:
L’Etat, c’est moi!  is almost a liberal formula by comparison with the actualities of Stalin’s totalitarian regime. Louis XIV identified himself only with the State. The Popes of Rome identified themselves with both the State and the Church – but only during the epoch of temporal power. The totalitarian state goes beyond Caesero-Papism, for it has encompassed the entire economy of the country as well. Stalin can justly say, unlike the Sun King: ‘La Société, c’est moi!’
* * *
In reply to Ivan Smirnov that Stalin is ‘a mediocrity, a colourless nonentity’, Trotsky replied:
Mediocrity, yes; nonentity, no. The dialectics of history have already hooked him and will raise him up. He is needed by all of them – by the tired radicals, by the bureaucrats, by the Nepmen, the kulaks, the upstarts, the sneaks, by all the worms that are crawling out of the upturned soil of the manured revolution. He knows how to meet them on their own ground, he speaks their language, and he knows how to lead them. He has the deserved reputation of an old revolutionist, which makes him invaluable to them as a blinder on the eyes of the country. He has will and daring. He will not hesitate to utilise them and to move them against the party. He has already started doing this. Right now he is organising around himself the sneaks of the party, the artful dodgers. Of course, great developments in Europe, in Asia and in our country may intervene and upset all the speculations. But if everything continues to go automatically as it is going now, then Stalin will just as automatically become dictator.
This was said not in 1935 or 1930, but in 1924. It was said not in malice, but quite objectively, on the basis of a keen grasp of the currents which had developed in a party in control of the state, the only party in the land.
Trotsky measured greatness not by the yardstick of success, or achievement and accomplishment per se. The greatness of a man ought to be measured as a total contribution to progress of mankind, the elevation of society, the improvement of the economic, political, social and cultural advance of man collectively and individually. Great men are largely men of genius or near genius in many fields. They were the initiators of great ideas and great social progress, and they lived in all ages.
If success alone is the measure of greatness, then greatness would indeed have been commonplace and there would be no men of distinction. The yardstick by which a Burnham could measure the greatness of Stalin could apply to a Hitler or a Mussolini, or to any man in any field who merely succeeded in achieving a goal.
Burnham writes of Stalin: ‘Long ago ... he succeeds.’ Impressive! What test of action? Success at the murder of all opponents! ‘The Moscow Trials have stood the test of action.’ Indeed! ‘Stalin’s political techniques show a freedom from conventional restrictions that is incompatible with mediocrity. The mediocre man is custom bound.’ Why does it follow? The same can be said of Hitler and Mussolini – all terrorists ‘show a freedom from conventional restrictions’.
But his greatness, continues Burnham, lies in Stalin’s theory of ‘multi-national Bolshevism’. ‘As a creative political idea’, he writes, ‘not merely or so much as a general theoretical conception of the nature of politics but as an idea fitted to implement politics in action, multi-national Bolshevism (Stalin’s contribution) ranks with Marx’s theory of the state, Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution, or Lenin’s analysis of capitalism in the stage of finance-imperialism.’ And this isn’t all. ‘Stalin has translated into a realistic political perspective the dream of theoretical geopolitics: domination of Eurasia.’ Like all of Burnham’s theories, these cannot stand the test of time or any other measure. And they are not necessarily new discoveries. Stalin’s theory of ‘multi-national Bolshevism’ is neither Bolshevik nor multi-national. It is merely Great Russian chauvinism expressing itself in its most blatant form; it is the triumph of those very ideas against which Lenin sought to organise the party through a bloc with Trotsky. Moreover, it is this very theory, and the practice which takes place under it, that is the Achilles heel of Stalinism, for it keeps the national minorities under Stalinist rule in a permanent state of opposition, ferment and struggle. Stalin’s ‘multi-national Bolshevism’ is a state of war of the Great Russians against all other nations in the Stalinist orbit. The measure of Burnham’s contribution is that he likens a modernised version of Tsarist policy on foreign affairs and on the national question to the great theoretical contributions of Marx, Lenin and Trotsky. Worst of all, this kind of contribution helps to muddy the already polluted waters in the struggle against Stalinism, for it pictures a power in that movement that is not there. Or to put it more accurately, it is precisely in that area of struggle that a movement against Stalinism is most ripe and contains the best possibilities of success. Realpolitik ! The scientific method!
In appraising the methods of Stalin, Burnham quotes approvingly from Hitler that politics was not conducted to satisfy ‘a few scholars or aesthetic sickly apes’ and which confounds intellectuals and writers who live in a ‘verbalised atmosphere’. For Burnham, even Stalin’s style, his rhetoric, was ‘in its own genre distinguished’. But Burnham overlooks this important fact: All of Stalin’s opponents were not just intellectuals and writers, observing events ‘coldly’ and ‘objectively’ from behind a typewriter. They were the men who organised and led the revolution. They were men of action as well as ideas. They stood out in the open, proclaimed their views and their goals, and went out and did their deeds. It was against men of this calibre that Stalin organised the bureaucracy.
When a Burnham rejects Trotsky’s description of Stalin as a mediocrity by asserting that the war established his greatness, he neglects to see that in so describing Stalin, Trotsky is comparing him with the truly great men of socialism, Marx, Engels, Kautsky, Mehring, Lenin, Luxemburg and even with himself. He wrote:
In attempting to find a historical parallel for Stalin, we have to reject not only Cromwell, Robespierre, Napoleon and Lenin, but even Mussolini and Hitler. We come close to an understanding of Stalin when we think in terms of Mustapha Kemal Pasha or perhaps Porfirio Diaz.
One need not subscribe to every word in the above to see the direction of Trotsky’s comparison and how much more accurate it is than Burnham’s re-evaluation.
Philip Rahv in his rejoinder to Burnham’s article in Partisan Review wrote pertinently on this question:
Stalin’s ruthlessness, his indifference to human suffering, and the unprecedented scale of his autocratic sway certainly link him, as Burnham remarks, to ‘the tradition of the most spectacular of the Tsars, of the great Kings of the Medes and Persians’, etc. But to conclude on that account that he is a great man is to judge him along purely aesthetic lines, that is, in the sense of the distinction drawn between the aesthetic approach and the ethical one. The aesthetic attitude is essentially that of the uncommitted person, of the detached onlooker gratified by spectacles. It is an attitude exhausted by the categories of ‘interesting’ on the one hand and the ‘boring’ on the other – categories as modern as they are inauthentic ... But in politics, as in morals, the criteria of aestheticism are the least meaningful. In the historical struggle to which we are committed, Stalinism deploys enormous forces, and the one thing we cannot afford to do is to abandon our interests and values in order to convert, through an aesthetic sleight of hand, the tragic struggle into a show of ‘pure politics’, a show in which Stalin inevitably appears as the star-performer. Pure politics, like pure art, is a delusion. The committed man, that is the man who has accepted the hazards of his political existence, can no more attend such a show than he can attend his own funeral.
We think that is good enough – for the time being. Time will permit a fuller portrait of the hangman of the Russian Revolution. It will assess his true role and fully, too. But we can see the outlines of that role now. Stalin will be seen as the architect of a new society of reaction, a society that was the expression of the social barbarism of our times. It will record that in the twentieth century of man’s development he introduced a new industrial slave society under a totalitarian police regime. He did so in the name of freedom and socialism, by the physical annihilation of a party which gave him fame and of men who made possible his political career. He was helped to success by methods which have their origins in earlier and backward societies, using cruelty with modern weapons and the employment of psychology to turn against man out of a burning inferiority which drove him to triumph with unparalleled force, cunning and duplicity. He has enriched the history of man’s malevolence as he has filled its pages with the blood of countless thousands.
If this is greatness ‘in the grand style’ it is the greatness of barbarism, the greatness of social decline, of disintegration, of chaos. Compared to the struggle of mankind to rise above its present peaks of achievement to loftier ones, freedom and progress Stalin’s contributions to history are those of retrogression, as a mockery of man’s highest aspirations.
* * *
Editor’s Notes
1. A slip on Glotzer’s part, this postscript was written 11 days after the Testament [MIA note].
2. If other parties had existed at the time of the struggle in the Bolshevik party, unquestionably that struggle would have taken on some other forms. The civil war which Stalin led inside the party may well have burst out in the country as a whole, and a different constellation of forces would most certainly have appeared. But it would have resembled the contending groups. Given the existence of a single party, that party reflected, in a distorted way, the tendencies within the country as a whole. Whether it would have brought results other than what did occur is impossible to say, given the general state of affairs. In any case, it is possible to say, after the experience of the revolution, that it would have been much, much better had there existed not one party, but many parties.



The Physiocrats, Six Lectures on the French Economists of the 18th Century
by Henry Higgs
The Langland Press, N.Y., 158 pages and index, $3.25.
The Langland Press, which only recently published Marx’s A History of Economic Theories, an English version of the Theorien über den Mehrwert, edited by Karl Kautsky, has now issued this little book.
The reader may be surprised to learn that with the issuance of this work, Langland Press has made available the only book in the English language devoted exclusively to the Physiocratic school of economic theory. Another work by Max Beer is not obtainable. If it were, together with Higgs’ book, they would still be the only two treating wholly with the famous French founders of Physiocracy. Considering the importance of the Physiocrats, as the first “school” of economic theory, the English speaking economists and economic historians have treated them quite shabbily.
Most of the writings of the Physiocrats are available only in the French. Yet their contributions have had a far more fundamental importance and lasting significance than the writings of literally dozens of other economists in the past two or three hundred years.
The book by Higgs is the compilation of lectures given more than fifty years ago. Its original publication occurred in 1896. But it has genuine historical value and is exceedingly informative as to the individuals who made up the group, their internal relations and the common struggle they carried on in behalf of their doctrines against the old aristocratic order in France.
The reader will find it quite useful, in fact, almost indispensable, to read this book together with A History of Economic Theories. McCarthy quite rightly points out that
“... Marx’s analyses of the Tableau Economique and his subsequent examination and criticism of national income flow as conceived by Quesnay (the author of the Tableau – A.G.), is the most searching examination of Physiocracy that has yet appeared in English.”
 
Higgs dates the Physiocratic school of economists from the meeting of Francois Quesnay and the elder Marquis of Mirabeau in July 1757. He advises that they were undoubtedly influenced in their thinking by the economist Cantillon. At least the latter’s ideas were faithfully represented in Mirabeau’s L’Ami des Hommes, in which Physiocratic economic ideas were presented publicly.
To understand the Physiocrats, it is necessary to bear in mind that their doctrine arose in a predominantly agricultural country, ruled over by a king with a large parasitic aristocratic class. The sovereign and the aristocracy lived off their share of the wealth produced by agriculture. Industry and commerce were yet but a segment of the national production. Restrictions to economic growth were many. The ruling classes siphoned off an enormous share of the productive wealth of the country – an almost complete loss to the economy – internal trade suffered many bars, and foreign trade was likewise largely prohibited. Under the conditions that prevailed, there was little possibility for a free development of the economy, such as was experienced by the Industrial Revolution in England.
Higgs effectively describes the conditions of life under the rule of the sovereign, and explains why the rise of the Physiocratic school appeared as an inevitable response to the terrible poverty of the population, the waste of land, and the economic decay of the times.
These were the decades immediately preceding the French Revolution. In retrospect, one can see the gathering forces of the Revolution. The Physiocrats, whether they were aware of it or not, and many certainly were aware of it, were fighting for liberation of the economy from the stranglehold of reactionary feudalism. Higgs quite rightly called them “not merely a school of economic thought; they were a school of political action.” Despite their “feudal appearances” the Physiocrats worked closely with the Encyclopaedists, and Minister Turgot helped to prepare the ground for the French Revolution.
In looking back at the Physiocrats, we can see the evolution of economic thought from their great beginnings to modern times, especially to Marx’s economic doctrines. One is reminded again, how each successive school or individual economist broadened the knowledge of mankind on the basis of the work of their predecessors.
Before Quesnay, Cantillon had written:
“Land is the source or material from which wealth is extracted ... human labor is the form which produces it, and wealth in itself is no other than the sustenance, the conveniences and the comforts of life.”
The Physiocrats regarded agriculture and commerce as the two sources of wealth in France. But commerce and industry were, in their minds, mere branches of agriculture, the latter being the primary and indispensable source of them. According to them, manufacture yields nothing: it is a sterile endeavor! Higgs summarizes the Tableau Economique, in the following way:
(1) Labor expended in industry (les travaux d’industrie), as opposed to agriculture, does not multiply wealth, though (2) it contributes to population and the increase of wealth, unless (3) it occupies men to the prejudice of agriculture, in which case it has the contrary effect. (4) The wealth of the agriculturist begets agricultural wealth. (5) Industrial labor tends to increase the revenue from the land, and this again supports industry. (6) A nation having a large trade in its raw products can always keep up a relatively large trade in manufactures; but (7) if it has little of the first and is reduced to the second for subsistence, it is in a dangerous and insecure condition. (8) A large internal trade in manufactured articles can only be maintained by the revenue from the land. (9) A nation with a large territory which depreciates its raw products to favor manufacturers, destroys itself in all directions. (10) The advantages of external trade do not consist in the increase of money. (11) The balance of trade does not indicate the advantage of trade or the state of wealth of each nation, which is (12) to be judged by both internal and external trade and especially by the first. (13) A nation which extracts from its soil, its men, and its navigation the best possible result needs to grudge the trade of its neighbors, and (14) in reciprocal commerce nations which sell the most useful or necessary commodities have the advantage over those which sell luxuries.
Quesnay then proposes that, to quote from Higgs again, the government should make possible “freedom in the production and circulation of goods; the abolition or diminution of tolls on transport; the extinction of local or personal privileges in dues of the same character; the repair of roads and of river communication; the suppression of the arbitrary discretion of private persons in subordinate administrations, so far as the national revenue was concerned.”
Given their basic conceptions, it is easily understandable why the Physiocrats should demand that taxes to support the state and the aristocracy be collected at their source, i.e., a single, simple, direct tax (impot unique) levied upon the land and not to exceed one-third of the ground rent (produit net). In this every consumer would pay a proportionate share of the tax because the landlord and farmer would adjust prices of raw materials to meet them.
The Physiocrats believed the best political system to be the single hereditary sovereign with a “fee-simple” interest in the nation. To Quesnay, the right to liberty meant the right to property which the state ought to defend. The sole function of the state was to guarantee security and to extend the powers of the state would be to encroach upon individual liberty. For the specific purpose he had in mind, the state could not be too strong, and constitutional checks and balances would weaken this central authority to uphold the right to property and guarantee security. What of the despotism of the state? That would be tempered by enlightened public opinion.
Most important of all, however, is the fact that it was the Physiocrats “to whom credit is due for having first analyzed capital (Marx).” Given the agricultural character of the country they could hardly be blamed for having in the mid-years of the 18th century thought that bourgeois forms of production “necessarily resembled natural forms.” They understood the meaning of value and labor power, and were among the first to seek the origin of surplus value.
Marx points out that:
“In their researches into the origin of surplus value, the Physiocrats shifted the emphasis from the sphere of circulation into that of immediate production. They thus posed the fundamentals of the analysis of capitalist production.”
Marx points out that they did understand the meaning of surplus value but not in its purely capitalist form. They had not reduced value “to its bare substance, the quantity of labor or labor time,” but they did understand that “labor alone is productive which creates surplus value, whose product contains greater value than the sum of values consumed in the production of this product.” But, as we have already indicated, it was in agriculture that the Physiocrats discovered the difference between the value of labor power and the “value it can yield, i.e., the surplus value which the purchase of labor power yields to the employer.”
They believed only agricultural labor to be productive labor, because, in the conditions of the French economy, they saw it as the only labor producing surplus value and “knew no other form of surplus value than ground rent.”
As we have already pointed out the Physiocrats thought the industrial laborer added nothing to matter, but only modified its form. And agriculture supplied him with his materials. Everything pointed back to the land, and as agricultural labor is the only productive labor, ground rent, “the form of surplus value which differentiates agricultural from industrial labor, seemed to them the unique form of surplus value.”
Living in our age, it is easy to see why the “true profit of capital, of which ground rent is only a derivative, did not exist for the Physiocrats.” In one brilliant paragraph, Marx summarizes his analysis of the Physiocrats:
Physiocracy was truly the first systematic analysis of capitalist production and the first to present as natural and eternal laws of production the conditions under which capital produces and is produced. On the other hand, it bore no slight resemblance to a bourgeois reproduction of the feudal system and of the regime of the landed gentry; and the industrial sphere, where capital begins its autonomous evolution, seemed to it, unproductive branches of labor, merely parasitic complements to agriculture. As the first condition of its development, capital requires separation of labor from the soil, primordial instrument of labor become an independent power in the hands of a particular class. In this conception, the landowner appears to be the true capitalist, to be the one who appropriates the surplus labor. The feudal system thus finds itself reproduced and explained sub specie of bourgeois production. Agriculture seems the only branch where capitalist production – that is to say the production of surplus value – is realized. While feudalism embourgeoises itself, bourgeois society takes on a feudal demeanor.
These appearances deceived the aristocratic followers of Dr. Quesnay, among others the quaint, patriarchal Mirabeau the elder. In the works of the other leaders of Physiocracy, particularly in Turgot, this appearance completely vanishes, and the Physiocratic system presents itself as the new capitalist society taking shape within the framework of feudalism. It therefore corresponds to bourgeois society at the period of its birth from out the feudal system. It is for this reason that its birthplace was France, a predominantly agricultural country, and not England, where commerce, industry and maritime navigation predominate.
It is true that the Physiocrats made many errors, but they were the first to seek a fundamental economic explanation for the phenomena they observed. Though they regarded use value as mere matter, and surplus value as a simple gift of nature, they did seek the explanation for surplus value in the appropriation of the labor of others, and to “base this appropriation upon the exchange of commodities ...”
Because the Physiocrats, in their glorification of land ownership, demanded that all taxes be charged to ground rent alone, they sought to free industry, the “sterile” portion of the economy. It is to the Physiocrats therefore that we are indebted, if not for the origin of the term, then at least the popularization of laissez faire, laissez aller, characteristic of an earlier capitalism.
The Physiocrats, Higgs reminds us, did form “the first and most compact school to be encountered in the history of economics.” His book describes their enthusiasm, their unity, and their daring and original thinking in the field of economics, since they endeavored to treat the subject as an organized science.
Although the “school” did not long survive, expiring even before the French Revolution, its ideas influenced many, most notably Adam Smith. In retrospect, however, it is easy to see why advancing industrial capitalism would push the doctrines of the Physiocrats into the background, though many of their fundamental ideas were to influence economic thought of the future decades.
It is a pity then, that so little written material exists in the English language devoted solely to the Physiocrats. True, Eric Roll treated the Physiocrats handsomely in his A History of Economic Thought, as others have done. But on the whole, no great amount of works appears on this historically important group of thinkers. In issuing the Higgs book, as well as the Marx volume, Langland Press has made a considerable contribution to English economic literature.
 



Informed persons know that the Independent Socialist League (its predecessor, the Workers Party) and the Socialist Youth League appear on the Attorney General’s list of “subversive organizations.” They also know that for a number of years, the Independent Socialist League has endeavored to obtain two things from the Department of Justice under four successive Attorneys general (three appointees of the old Administration, and the new one under the Eisenhower government): the basis for the placement of the ISL, et al., on the list and a hearing at which the original action of the present Supreme Court Justice, Tom Clark, could be challenged and refuted.
The efforts of the ISL to achieve these two simple things is a four-year story that winds through the elaborate bureaucratic jungle of Washington. This time, however, the issue is one that goes to the very heart of democratic processes and involves at once the witchhunt atmosphere that has been slowly and with fearful certainty spreading to almost every aspect of American life.
The only tangible result of these efforts of the ISL to be removed from the list came a few months ago when the Attorney General, for the first time, presented a statement of grounds and interrogatories which the organization replied to in preparation for a hearing. A hearing, however, is still pressed for against a reluctant Department of Justice.
Back in 1948, President Truman issued Executive Order 9835 to his attorney general to set up a list of subversive organizations which would serve as an employment guide to governmental departments. Ostensibly, membership in any organization listed by the Attorney General would bar one from government employment. This simple purpose of the list was immediately obscured by its publication, and before long it became a nationwide index used in private industry, the entertainment world, private organizations, etc. A series of private organizations mushroomed up to police the nation and to make sure of the issue of “anti-communism” as a private racket – of course, in no more objectionable form than politicians who, in their general incompetence, have made it their sole stock-in-trade.
The original responsibility for this offense against democratic processes and civil liberties, belongs to former President Truman. For under his executive order, no provisions were created whereby organizations listed by the Attorney General could challenge the action. Secrecy characterized the whole conduct of the Attorney General. No organization ever knew that it was being considered for the list and no organization was ever informed of any decision that it would be placed on the list. None, of course, knew the basis for the action of the Attorney General.
Efforts to obtain that information were unavailing, since all the successive Attorneys General took the position that the Executive Order 9835 did not provide for disclosure of the basis for their decisions. The Executive Order not only did not provide for such a disclosure, it did not provide for a hearing of any kind at which a proscribed organization might challenge the listing. Neither was any provision made for notifying an organization directly that it had been placed on a list. The organizations listed learned about it simultaneously on a day in 1948 when the Attorney General merely sent out a nationwide press release announcing the existence and membership of the list.
In protesting its listing, the former Workers Party demanded an immediate hearing at which it could challenge the Attorney General’s action. It demanded, also, the basis upon which the Attorney General had acted. Both requests were denied to it: the Attorney General, under the Executive Order, would grant no hearing, and he would not disclose the basis for placing the Workers Party on the list.
Thereafter, the ISL continued to pursue the matter and finally agreed to attend a meeting to present its point of view before an assistant to the Attorney General. The reader, however, should bear in mind that when the ISL agreed to such a meeting it had not the slightest idea of what charges it had to meet. In preparing a written petition to Attorney General McGrath, prior to the meeting, for removal from the list, it proceeded on certain assumptions about the methods of the Department of Justice, and its subordinate Federal Bureau of Investigation, which it was also certain played a determining part in the case of the ISL.
At its meeting with Assistant Attorney General Raymond P. Whearty, in January of 1951, the ISL delegation, accompanied by Rowland Watts, Secretary of the Workers Defense League, was advised that Whearty had been on the committee which drew up the list. He declared that he was certain that a prima facie case could be made out for his action in any court! What the prima facie case was, Whearty could not disclose! It was based on information supplied by official and unofficial informants!
The delegation assumed that the Attorney General adopted a criteria that an organization which advocated the overthrow of the government by force and violence, supported a foreign government, or was agent of such a government should be on the list. It was led to this belief by the nature of the partial information contained in the press. Therefore, the delegation made a forceful statement of its views to Mr. Whearty, and on the above-stated assumption, refuted the position of the Attorney General.
 
There was undoubtedly a certain folly to the trip to Washington in the first place because of the position taken by the Attorney General in refusing to divulge any information or grant a formal hearing which would require an official decision by him in response to the protest and challenge made by the ISL. Yet, so strong was the position taken by the ISL and its counsel, that Whearty made a commitment to the delegation that the case of the ISL (and the SYL) would be reconsidered.
What happened thereafter was that the Attorney General refused to honor the commitment. The ISL was given a complete runaround on its case. Letters to the Attorney General requesting information and a decision on the reconsideration, were either not answered, or, only answered upon repeated requests for a reply. The replies merely shifted the ground of the Attorney General’s refusal to honor the commitment made. More accurately, the Attorney General stated that the re-examination had been made but the decision would not be disclosed until the termination of a case or two which had been languishing in the District Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. By now two years had passed and a new Administration took over in Washington.
Immediately after the presidential election of 1952, rumors began to circulate that a “new deal” would follow in the scandal-ridden Department of Justice. Mr. Herbert Brownell, with a reputation as a firm believer in democratic processes, civil liberties and the Bill of Rights, was appointed as Attorney General. The country was told that the new Administration would revoke the Executive Order of Mr. Truman and issue a new one to guarantee that there would be no violations of the democratic rights of any person or organization. Organizations threatened with placement on any index, would be notified of charges and given the opportunity of a hearing before any decisions were drawn.
It was tempting to think that the old list might go out of existence, superseded by a new one based on charges against an organization, and followed by hearings at which charges could be refuted, witnesses confronted and cross examined. But it didn’t work out just that way. No, the old list, which had created so much mischief in the land, was retained. It was learned that Mr. Brownell would apply the aforementioned procedure only to new organizations who were not yet on the list (these were becoming fewer and fewer). But even here, the formal terms of the procedure of the new administration became a meaningless thing, because the new Attorney General, as in the case of the National Lawyers Guild, convicted the organization in a public statement before any charges were submitted to it or any hearing held. Thus, the National Lawyers Guild must now fight its case after it had been one-sidedly aired in public by the man elected to defend the democratic rights of any and all citizens!
Upon the announcement of the new executive order of President Eisenhower, the ISL immediately telegraphed the Attorney General protesting its retention on the list of “subversive organizations” and demanding an immediate hearing where it could contest the list and its placement on it. Under the new procedures adopted by the Attorney General, any organization demanding a hearing within a specified time from publication of its listing, could have one. The Attorney General would, upon such a request, present the protesting organization with a list of charges and interrogatories to which a reply must be forthcoming. The reply was to be accompanied with a formal request, once more, for a hearing. Thereupon, the Attorney General would grant a hearing presumably based upon his charges and interrogatories and the reply of the organization in question.
In July of this year, five years after its original listing by Tom Clark, the ISL received from the present Attorney General, a Statement of Grounds containing charges against the ISL and Interrogatories, reiterating the charges and requiring answers by the ISL. The reply was made on September 3 and returned to the Attorney General by Max Shachtman and Albert Gates, as officers of the ISL and in behalf of the organization. (See Labor Action of September 28, for full text of Attorney General’s charge and the reply.) There remains now the setting of a date by the Attorney General for a hearing. This, however, is slow to come forth as we shall show at the conclusion of this story.
The Statement of Grounds and Interrogatories of the Attorney General is an unusual document which has already brought protests from many quarters. It is sometimes difficult to fathom the bureaucratic mind with police powers, whose interests are based upon an active hostility to any non-conformist views or doctrine which challenge the validity of this society and its state power. It is disorderly; it is primitive.
The Attorney General’s document contains not merely the stock charges which are leveled against Stalinist organizations, but because someone apparently advised the Department of Justice that the ISL is undoubtedly somewhat different from a Stalinist organization, contains new ones which mark a departure from the ordinary or usual position taken by an administrative body of the government in former times.
Nowhere does the document of the Attorney General charge directly that the ISL, and its predecessor, the Workers Party, ever advocated the overthrow of the government by “force and violence” or by “unconstitutional means,” even though they are on the list on those grounds. The most the Attorney General does is to place an interpretation on Marxism and Leninism and declare that the ISL is Marxist and Leninist. As there is no direct charge made against the aforementioned that they advocated “force and violence” no refutation can be made except in a negative way that the ISL does not advocate those methods for social change in the United States.
Is the ISL (and was the WP?) an agent of a foreign power, or some reprehensible and objectionable international organization? No, the government does not make any such charge! It merely asks the question: whether the ISL is such an agent, and whether it does belong to any international body. It knew the answer before it even asked it.
The Department of Justice, as was clear from its document, is in a difficult position because in the case of the ISL, et al., it is dealing with a truly independent, revolutionary socialist organization, which does not fit into any of the categories of its proscription. It knows the ISL as an anti-capitalist, anti-Stalinist organization, which is opposed to all imperialism, United States as well as Russian, as a socialist anti-war organization, which stands for the abolition of capitalism and its replacement by socialism. Its crime then is clear: It is opposed to capitalism! For the Eisenhower Administration, that is enough. Here then is the “crime” of the ISL.
“The ‘changes’ advocated by the WP, ISL and SYL, if carried out, would result in the destruction of the existing form of government in the United States, and in place thereof would be established an entirely new social philosophy and system of ‘proletarian internationalism’ ... (it teaches that) capitalists control the existing form of government in the United States and use it against the workers as a repressive force.”
 
Throughout, the document of the Attorney General is an unconcealed defense of capitalism and its class divisions against socialism and its liberating ideal. The fight of the ISL is therefore in essence a fight for the right to advocate the ideas of Marxian socialism against a government that openly proclaims itself the government of big business and “free enterprise.”
The Socialist Reading Labor Advocate, mindful of the many differences it has with the ISL in the field of socialist theory and practice, nevertheless came to its defense editorially, because it saw instantly the meaning of the position taken by the Attorney General.
The Weekly People, organ of the Socialist Labor Party, in violent disagreement with the ISL, likewise was able to tear the document of the Attorney General to shreds, to show how it was speaking in the narrow interests of the American capitalist class.
Norman Thomas, with whom we have our share of differences, was quite astounded at the nature of the Attorney General’s Statement of Grounds and Interrogatories and made known his severe criticism. He and others are fully aware that the position taken by the Attorney General is such that it could be employed against almost any movement or organization solely on the grounds of opposition to capitalism. John Finerty, the noted labor lawyer, likewise voiced his sharp critical attitude toward the position taken by the Attorney General.
What is really involved in the case of the ISL are fundamental and decisive questions which relate to the future of civil liberties in the United States. This is the first time that an organization listed on the Attorney General’s index of “subversive organizations” has received the grounds upon which the Department of Justice acts in these matters. It is a document not calculated to hearten anyone about the prospects of civil liberties and civil rights, and democratic processes in the country. Socialism and its advocacy has become the object of government proscription and forms a new legal basis for administrative action against political opponents.
Having conformed to the rules of procedure set down by the Attorney General, the ISL had thought that by this time it would have received a date for its first formal hearing upon the charges and Interrogatories. After waiting for a number of weeks, it telegraphed the Attorney General inquiring whether any date had been set for a hearing. The reply received from Assistant Attorney General Warren Olney III was couched in such provisional and hypothetical terms, that at the time of this writing, it cannot be said with any certainty that a hearing will actually be forthcoming.
In his letter to the ISL, Mr. Olney merely said that the ISL would be informed in ample time to prepare for “any hearing” which “may take place.” The ISL in turn replied pointing out that the hearing could not be made such a provisional matter, since the procedures of the Attorney General state that upon a reply to interrogatories and a request for a hearing, the Attorney General “will” set a date and notify the organization in question by registered mail.
At the time of this writing, the ISL is still awaiting a forthright reply from the Attorney General.
 



“It is a paradox of our time,” Camus writes in his preface, “that I should have to introduce Rosmer today whereas the contrary would be more decent.”
To us Rosmer’s credentials should be well known in any event: revolutionary syndicalist before World War I, internationalist during the war, rallied to the Russian Revolution in 1917, participated in the second, third and fourth congress of the Comintern, member of the executive committee of the Comintern from June 1920 to June 1921 and of its bureau since the Congress of Tours; Lozovsky’s collaborator and co-founder of the Red Trade-Union International; member of the Comintern delegation to the Congress of the three Internationals in Berlin and to the fusion congress of the 2nd and Vienna (2½) Internationals; in the French CP, member of the Executive Committee, the Political Bureau and the Directing Committee of L’Humanité from 1923 to March 1924; took sides with the Left Opposition in the struggle against the bureaucracy, participated in the French Trotskyist movement, later joined the group around La Revolution Proletarienne, where he is today, defending an independent, third-camp revolutionary position.
“He has now written a very necessary and timely book. [1] It is necessary because few living records subsist of the first years following the Russian Revolution, the ‘origins of communism.’ There is, of course, John Reed’s Ten Days and Arthur Ransome’s Six Weeks in Russia published in 1919, but they are more limited in their scope. The period covered by this book extends from 1920 to Lenin’s death in 1924 – decisive years for the Russian Revolution and for the fate of the World Revolution. Rosmer describes the congresses of the Comintern and of the Red Trade-Union International at which he was present; also episodes from the civil war, Kronstadt, the Workers’ Opposition, the trial of the SR’s, the origins of the French and the Italian CP; the discussion on the trade-union question in 1921, the war against Poland, the NEP, Genoa, Rapallo, the occupation of the Ruhr, the collapse of the German revolution in 1923, Lenin’s death. Through the sober descriptions clearly appear the immense hopes of these years, the intense participation of all in the shaping of policy, the democratic, informal habits, the honesty and sincerity of what was then the communist movement, the revolutionary passion. Also the insane fear and hatred of the bourgeoisie, especially of the French bourgeoisie under the Poincare government. All the great leaders of international communism appear in these pages, particularly Lenin, Trotsky, Bukharin, Radek, Zinoviev, but also many others. In these years, Rosmer saw Stalin exactly twice: once intriguing with Zinoviev and Kamenev against Trotsky, and another time lobbying in the corridors of the 4th Congress of the Comintern, “in uniform even though the war was over for four years and in high boots even though it was in the month of July.”
Rosmer’s purpose in writing the book has been, above all, to re-establish historical truth. “I will have achieved my purpose,” he says, “if I succeed in focusing attention once again on a forgotten epoch, and if my contribution to its study helps to better understand it.” He sets out to uncover painstakingly all the historical facts that have been smothered through the years by several successive layers of lies, so that we may once more learn from them. Among the falsifications he has specifically in mind are not only the Stalinist ones but also those like Ypsilon’s Pattern for World Revolution or the piles of nonsense written about Kronstadt. His tone is restrained throughout: a sober, matter of fact account of events. In his introduction he writes: “I will simply say: I was there, and this is the way things happened.” His comments are measured and few – too few almost. One might have wished a fuller discussion of certain political issues such as the trade-union question, the early opposition groups, perhaps others. Only at the end he draws a conclusion. After having shown by his account how different the revolution was in its beginnings from the outfit that today pretends to govern in its name, Rosmer writes:
“Stalinism, in order to maintain itself, to maintain its hold over the working class, has to appear as the heir and the mainstay of the socialist revolution, as the incarnation of the Russian Revolution. This is a lie; it is neither one nor the other. Why allow it to claim descendancy from a revolution it has betrayed? To identify its totalitarian state with the October Revolution is to serve its aims and to support its propaganda. For its power will collapse when the socialist mask is torn from its face and when the workers, seeing it as it is, in its totalitarian nakedness, cease to support it.”
It is best to conclude this brief survey with some excerpts from Camus’ preface, because they contain as good an evaluation of the book as can be made:
“It is difficult indeed to be a witness to the degeneration of a revolution without losing faith in its necessity. This problem is precisely one that concerns us, and for this reason Rosmer’s book is relevant today. It concerns itself with a historical phenomenon which is in the center of our preoccupations: the rise and degeneration of revolutions ... But, in order to be able to think rationally about this problem, one must not be one of those who insult revolution itself and who see an abortion in every birth. To draw the necessary conclusions from the decadence of a revolution, one must be one of those who suffer from this decadence, not of these who greet it joyfully.
“As far as I am concerned ... of all the guides that offer themselves so generously, I prefer to choose those, like Rosmer, who do not offer themselves readily, who do not rush to the aid of the winning side and who, refusing both dishonor and desertion, have preserved for years, in day-to-day struggles, the precarious chance of a revival. Yes, our comrades in this fight are those who are scoffed at because they are not powerful and because they seem to stand alone. But they are not alone. Only servitude is lonely, even then it drapes itself in a thousand voices to applaud its own power. What those few have maintained, on the other hand, is what we still live by today. If they hadn’t maintained it, we would have nothing to live by.”
* * *
Footnote
1. Alfred Rosmer – MOSCOU SOUS LENINE – Les origines du communisme – 316 pages. Preface by Albert Camus. – Editions Pierre Horay. Paris, 1953. 600 frs.
 



Of the organizations in the Communist International, none have suffered and continue to suffer such mangling as the Young Communist International. With a splendid background – the struggle of the Youth against the war in unison and under the political guidance of the Bolsheviks, the Russian Revolution, and the splendid leadership of comrades Lenin and Trotsky during the early days of the organization of the Communist International – the Y.C.I. was destined to enjoy a healthy growth and activity.
Education and participation in mass activity – these were the watchwords of the Youth Leagues. Progress was inevitable, The Leagues everywhere enjoyed considerable growth. They embodied a revolutionary enthusiasm and energy that gave rise to splendid activity. The education in Communism and the participation in the class struggles prepared hundreds and thousands of young revolutionaries for future leadership in the ranks of the Party.
This ascent, however, in the ranks of the Young Communist International was halted abruptly. In preparation of the struggle against the Russian Opposition under the leadership of comrades Trotsky, Rakovsky, etc., the Stalinist bureaucracy aimed heavy fire against the Youth International. The Youth International was made a mere appendage to the Right-Center bloc. Made to think that the youth alone were the leaders in the struggle for correct political lines in the ranks of the revolutionary movement, the theory of “vanguardism” once again made its way in the Youth International. From this theory grew a negative attitude toward the education of the Youth and their participation in mass activity. In place of a training for the future, the international leagues entered a stage of heated participation in “high politics” and into an unprecedented period of factionalism. There developed in the ranks of the youth cynicism for the elementary tasks of organization.
Beginning with the period of 1923–24 a state of passivity, opportunism and stagnation set in. Bureaucratic direction displaced the education of the Youth. Mass activity was shunted for an accelerated condition of factionalism. The scandalous maltreatment of the Young Communist International left horrible gaps in its ranks. The Russian League alone withstood the heavy decline of its organization.
In Germany the social democratic and Reformist youth gained heavily at the expense of the Young Communist League. In France the League lost 12,000 members and has today a membership of only 3,000. The opportunist policy of the Right-Centrist leadership was not without its effect on the British League. There with the splendid situation caused through the split in the Guild of Youth (Social Democratic) and the General Strike, the League numbers only a few hundred (even Bulky Bill Rust cannot count more). In Sweden the Right wing split carried more than half of the Youth membership into its ranks. The young workers of Austria remain under social democratic influence while the Communist influence is almost nil. The American League continues to remain at a static membership of between 1,000 and 1,500 members. Here the fruits of the Lovestone leadership and the present incompetent, pretentious and impotent leadership of Steuben, Green and Harvey have made matters only worse. (Of the American League more will be said in other articles.) And so on ad infinitum.
The invention of the spurious “third period” theory and the rise of adventurism in political policy has only made matters worse. It has added greatly to the already achieved sectarianism and isolation. The present policies of the Y.C.I. and its Leagues only promise to perfect this condition.
This situation in the Youth movement is but a reflection of the situation in the Communist International. The past seven years history of the Comintern is mirrored in the Leagues, though at times even more grotesque and more accentuated. The solution of the present crisis in the International Youth movement can come about only through a solution of the problems facing the Communist International. The struggle of the Opposition against the present revisionism, adventurism and opportunism alone will solve this crisis. A resurgence and re-education is necessary – on the basis of a correct political program. That program is the platform of the Opposition. Participation in the ranks of the Opposition and common struggle together with the Party comrades is an imperative task of the Youth. The bureaucratic Stalinist leadership cannot bring about a revitalizing of the International Youth movement. That task belongs to the Opposition. In the solution of the present crisis in the Communist movement the Youth will play no little role.
 



In recent weeks the struggle of the Indian proletariat and peasantry against the intense exploitation of British imperialism and their home bourgeoisie, and for independence has been intensified. In Calcutta six were killed and over 100 injured in a demonstration against the domination of British capitalism. One killed and over thirty-three injured in Karachi. Similar conditions are to be observed everywhere. Trolley cars turned over and burned, telegraph wires cut, means of communication destroyed, are evidence of the temper of the masses. The British government is using every conceivable form of repression against the Indian proletariat. Armored cars, police armed with guns, lances, and sticks, militia, and civil troops are mobilized to thwart the struggle.
Thus far the movement is under the leadership of the Swaraji Party, the organization of the national bourgeoisie and petty-bourgeoisie. Under the head of Gandhi with a policy of non-resistance, the movement is being misled into channels that will spell its death. When the Indian Nationalist Party, through the initiative of Gandhi, adopted at their congress in January, the resolution calling for “complete Indian independence” it only expressed the pressure of the masses. Gandhi’s “march to the sea,” with the intentions of boycotting the salt Laws, and in this manner struggle for independence, carried with it elements that destroyed the original purpose. It must be remembered that the policy of Gandhi and the Party is that the independence of India can only be gained through a boycotting of the products of Great Britain and a “struggle” for independence with a policy of non-resistance (non-violence) to the British government. “Non-resistance” to the severe exploitation that the Indian masses undergo, to the shooting of striking and demonstrating workers, can only result in the betrayal of the revolutionary movement in India.
 
The Masses Struggle Despite Gandhi
Paradoxical as it may seem, Gandhi’s mobilization of the masses, on the basis of non-resistance has already taken the form of militant struggle and RESISTANCE of the masses to the brutal regime of the British “Socialist” government. The demonstrating workers have taken the only possible course in the struggle against the domination of the British government – open struggle and resistance It has as always overstepped the limits which the policy of Gandhi places on the movement for independence.
India is the foundation rock of the British Empire. The British investment in India today is over four billion dollars. Over fourteen percent of the British exports are sent to India. It is easy to understand, then, why the struggle of the Indian proletariat and peasantry for independence will meet the stubborn resistance of the British government. That stubborn resistance is already exhibited in the present reprisals. One can easily see how much fiercer will be the resistance of the British government when the movement for independence outstrips its present stage and reaches the point of an open conquest for power.
 
The British Labor Government Defends the Empire
The role of the “socialist” government of Great Britain is highly illuminating. The policy of Baldwin and the Conservative Party and MacDonald and the Labor Party alike is the use of violence against the Indian masses. Both defend the interests of British capitalism with enthusiasm. This is understandable, when we recall that one of the planks of the MacDonald administration is to save the tottering Empire. One cannot say that efforts of MacDonald and his “socialist” government in this direction have been lacking. The role of the Labor government in India is only an additional commentary to the fact that the only solution for the proletariat is the complete destruction of capitalism and the establishment of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
One of the sad features in the present situation in India is the almost total lack of a Communist Party. The policy of the Communist International in India calls for the organization of almost every kind of Party except that of a bona fide Communist Party. The Stalin leadership continues to carry over the same policy that was responsible for the glaring defeat suffered in China. The organization of a Workers and Peasants Party remains on the agenda of the Comintern in India. This flows from its false orientation that the revolution in India must be accomplished through and together with the national bourgeoisie. It led to the subordination of the Communist Party and its eventual collapse in China. It can have no other result in India. Neither the big bourgeoisie nor the petty bourgeoisie can lead a successful revolution for the overthrow of British imperialism. Neither can this be done by the most revolutionary trade unions. For that, the leadership of a Communist Party, which centralizes the political action of the masses, which gives it direction in the struggle, and prepares the revolution, is necessary. Without a genuine Communist Party capable of carrying out such tasks, one cannot hope for a successful struggle of the revolutionary masses in India.
 



The five power naval conference to be held January in London is another chapter in war preparations. The conference will present a picture of spectacular jockeying for advantageous positions and for further maneuvers in alignment of forces.
The world map today offers a sectionally divided picture. By agreement, the imperialist powers have designated the rights of possession among themselves to the extent that no part of the globe, with the exception of the Soviet Union, is free from capitalist domination. The last arrangement in division of territory was made following the last war and the defeat of the Central powers. But what appeared to world capitalism then as a “fair” distribution of the spoils, has today become obsolete in view of the decisive economic changes that have taken place in post war capitalism.
 
The New Economic Center of Gravity
The outstanding change in world economy is the transference of the economic center of gravity from Europe under the hegemony of England, to the United States. At the same time all facts point to the decline of England. American capitalism, contrary to its pre-war position, when it maintained Itself primarily on the basis of the home market, has its roots sunk in the soil of world economy. It dominates the European market, has penetrated into Asia, South America, etc., and in this way brought about the sharpest antagonisms between itself and the other powers.
America is pressing England ruthlessly. Any alliance between them can only mean the further domination of the U.S. The struggle for markets and a redistribution of colonial possessions and “spheres of influence” is driving headlong to war. This is especially clear in the pre-conference discussions and negotiations. While these changed economic conditions force the United States to lock horns with its outstanding competitor, England, they equally force her into sharpest antagonism with France, Japan and other imperialists. The contraction of the world market is forcing its solution through war. It is the only way that capitalism solves its contradictions.
The pre-conference atmosphere is an extremely bitter one. The preliminary discussions between the U.S. and England are looked upon with disfavor by the other powers. Japan, France and Italy reject the ratios of naval armaments laid down by these two countries. If there are to be ratios, they too demand an equal voice. Open talk of war is on the order of the day. John Steele in the Chicago Tribune of December 20, speaks of England as “our enemy”. Every power assumes a most bellicose attitude, backing it with threats to one another.
 
The Conflict in Ratios
The matter of ratios in armaments will appear to be the main issue at London. This alleged issue of difference is indicative of the nature of the conference. The ratio of 6–5–3 as agreed upon by the U.S. and England is disputed by the other three participants. Japan asks for an increase in the ratio to 10–7–7. France demands a naval strength of 800,000 tons. Italy calls for parity with France, with the added statement that she is willing to concede this point if France will in return allow her concessions in Northern Africa.
The issue of parity and ratios, if accepted at face value, can mean nothing. What is important for the unmasking of the London fraud is the more cogent question of actual war preparations. It is necessary to remind the working class that the parity agreements are not parities based upon a decrease in armaments and the ratios of strength, but are on the contrary parities and ratios based upon increased building and further expenditures for war. The establishment of parity or ratios between the imperialists is a meaningless cloak to mislead the workers into false security. Agreements between these robbers are less than worthless. The whole history of capitalist diplomacy shows this. London will be the scene where the gauging of each others strength will be attempted, where the more concrete steps for war can be taken, and from where a barrage of pacifism will be laid under the direction of reformism and social democracy.
The possesion of naval bases will play a tremendous role in the coming conflict of the seas. They serve as an intermediary point for supplies, refueling and ammunition. An examination of these naval bases of the three leading powers, England, U.S. and Japan will shed light not only upon the strength and role of these bases, but will at the same time give a picture of the areas of conflict. It will be seen too, that naval bases exist where the interests of the imperialists are the greatest, and as such serve also as a center of military operations against colonial uprisings. England’s Naval Bases Taking England first, her twenty-six bases form an almost complete circle around the globe. Beginning at Wei-hai-wei, on the East coast of China, directly opposite Japan, starts the first of a long arc of bases. Following along the coast Southward lies Hong-Kong. Singapore and Rangoon on the South marks the complete arc around China. From there a continuous path is cut around the whole of Southern Asia (in the main, India) beginning at Trincomales, to Columbo, and Bombay. The bases then proceed thru the straits separating Africa from Asia, at Aden, Port Sudan, Suez, Port Said, Malta and Gib[raltar. In the Med]iterranean Sea lies Malta and at the entrance to the Sea lies Gibraltar. Here we find a long line of naval bases stretching from the East coast of China, encircling the Southern coast of Asia, passing thru the straits, making not only a border of Africa, but also the Near East and Europe. Africa is similarly circumscribed. Aden, Port Sudan, Suez, Port Said, Malta and Gibraltar on the North, Freetown, and St. Helena, on the west, Simontown at the South Cape and Port Louis off the East Coast. In this hemisphere are located seventeen of England’s total of twenty six bases, since it is here that her possessions are the most numerous and the antagonisms the greatest.
Central and South America mark the second decisive section of imperialist exploitation. Here as well as in Asia, England and American interests clash most violently. In this section, England’s bases begin at Halifax on the East coast of Canada, continue to Bermuda, East of the United States thence to Kingston and Port Castries in the Carribean Sea. Port Stanley, East of the Southern end of South America marks the fifth base forming one line along the Atlantic coast of North and South America. The remaining four bases are in the Pacific. Esquimau on the West coast of Canada, King George and Sydney in Australia, and Auckland in New Zealand, complete them.
The seven bases of the United States are concentrated in the Central America and Pacific territories. On the map they present an almost straight line. Located in the Caribbean are two, one at Guantanamo Bay and the other at the Virgin Isles. Number three is located at the Panama Canal, which is of vast importance, since the canal serves as a gateway between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, rendering transference of forces relatively less difficult. The remaining four bases are In the Pacific beginning at Pearl Harbor, proceeding westward to Samoa, Guam and the Philippines.
Japan’s six bases lie off the coast of China at Ryoyun, Eiko, Chingkai, Futamiko, Amami-o-shima and Bako. They are all definitely in the area of China, the main seat of Japan’s interest.
 
England’s Favored Position
From the above it appears that England is in a favored military position. There is no question but that the posession of so overwhelmingly a number of bases are a positive advantage over the supposedly greater fighting force of the U.S. But this is not the most decisive question. The bases indicate the areas of conflict, the centers of the greatest competition, but do not necessarily mean that the possession of a majority of them is the overwhelming factor.
The most decisive factor in the event of war is the resources of the various contenders. Increased building and expenditures presents a problem to all of the powers with the exception of the United States. Her resources place her in a most favored position. This is indisputable. While France demands her share of extended naval construction she is at the same time in favor of a let-up because of lack of resources. Likewise Japan, and England feel the difficulties. America alone can continue with a steady building program and will maintain this position. In addition no other country has its industries so completely organized on a war basis as the U.S. Particularly the two most essential industries to war, steel and chemical, are ready at a moment’s notice to prepare for war production.
 
New Methods of Sea Struggle
Another factor of importance which is also a point of difference is the type of warfare and methods to be employed. It is apparent that the old methods of ship versus ship struggle is giving way to undersea and air methods. This will call for faster ships and more effective guns. It will mean increased airplane carrier building and likewise submarine construction. In addition the fact the expense in the building of huge battleships is a tremendous one, plus their decreasing effectiveness, will lead an attempt to reduce their role in war. This reveals the whole MacDonald program of battleship reduction as hypocrisy.
But these questions are not the most important ones for us. At this stage the crucial problem is that war is on the horizon. The bloodbath is being planned, one that will far exceed the last war in brutality and slaughter. London is a preface to it. “Disarmament” and “peace” discussions, headed by pacifists and “socialists” are gestures made only to lull the international working class into a false sense of security. The time is ripe for struggle against the threat of war, with which capitalism is always pregnant. To arouse the international working class, to organize it to defeat the imperialist war with the weapon of proletarian revolution that is the task of the Communists.
 



The long awaited Revolutionary Youth, organ of the youth members of the Lovestone group has finally graced us with its maiden debut. Expressing intentions of becoming the fighting organ of the American youth movement, the beacon light for the training of young Communists, and the herald of all that is “revolutionary” “Leninist,” etc. it actually typifies in the main the characteristics of the whole composition of the Lovestone group. It goes without saying that Revolutionary Youth embodies none of these forms; on the contrary, it exhibits the worse features that have become attached to the body of the Communist movement.
The problems of the American League have not grown up today. The decline, both organizationally and politically, of the Y.C.L., its cynicism, high politics, lack of vital activity, and all the retarding conditions of the Communist Youth League, are not the product alone of the present leadership. While it is true that the present regime of Harvey, Green, Rijack, has only accentuated these conditions, basically they have been part of the League from the period of the Lovestone-Zam leadership.
 
Present Disintegration of the League
The present leadership despite its strict adherence to the “leftward” swing in the Comintern, actually carries over all the features of the former opportunistic and bureaucratic leadership. The heritage of the Harvey-Green-Rijack (Steuben) leadership from the former Lovestone-Zam clique was a non-appearing Young Worker, a pitifully small membership, a League that was apathetic to its tasks, that was virtually non-existent as a factor in the revolutionary movement. This inheritance found fitting executors in the present regime, who while differing in their political affiliations, are for all practical purposes alike in their concepts of the needs of the League, and the methods of building a mass youth movement. Not only has the present leadership failed to better substantially the state of affairs left by the former ruling group, but it is responsible for the further decline and disintegration of the League.
Revolutionary Youth offers no solution for these conditions. Upon the heads of the Rubinsteins, Silvis, Luryes, Zams, Herbergs, as well as the present Harveys, Rijacks and Greens, lie the shortcomings of the League. The attempts of the Lovestone youth section to cry for democracy, discussion, mass work, organization, etc. can only draw crocodile tears from the members of the Communist Opposition. Only a year ago we were faced with the same bureaucratic expulsions, lack of opportunity of discussion and sluggings from the same group that finds it expedient today to discover that the principles of Communist organization are mercilessly looted by the present Stalinist adventurers.
It is apparent from the situation that exists in the League (which cannot be and is not separate and apart from the general conditions prevalent in the Party, and for that matter in the Comintern and Y.C.I.) that the problems of building a mass youth movement are far greater and deeper than the personalities in the leadership. Revolutionary Youth clarifies nothing. It actually brings on greater confusion.
 
Needs of the League
What is necessary at this juncture is a revaluation of the principles that accompanied the organization of the Y.C.I. Clarification is sorely needed on the following questions: What is and what should be the character of the Communist youth leagues? What shall be the attitude towards the question of “vanguardism”? What shall be the attitude on the question of “independence”? What are the main problems and the immediate tasks of the Youth? What is the attitude of the youth movement on the burning questions of principle between the Centrist leadership and the Leninist Opposition?
A discussion of these questions and the arrival at their proper decisions will fundamentally alter the course of disintegration of the youth Leagues. A correct solution would spell death to the sophistication, high politics, cynicism and opportunist adventurism that today pervades the youth movement. To these and other questions, subsequent issues of the Militant will devote itself.
 



A new feature in the militarization of the American youth is taking place in New York. This act, in face of the recent London Conference, and all other peace and disarmament negotiations, belies the attempts of this government to appear as a promoter of peace. A bill has been introduced into the New York State Legislature calling for the conscription of all students between, the ages of 10 and 18 to compulsory military training.
To avoid resentment to this open attempt at making soldiers of the American youth the bill states in its title that it is “Instruction in boy scout training and kindred subjects”. But even such a covering fails to hide the fact that the aim and purpose of this bill is the preparation of cannon fodder for the coming war. As in all forms of military service, the weak and sick are eliminated, and the best physically are allowed the “privilege” of participation, which in this instant would mean compulsion to service.
The bill if passed would mean that all students, regardless of attendance at private or public schools would be forced to wear the uniform, take 30 minutes drill daily, and special training during the holidays, and summer vacation periods.
 
Need of Mass Movement
The passing of such a bill would necessarily set a precedent that would undoubtedly be pursued in other states. At the present moment only the Teachers Union of the State has protested against “this attempt to exploit the children of the state and thus keep alive the institution of militarism”. That however, is far from sufficient.
This particular attempt of the state of New York must be linked with the whole attempt at militarization of the youth In preparation of war. The struggle against war and militarization must be made a mass movement of protest and struggle. To effectively carry out such a struggle, only the Communist and class conscious workers leading the mass of workers can be relied upon. It demands effective organization and propaganda – a feature that is entirely lacking in the revolutionary movement in this country.
The present move on the part of the militarist strata must be viewed as part of the general war manoeuvers, and which will be more and more aimed at a war by the capitalist powers against the Workers Republic of the Soviet Union. Pictured in that light, the fight of the workers must be linked together with the general struggle against war and the brutal exploitation of the capitalist system. The present act is a warning to the working class of what to expect in the near future. It is a forerunner to the further preparation for war thru the attempt at complete militarization, not only of the working class and student youth, but of the whole industrial system of the country.
 



The collapse of the London Naval Conference, coming on the heels of the fall of the French cabinet, bears out all contentions of the impossibility of the imperialists even to pretend at limitation of armaments. The attempt to mask itself as an apostle of peace for the world was a farce; the conference was made up purely of the leading imperialist powers – to the exclusion of all others. The issue of parity strength proved to be not one of reduction, but, on the contrary, one of increased construction of naval armaments.
We have all along pointed out the impossibility of the capitalist powers to attempt to solve and patch up their differences through conferences and negotiations, We said further that the London conference was actually a session of the leading capitalist powers, jockeying for advantages in the world political arena, and preparing their allies in preparation of an impending conflict. Furthermore, it was obvious from the outset that one of the main objectives of the conference would be to lay the plans for an alliance of the powers against the Soviet Union. In the beginning, it was clear that nothing could be achieved in the way of diminishing construction and reduction of armaments, and that the conference would reach a blind alley in a short while.
These views have been substantiated. For over two weeks, the conference has lapsed. The pacifists and the Conference attempt to lay the blame for this on the collapse of the French cabinet. While this is a factor, it does not eliminate the fact that the whole conference was leading to a point where its further deliberations would be checked.
 
Issues at the Conference
At the beginning of the conference, the following conditions were the basis for the negotiations: The parity ratio between the United States and England. The demand for increased parity on the part of Japan from the original proposal of 5–5–3 to 10–10–7. The demand of France for a tonnage of 724,000 tons, and Italy’s position calling for parity with France. This presented the curious picture of a disarmament conference with a program of increased naval construction.
The various issues during the first month of the conference whether or not battleships should be expunged from naval service, whether submarines were “humane instruments” during war, etc., were only confusing and played their part in delaying the discussion of disarmament. They allowed for time so that the various powers could obtain information on their opponents’ strength.
The real obstacle remains unsolved – what shall be the naval ratios of the participants? On this there is unanimous disagreement. While United States and England apparently agree to parity the remaining countries continue to disagree unless their commands are granted. France, which today has taken the place of pre-war Germany as the outstanding militarized nation, insists that her “freedom and interests” demand a naval tonnage of 725,000 tans, to be built for the most part by 1936. This means that France, in a short period, would have one of the largest and most modern navies in the world. Neither the United States, England, nor Japan agree to this. Japan on the other hand refuses, on the basis that she is an “island nation”, to reduce her tonnage, and Italy continues to insist on parity with France, to allow protection of her interests in the Mediterranean Sea. Both France and Japan refuse to liquidate their submarine fleets, which are the backbone of their smaller naval strength against both the United States and England. The above was the condition prior to the opening of the conference, and on which the conference today has lapsed because of its failure to even make initial progress.
Each of the naval powers demand “security” and are willing (!) for reduction it the other begins it That no progress will be achieved is obvious from the whole viewpoint of capitalist diplomacy, which can only try to solve its differences in the arena of war.
 
The Lineup against the Soviet Union
The question of the relations of the powers to the Soviet Union received special consideration during one of the sessions in which there appeared no possible solution to the conference negotiations. Japan opened with a defense of its naval program on the basis that her position off the coast of Siberia demanded that she be fully prepared to take part in a general offensive against the Workers Republic. This set a precedent which was followed by the other powers. France and Italy in particular emphasized this as one of the main reasons for their naval program. It goes without saying that all of the powers have in mind an attack against the Soviet Union and that this conference has already posed the question of the relation of forces between these imperialist wolves in that event. The problem of the defense of the Soviet Union grows greater and greater and becomes one of the chief tasks of the international proletariat
 
Conference Can Offer No Solution
It is clear that the London conference will arrive at nothing definite regarding naval limitation. The disappointment of Social Democracy and Pacifism is a great one. Their hopes have been shattered through the miserable collapse of the conference in which they pinned such exalted hopes. Along with this destroyed hope, the open betrayal of McDonald has become so much the more clear in his resignation from the Independent Labor Party – and his complete solidification with British imperialism.
The much heralded London conference has collapsed. Attempts to revive it will fall exceedingly short of their mark.
The problem of war remains as ever the problem of the international proletariat irrespective of sham conferences, utilized only to mislead the working class and put them in a state of false security, its solution lies in the destruction of this system of exploitation and war.
 



The killing of fire Haitians on December 7 by a detachment of United States marines, forced into the open the serious nature of the protest of the Haitian masses against United States occupation, and also against its puppet president, Borno. Since then the movement for Haitian independence, although curtailed and misguided by a bourgeois and liberal leadership, showed the increased temper of the mass of Haitian peasants, whose protests were set forth under such slogans as, “Long live Independent Haiti”, “Down with the Council of State”. They culminated during the past number of weeks in a demand for an end to the occupation of Haiti by the United States marines and the National City Bank of New York.
The past history of the occupation of Haiti by the United States, is a record of bloody extermination of the peasant masses. From a period of the occupation In July, 1915, the “peaceful guardianship” by the marines has resulted in the slaughter of over 3,000 Haitians, who dared to protest against the military dictatorship and exploitation of United States capitalism. The state of affairs brought about by American occupation finds the Haitian masses in a virtual state of peonage. The [repeal of the] old Haitian laws against the ownership of land by foreigners resulted, since 1915, in the dispossession of the peasantry and allowed for large holdings by the United States and other foreign imperialists. Dr. Dalencour, head of the Haitian Medical Journal, characterizes the situation in the following manner: “The Haitian peasant sees his future endangered by the entry of American capitalism. This necessarily results from the creation of large estates which would cause the subjugation of the peasants into a servile peon class.” The peasantry of Haiti are actually in such a state today, which accounts for the vigorous struggle they are making for an “independent republic of Haiti”.
The occupation of Haiti by the United States took place with its rapid expansion into the arena of the leading world imperialists. Haiti’s favorable geographical location in the Caribbean Sea, as a naval base, and its strategic importance as an aid to the defense of the Panama Canal, along with its offensive possibilities against Great Britain, led to America’s military and financial invasion and resultant control. This condition came about through the intense exploitation and persecution of the Haitian masses.
The present movement for Haitian independence is undoubtedly an expression of the current feelings of the masses. At present it is still weak in its outlook. With a bourgeois and liberal leadership, the movement is so far led into channels of subservience to American dictates. The open revolt against the puppet president, Borno, and the intensity of the struggle of the masses, caused Hoover to form a commission with the object of “studying” the conditions. Realizing the revolutionary temper of the Haitians, the commission made a proposal for election of a temporary president to replace Borno, as if the removal of Borno would solve the problem of Haitian independence.
The newly elected president, Eugene Roy, a broker by profession, was elected under the supervision of both the leadership of the opposition and the United States in collaboration with Borno. However, Roy does not take office until May 15, when Borno’s term expires. When Roy takes office, he is to continue as temporary president until next fall. Then legislative elections are held, and a new president seated by the deputies and senators. The further proposals of the commission for “gradual” removal of marines as a basis of permitting a slow solution to independence testify to the fact that Haitian independence, under the “good will” of the American capitalists, is just a guise with which to nullify the movement of the Haitian masses.
 
Election of Roy – A Sham
The election of Roy, as the temporary president, is the biggest farce in the commission’s program. Roy, just as all his predecessors, will continue to serve the interests of the National City Bank of New York. Being a broker himself, this will not be a difficult task. The “eventual independence” of Haiti, given freely by the United States, is an illusion, handed down in order to quiet the discontent. It is easy to understand, in view of this, why the removal of the marines will be only a “gradual” process. The marines will be kept in Haiti in order to act as the sword of American capitalism. They will be there to protect the continued exploitation of the Haitian masses.
The present “solution” can only be a temporary one. American capitalism has only removed one puppet and replaced him by another. But this temporary “solution” while it may for the moment soften the discontent of the masses, can in the end only add fuel to the existing state of revolt in Haiti. The leadership of the masses have succeeded in misdirecting the movement into accepting the further dominance of “dollar diplomacy”. Roy’s election, and the maintenance of the marines, along with continued domination of U.S. capitalism will only bring further persecution and exploitation. The military dictatorship of the United States will lend fuel to the further growth of the revolutionary movement of the Haitian masses.
The struggle for independence must be accompanied with a decisive fight against American imperialism. It must be accompanied with a struggle against the military dictatorship by United States marines. This end however is not alone the struggle of the Haitian masses, but is likewise a task of the American working class who must join in the fight for Haitian independence, against the domination of Wall Street and the military occupation.
 



The 14th convention of the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers of America (UE-CIO) held in Cleveland on September 19–23, produced the answer to what Stalinist strategy in the CIO would be now that the Executive Board has issued its ultimatum to all officers and unions: submit to and carry out CIO policy or else suffer the consequences for failure to do so. The answer given was a direct one, as this article will show, and it points to the preparations made by the Stalinists to split over the issues which now divide them from their erstwhile allies in the CIO, endeavoring, of course, to place the onus for such a split upon the ruling officialdom.
All of this was certainly indicated after the May 1949 meeting of the CIO Executive Board. Readers will recall that while the Portland convention last year issued a stern warning to the Stalinist-dominated unions to relinquish their support to Russian imperialism in favor of American imperialism, no actual disciplinary motions were adopted to enforce such a demand. Reuther and others asked for it, but Murray was far more cautious, hoping for something, he knew not what, that might end the schism and bring peace to the CIO. There is no doubt whatever that the prospect of a split in the CIO is extremely distasteful to him. Yet this ardent supporter of American imperialism could not forgive the Stalinists for the manner in which they broke up their wartime alliance with him in favor of exclusive support to the Kremlin. And that which caused his gorge to rise was the way in which the Stalinist-controlled unions backed the CP campaign for Wallace for president. Of these unions, none was more aggressive and truculent in its opposition to CIO policy than the UE.
Murray was particularly touchy on this subject because Albert J. Fitzgerald, president of the UE, was also a vice-president and executive board member of the CIO, and James Matles, organization director, was also a member of the board.
Since the Portland convention, the national CIO has been moving in on state and local CIO councils and reorganizing them. That is to say, they have been taking them out of the hands of the Stalinists, who have used the councils (which they usually dominated with a disciplined and organized minority) to champion CP policies against official policies of the CIO. Now, nearly all councils uniformly reflect national CIO policies. But that is not nearly enough to satisfy the solidifying bureaucracy in the CIO. Of what avail is it to win control of the councils if the Stalinists continue to dominate a number of international unions and to use these as sounding boards for Kremlin strategy? Therefore, the Executive Board made and carried the following motions at its May meeting:
All members of the Board who are unwilling to enforce the constitution and carry out the instructions of the convention and, between conventions, of the decision of the Executive Board, are called upon to resign.
All unions affiliated with CIO who are represented in the Board by members unwilling to [do the above] are called upon to insist upon the resignation of such representatives and to nominate successor representatives who are willing to and will comply.
There you have the background to the UE convention. The Emspak-Matles leadership, however, was faced with another problem. For the first time in the history of their control of the union, a formidable and organized opposition actually arose threatening to overthrow their leadership. This opposition was created in a matter of months and even though it had no time to challenge the Administration in all districts and locals, its strength was enormous.
The Emspak-Matles leadership hesitated in the organization of the convention only momentarily. At first, they were prepared to ram through its sessions with the typical bureaucratic brutality of a CP convention meeting an opposition. They were going to select the visitors, choose the representatives of the press, act sternly on challenged delegations and do everything within their power to prevent a majority going to the Opposition. But when they were absolutely certain of a majority of the 3,800 odd votes, the reins were relaxed a little to give the convention an appearance of democracy. Only within limits, however, for they made certain that the chair of the convention would remain completely in their hands. No presiding committee was elected. Instead, the three main officers of the union, President Fitzgerald, Organization Director Matles and Secretary-Treasurer Emspak, occupied the rostrum throughout the convention, and Fitzgerald was the permanent chairman who conducted the sessions with all the formal fairness of a kangaroo court.
 
A Miscalculation of Strength
If the Stalinist leadership had any fears about losing to the Opposition, they may have been induced by James B. Carey’s confident pre-convention statements that the great majority of the delegates supported his group and its candidates for office, Fred Kelly, Michael Fitzpatrick and John Dillon. Carey’s estimate of the relationship of forces was highly exaggerated. As the convention showed, it was certainly not a sober analysis of the real strength of the Opposition. His confidence in winning a majority at this convention was not reflected in the wider circles of the Opposition. Carey undoubtedly came by his opinion from the fact that the larger and more important locals opposed the Administration and because for the first time in the history of the UE an organized opposition actually made its appearance at a convention.
Majority or not, the opposition did represent the decisive sections of the union. It did not, however, command the support of the “doubtful” delegates who came from the lesser urban centers and whose primary contact with the union was through the great horde of International representatives and district functionaries, all of them Stalinists or fellow-travelers. In any case, the Administration realized that for the first time since it took complete charge of the union in 1941, its stranglehold was being loosened.
Given their record over the years, the Stalinists could not parade before the convention with a list of achievements. It was not very long ago, that these wreckers had instituted union-wide “incentive pay” systems and the speed-up to support the war. They had gone much further than any of the old-line unions. They had done what none of the conservative and reactionary unions even dreamed of doing: turned their union back a decade or two, reintroducing a murderous speed-up system against which the entire labor movement had fought for years. They failed miserably in the important negotiations with the giants of the electrical industry, Westinghouse and General Electric. The regime of Emspak-Matles (it is hard to talk about Fitzgerald seriously since he is merely the slow-moving, slow-thinking, not very competent captive of the real leaders of the union, the Stalinists) was brutal and dictatorial. Their effort to compare the gains of UE to those of the UAW and Steel was not very effective. On the whole, their fight would have been a defensive one had it not been for one event: the report of the fact-finding committee for the steel industry and the decision of Murray and his steel union leadership to forego the wage struggle and to accept the pension proposal of this government board.
It was a running fire against the conduct of the steel union that formed the basis for the Stalinist strategy in the convention. Almost before the convention was organized, Matles presented a “surprise” resolution on collective bargaining (not given beforehand to the resolutions committee) calling for a renewal of negotiations with the companies, rejecting a fact-finding commission and demanding a $500 Christmas package from industry to cover wages, pensions, etc. The resolution contained a running reference, ineffectively camouflaged to the acceptance by Murray of the fact-finding committee’s recommendations, thus precluding any wage fight by the CIO. The design of the resolution was to put the opposition on the defensive, and by contrast to make the UE appear as a militant, progressive union. In a word, Murray’s derelictions were used to cover up the crimes of the UE leadership. Putting the opposition on the defensive might have meant changing the whole character of the convention struggle and thus enhancing the position of the Administration.
The first day of the convention found the opposition, along with their floor leader Carey, biting this bait. In contrast to the vigorous floor work of the Administration and its hand-picked supporters, the opposition made a very weak fight. Outside of some rather empty boasting and a little red-baiting, it presented nothing. And this for one little reason. They fell into the Stalinist trap and forgot all about their own program. Fitzgerald showed the kind of stuff he was made of when, in the debate, he called upon one Administration spokesman after another. Thus the first debate on this resolution showed nine speakers for the Administration and three for the opposition.
 
The Opposition Line Changes
On the following day, a considerable change took place. The caucus of the opposition thrashed out the question of convention strategy and decided that its course up to that point had been wrong. They had permitted the Stalinists to take the play away from them. Their floor work had been poor. Their speakers were ineffective, merely giving personal testimonials to their hard work, loyalty and Americanism. They seldom knew what points to make, and when they made one, did not know how to clinch it. Since the caucus had decided not to organize its fight on the convention floor, there was a free-for-all around the microphones, and in these mêlées, Fitzgerald picked the speakers! Only delegate, Jennings of the New York Sperry local, saved the day for the opposition with a vigorous and militant dressing down of the Stalinist administration.
The second day saw a complete reversal of form by the opposition. This time it challenged the Administration not merely with speeches, but by its infinitely superior counter-resolution on the task of the UE. Indicating the Stalinist misleadership, the resolution ended with the following 9-point program:

That UE stop discrediting those in our union who seek to restore the union to its proper place as a militant labor union;
 
That UE devote all of its strength and activity to collective bargaining and stop diverting its energies into suicidal political adventures;
 
That UE return home to its membership;
 
That UE take its membership into its confidence and give direction and guidance to them in an effort to solve their immediate problems and improve their working conditions;
 
That UE vigorously demand a pension of $100 per month on a non-contributory basis from the electrical industry exclusive of government social security benefits.
 
That UE shall not rest until its membership is covered by a non-contributory plan of social insurance which will provide adequate life insurance, a weekly sickness and accident benefit of 75 per cent of weekly earnings, hospitalization costs, a schedule of surgical benefits which will cover costs and complete medical care;
 
A general wage increase to equalize earnings with those prevailing in steel and auto;
 
That UE restore to its members the right to fight for and hold union security;
 
That UE return at once to bargaining with GE and Westinghouse to secure these vitally necessary improvements.

Given this strong minimum program, the opposition delegates presented an entirely new face to the convention, and even though they did not carry their resolution, they did give the Stalinists a warm time of it. So aggressive was their fight that when Matles, in summary, made a scurrilous attack upon some of the outstanding opposition locals in the UE he was unable to complete his summary speech over the booing and left the speaker’s podium.
 
The Stalinist Resolutions
It would be impossible in an article like this to report the entire convention in detail, nor would it be necessarily fruitful. Once the fight over the above-mentioned resolutions was completed, the way of the convention was fairly determined. There remained two decisive questions yet before it: the Administration’s resolution on raiding and the opposition resolution on support to CIO policy; and the Administration’s constitutional amendment to permit the General Executive Board to supersede locals in the trial and discipline of members. (The election of officers was a completely secondary matter in face of the real situation and struggle in the union.)
The Stalinist resolutions announced their strategy in the current struggle. In their resolution on raiding, a series of ultimatums was proposed to be placed before the coming convention of the CIO. These ultimatums, deploring the threat of a split initiated by the action of the May meeting of the Executive Board, demand of the Board the cessation of “hostility” to the UE and warn that if attacks and raiding on the UE continue, the UE would, in turn, cease to pay its per capita tax to the CIO. At this point, Stalinist cleverness seems to have gotten the better of them, provided ... it was their real intention to remain in the CIO and not form a third trade-union center, as John Williamson has contended in his open letter to Murray.
 
The Threat of a Split
But obviously, the threat not to pay per capita tax, which means automatic exclusion from the CIO, is a threat to split, no matter what the provocations might be. Common sense alone dictates that, given the political programs of the CIO and the Stalinists, buttressed by the latter’s undeviating loyalty to the Kremlin, there will be no end to the internal struggle until one side or the other prevails. The question then reduces itself simply to one of whether the Stalinists want to remain in the CIO as a defeated minority. The resolution of Emspak-Matles (read: CP) indicates their readiness to accept the full consequences of a refusal to pay per capita tax. Only the uninitiated would regard such a split a matter of a financial dereliction or as a technicality.
In order to emphasize this course, the Administration introduced a most astounding bureaucratic amendment to the constitution that would permit the GEB to bring charges against and try any member of the union directly, without bringing such charges to the member’s local union and having him tried there. To emphasize its real aim, the Board calls on “the membership [!] (to) ... drive the traitors out of their locals and the union.”
The constitutional amendment gives the Board the means of side-stepping the opposition locals to expel their leaders, and if necessary whole locals, such as they have already done in Chicago and elsewhere. So, when the Stalinists cry bitterly that they want unity and want to remain in the CIO, they are merely deceiving the membership of the CIO. More important to these agents of the Kremlin than remaining in the CIO, is their freedom to act in behalf of the foreign policy of the Stalinist State. And if remaining in the CIO means a reduction in their effectiveness, they are going out of the CIO where they will be free to carry out “the line.”
If a split does not occur immediately following the CIO Convention in Cleveland, the split situation is nevertheless already present. The next stage will see an intensification of the internal struggle with the Stalinist administration taking punitive actions against the opposition. The opposition, however, makes up the real backbone of the union and the Stalinists will not be able to take the UE with them. At best they will take, for the time being, the smaller and dispersed locals, as administrations usually do. That, however, would be only the beginning of the struggle and not its end.
 

Glotzer: Removed Satir as Labor Secy. in Cook County (August 1937)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Glotzer
Removed Satir as Labor Secy. in Cook County
(August 1937)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 1 No. 3, 28 August 1937, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

CHICAGO. – The August 16th meeting of the County Central Committee witnessed the first shot in the campaign of the Clarity Group against the left wing here. Where under ordinary circumstances we were able to obtain a majority in the CCC by default (the absence of the representatives of the language branches for more than a year and a half), last night the Clarity leaders made the round-up. With the representatives of the numerous Jugoslav branches present they had a majority.
Utilizing this majority they proceeded to upset the actions of the CCC meeting of July on technical grounds of an extremely tenuous kind. McDowell, the “constitutional expert” falsely interpreted the local constitution as requiring a semi-annual election of delegates to the CCC (it called only for a reapportionment), moved to reconsider the actions of the July meeting on the ground that the meeting was illegal. The real reason for his action lay in the fact that the July meeting elected Satir to the County Central Executive Committee in place of Ben Fisher who is now in Detroit. Utilizing an old agreement made at the time of the elections to the CEC, the Clarity group demanded that Satir first decline in favor of McDowell on the ground that he represented the same tendency as Fisher and should replace him. This proposal Satir correctly rejected and because he did so and ran and was elected, the “Clarity group determined to “show him a lesson”.
 



Capitalism and Socialism on Trial
by Fritz Sternberg
John Day Co., N.Y.C., 604 pages. $7.00.
For the task which Fritz Sternberg set himself, his book is too short; for the ideas which he has actually summoned up, it is far too long. Intended as a sequel to his other books, Capitalism and Socialism on Trial is presented to readers as the conclusion to Sternberg’s long studies of the rise and decline of bourgeois society and an affirmation of his socialist beliefs. That is perhaps its chief merit. It is not an unimportant merit either in these days when the apostates, particularly those who have fled a decaying and disintegrating bourgeois order in Europe in order to affirm the elasticity and power of that same order behind the borders of a still powerful American capitalist society are the stoutest defenders of capitalism.
But the truth is that Sternberg’s book is a very spotty one and not easy to follow. The large chapters, divided into many sub-parts, skips through the subject matter to form a rather mechanical statement of the main thoughts of the author. In the most general Marxist sense, very often mechanical in its understanding and presentation, Sternberg does bring home, with considerable statistical proof, the unmistakable decline of world capitalism. He does prove the collapse of capitalism as a world order and the centralization of its strength in one country, the United States. But these economic sections are very summary in character. Sternberg presents many of them merely to introduce some of his own pet theories (imperialism, Russia, etc.).
The political aspects of the book are weak and disorienting, particularly when he writes about the Russian Revolution and the Stalinist degeneration. Because of his own confusions and what appears in the book as an inability to understand Stalinism, he permits himself to be the butt of smart-alec criticisms. It is true that Sternberg has traveled several inches away from his earlier position that the economic basis of Russian society (nationalized property) had progressive aspects and that Russian imperialism (“expansionism”) was not organically inherent in the system (you see, it is a matter of choice and Stalin has chosen to be imperialistic). Yet, there is no basic analysis of Russian society and Stalinism, and Sternberg unwittingly falls a victim of his own unclarity. That is why Franz Borkenau, in his supercilious review of the book, could accuse Sternberg of “refusing to call ‘socialist’ the only completely socialist country of the world.” Borkenau taxes Sternberg precisely on the point where the latter thinks his position is strong: that Russia is not structurally driven to follow an “expansionist” line. Such a view is possible only if one makes a fetish of nationalized property and invests it with a significance per se it cannot and does not have.
It is this kind of “Marxism” that provides critics with the opportunity of side-stepping the challenge of genuine Marxism to take on its superficial and half-representatives. Sternberg does not discuss the “Russian question” fundamentally; in fact, he does not preface his discussion by a statement of what socialism is, so that a fundamental comparison might be made between the ideal of Marxism and the Stalinist nightmare. The whole section on Russia is thus quite superficial and merely serves Sternberg with the opportunity to re-heat his old chestnuts about the historical mistake of Lenin in faking the Russian Revolution, which is, in Sternberg’s mind, second only to the permanent capitalist crisis as the source of the world’s ills.
The book’s weakness – or sectarian bias – in political scholarship is again revealed in the discussion of the Russian question and Stalinism. In this part of the book there is no reference to Trotsky. Is this not unusual scholarship, when one recalls that the struggle against the Stalinist counter-revolution was organized and led by Trotsky and that it was he who wrote all the main theoretical, political and practical ideas in that struggle for a period of fifteen years. It was Trotsky who, almost alone, first made the world conscious of what was happening inside Russia. The outside world relied almost wholly on his writings for knowledge of the economic and political situation in Russia. Yet in the bibliography which Sternberg gives for his sections on Russia and Stalinism, not a single one of the many books, pamphlets and articles Trotsky wrote is given as a reference. Isn’t this incredible? But Lenin, too, is given short-shrift when Sternberg details his own views of the Russian Revolution.
In general, the political writing in this book is wholly unsatisfying where it is not wrong. One of the most uninstructive sections is that dealing with the New Deal. In The Growth of the Trade Unions, as my colleague Hal Draper has already pointed out in Labor Action, Sternberg does not even mention the CIO, except in a table of membership figures of the two American labor organizations. But in the body of the section dealing with the New Deal, the NRA and the rise of unionism, the CIO is not mentioned; therefore, nothing follows about its enormous significance in the American social struggle. Sternberg was guilty of the same glaring omission in his more limited work The Coming Crisis, in which he devoted a great many pages to the United States and its role in the present world crisis.
A close examination of Sternberg’s writings will reveal that while he seems at home when presenting a statistical analysis of capitalism in its periods of rise and decline, sustaining the general Marxist prognoses on the social order, he is a terribly confused man politically. In this field, his conceptions are mechanical and inept; economic-determinist rather than historical-materialist; static rather than dynamic.
 



(Continued from last issue)
In our first article, we gave a summary of what we believed totalitarianism to be. It was sufficient to indicate the direction of our thoughts on the subject, to show that in the very approach of this modem phenomenon, we proceeded from premises considerably at variance with those used by Hannah Arendt in her Origins of Totalitarianism. We cannot adequately and thoroughly review every conception of her book, contradictory and otherwise (there are literally dozens of them presented dogmatically, in thesis style, as “fundamental” ideas). However, we shall consider the highlights of her theories as we direct our brief inquiry into what we believe are truly the origins of totalitarian scourge.
Arendt does not present a unified definition of what the totalitarian dictatorship is. It is therefore impossible to say on the basis of her theories and terminology: This is totalitarianism.
She erects a certain structure in her book that enables her to present what in her mind is a continuity of historical process which led inevitably to totalitarianism. The book begins with a long discussion of the origins, rise and development of anti-Semitism, and ends with the Dreyfus case at the close of the last century. The second section of the book, Imperialism, deals with the rise of the “nation-state,” a world-wide imperialism, the decline of the nation-state and the “end of the Rights of Man.” It portrays the progressive deterioration of modern civilization and prepares for the discussion in the third section called Totalitarianism. The latter stage of social development is marked by the breakdown of class society; the disappearance of classes into masses; the “denationalization” of people and their expulsion from human communities; and the rise of the totalitarian movements.
The author considers the effects of social causes as primary phenomena, and raises them to the level of principle. We have already quoted to show that for her the “Jewish question” was the catalyst for all that happened in Germany during the past thirty years. And it is from her that we learn that “totalitarian regimes establish a functioning world of no-sense,” and that totalitarianism expands only to prove that its “respective supersense (!) has been right.” (The dangling “respective” is one of many grammatical ambiguities, traceable, we believe, not to faulty editing but rather to her mystical predilections.)
Though Arendt is not guilty of the simplistic view so widely current years ago, and still held today, that fascist totalitariansm is the product of “mass neurosis,” that its leaders were all lunatics requiring clinical assistance, and that it could not be understood except in these terms, she also contends that “commonsense trained in utilitarian thinking is helpless” against the movement. While it might be said that her views are presented with more subtlety and considerable erudition, her method of inquiry is compounded of idealism and mysticism.
Historical methodology is of the highest importance in trying to understand social events. Arendt has no genuine methodology. She considers man and his movements as an absolute, outside of history and nature, abstracted from his social environment, propelled by certain moral values or the lack of them. In the case of totalitarianism, it is a product of the negative influences of the French Enlightenment, of materialism, science and Marxism, for these have produced a “decline of religious faith.” The decline of religious faith is then one of the greatest factors in the rise of totalitarian nihilism. As she reasons from such subjective observations, we can understand why it is possible for her to say:
Today we consider both history and nature to be alien (!) to the essence of man. Neither any longer offer us that comprehensive whole in which we feel spiritually at home.
Contrast this view to scientific-materialist methodology of Marxism. In his introduction to Karl Marx, Living Thoughts Library, Trotsky summarizes it in the following way:
For economic science the decisive significance is what and how people act, not what they themselves think about their actions. At the base of society is not religion or morality, but nature and labor. Marx’s method is materialistic, because it proceeds from existence to consciousness, not the other way around. Marx’s method is dialectic, because it regards both nature and society as they evolve, and evolution itself as the constant struggle of conflicting forces.
Franz Neumann, in Behemoth, still the finest book on Hitler Germany, although written ten years ago, dealt with this same question, for he met with it often in the many philosophical attempts to explain the German people as inherently evil and immoral. He wrote:
If we believe man to be essentially wicked, if egoism is the sole incentive of man, the prospects are black. But man is neither bad nor good, he will be molded by his cultural and political experience.
This cultural and political experience accrues to man against the background of a specific social order and he takes his own history not in accordance with any “eternal laws” but on the basis of conditions which exist in society. History and nature are not alien to man, but part of the essence of man.
There is no doubt that elements of lunacy were present in all fascist movements, more so in Germany than in Italy or Spain. A measure of madness could be found in the movement which Hitler led to power and irrationality appeared to be its hallmark. But it is shortsighted and disorienting to describe the totalitarian movement primarily in such terms. Even such an inconclusive affair as the Nuremberg Trials revealed that beside the “madmen” were men of considerable intelligence, measured by ordinary standards, rational men of firm conviction who knew what they wanted, where they were going and how they would achieve their aims. However useful a clinical analysis of the fascist-totalitarian movements might then be, for they did incorporate aberrations of one kind or another, it could never substitute for a fundamental understanding of the social causes of this phenomenon which emerged from the complex economic, political and social matrix of German capitalism in the same way as the other fascist movements mirrored the traditions, cultural and social conditions of their respective nations.
In School for Dictators, Ignazio Silone says quite aptly:
You know there are many people who maintain that Hitler and Mussolini, for example, are mad, mad in the clinical sense. That is a thoroughly intelligible thing for normal, useful and decent people to believe ... But if democratic politicians and socialists hold the same opinion of the dictators, it only proves that they themselves are amateurs and intruders on the political scene.
Trotsky, in a similar vein, tried years ago to dispel these notions about Hitler. In What Hitler Wants he wrote:
It is most dangerous to underestimate an enemy just because his system goes beyond the limits of routine. Simply to say that Hitler is a demagogue, an hysterical person and an actor is to shut one’s eyes so as not to face the danger! It takes more than hysteria to seize power, and method there must be in the Nazi madness.
To many who live in the dream world of a happy society of the past – the sunshine of a peaceful, ever-progressing capitalism of the 19th Century, the fascist and Stalinist totalitarian movements with their abrupt, direct and violent approach to the economic and political problems of modern times, are so shocking as to elicit reactions of horror, accompanied by a loss of ability to think clearly and logically on what has happened in recent years and why.
 
Trotsky and the Marxists attributed the rise of reactionary fascism to the crisis of bourgeois society which depresses the conditions of all the lower classes to the point where life becomes unbearable. The crisis of capitalism is world-wide, therefore the movements of reactionary totalitarianism are world-wide and assume similar organizational and ideological form. Where the crisis of capitalism is prolonged without a progressive, i.e., a socialist solution, said Trotsky, “the crisis can bring in its trail only the pauperization of the petty-bourgeoisie and the transformation of ever-increasing groups of workers into the lumpenproletariat.”
In What Next, dealing specifically with German fascism during the period of its imminent rise to power, Trotsky wrote:
In order to try to find a way out, the bourgeoisie must absolutely rid itself of the pressure exerted by the workers’ organizations. These must needs be eliminated, destroyed, utterly crushed.
At this juncture, the historic role of Fascism begins. It sets on its feet those classes that are immediately above the proletariat and who are ever in dread of being forced down into its ranks; it organizes and militarizes them at the expense of finance capital, under the cover of the official government and it directs them to the extirpation of proletarian organizations, from the most revolutionary to the most conservative.
Fascism, is not merely a system of reprisals, of brutal force, and of police terror. Fascism is a particular governmental system based on the uprooting of all elements of proletarian democracy within bourgeois society. The task of Fascism lies not only in destroying the Communist advance guard but in holding the entire class in a state of forced disunity. To this end the physical annihilation of the most revolutionary section of the workers does not suffice. It is necessary to smash all independent and voluntary organizations, to demolish all the defensive bulwarks of the proletariat, and to uproot whatever has been achieved during three-quarters of a century by social democracy and the trade unions ...
Through the Fascist agency, capitalism sets in motion the masses of the crazed petty bourgeoisie, and the bands of declassed and demoralized lumpen-proletariat; all the countless human beings whom finance capital itself has brought to desperation and frenzy ... When a state turns fascist, it doesn’t only mean that the forms and methods of government are changed in accordance with the patterns set by Mussolini – the changes, in this sphere ultimately play a minor role – but it means, first of all for the most part, that the workers organizations are annihilated; that the proletariat is reduced to an amorphous state; and that a system of administration is created which penetrates deeply into the masses and which serves to frustrate the independent crystallization of the proletariat. Therein precisely is the gist of Fascism ...
It has been objected that this view is entirely too narrow since it “confines” the description of this totalitarian phenomenon to the “sectarian” struggle of the workers and does not take into consideration society as a whole. That would be true only if one understands the above in purely mechanical terms and does not see the dynamics of the analysis made by Trotsky, i.e., the involvement of the whole society, every segment of it.
Neumann stated the problem of German society more specifically to explain the forces which gave strength to reaction in the form of fascism.
The Weimar democracy proceeded in a different direction (from the constitutional monarchy, the Reichstaat). It had to rebuild an impoverished and exhausted country in which class antagonisms had become polarized. It attempted to merge three elements: the heritage of the past (especially the civil service), parliamentary democracy modelled after Western European and American patterns and a pluralistic collectivism, the incorporation of powerful social and economic organizations directly into the political system. What it actually produced, however, were sharpened social antagonisms, the breakdown of voluntary collaboration, the destruction of parliamentary institutions, the suspension of political liberties, the growth of a ruling bureaucracy and the renaissance of the army as a decisive political factor.
Why?
In an impoverished, yet highly industrialized, country, pluralism [1] could work only under the following different conditions. In the first place, it could rebuild Germany with foreign assistance, expanding its markets by peaceful means to the level of its high industrial capacity. The Weimar Republic’s foreign policy tended in this direction ... The attempt failed. It was supported neither by German industry and large landowners nor by the Western powers. The year 1932 found Germany in a catastrophic political, economic and social crisis.
The system could also operate if the ruling groups made concessions voluntarily or under compulsion by the state. That would have led to a better life for the mass of the German workers and security for the middle classes at the expense of the profits and power of big business. German industry was decidedly not amenable, however, and the state sided with it more and more.
The third possibility was the transformation into a socialist state, and that had become completely unrealistic in 1932, since the Social Democratic party was socialist only in name.
The crisis of 1932 demonstrated that political democracy alone without a fuller utilization of the potentialities inherent in Germany’s industrial system, that is, without the abolition of unemployment and an improvement in living standards, remained a hollow shell.
The fourth choice was the return to imperialist expansion. Imperialist ventures could not be organized within the traditional democratic form, however, for there would have been too serious an opposition. Nor could it take the form of the restoration of the monarchy. An industrial society that has passed through a democratic phase cannot exclude the masses from consideration. Expansionism therefore took the form of National Socialism, a totalitarian dictatorship that has been able to transform some of its victims into supporters and to organize the entire country into an armed camp under iron discipline.
The bourgeois economist, John C. DeWilde, wrote voluminously over an extended period of time on Germany’s “controlled economy,” showing through an examination of production, property relations, profits, wages, and other economic facts that while the economy was controlled, it was still, in a fundamental sense, a capitalist economy.
Hermann Rauschning, Nazi apostate, who was intimately acquainted with the “theories” of his erstwhile companions, wrote that the anti-capitalism of the National Socialists was “just a bargain counter, like almost everything else.” In The Revolution of Nihilism he added: “The movement has no fixed aim, either economic or political.” What he is really saying is that it did not have a new ideology in the sense of new social and economic doctrine, or that it in any way sought to create a new social system. This fact will be well worth bearing in mind as we will shortly deal with other conceptions of Arendt in this context which contribute so much to her overall appreciation of totalitarianism.
Economic study of the German fascist-totalitarian state revealed the strongest pro-monopoly-capitalist bias on the part of Hitler’s regime. The whole German economy was revived under that regime as a war economy in which the monopolists enriched themselves. All other sections of the capitalists did as well, since the profit and dividend structure of economy improved beyond the fondest hopes of the bourgeoisie. Sectors of the economy which had been nationalized during the Weimar Republic were denationalized and privatized by the new regime. The exploitation of the Jews became a means of enrichment of Nazi Party members – not on the basis of the nationalization of Jewish property, but by a change of ownership- -on a capitalist basis. The new regime strengthened monopoly capitalism since it was this sector of the economy which largely made possible war preparation and the rebuilding of Germany as a military power. All of this was accomplished without a change in the most important characteristic of capitalism: ownership of the means of production which remained private under monopolistic organization.
In Fascism and Big Business, Guerin provides irrefutable material to prove that the Nazi conspiracy, like all other fascist-totalitarian movements, developed in the closest ideological and physical relationship with the decisive sections of big business and finance.
Back in 1938, in his introduction to Daniel Guerin’s Fascism and Big Business, Dwight Macdonald found it necessary to write against the superficial and simplistic thinking which was then so popular on the subject of fascism, and to which we have already made reference in this article. In the opening paragraph of this introduction, he wrote:
Americans have a tendency (not only Americans, it should be added – AG) to look on fascism as a mass neurosis which mysteriously seizes on entire people. According to this view, the German and Italian peoples are possessed of the Devil, and, like the Gadarene swine similarly afflicted, are rushing down a steep place to perish in the sea. This moralistic approach has been reinforced by the recent anti-Jewish atrocities in Germany. All sections of American public opinion, from John L. Lewis and William Green through the Nation, the Communist Party and Franklin D. Roosevelt, to Bishop Manning and the presidents of Yale, Harvard and Princeton, all have united in an uproar of indignation whose dominant note is: how can such things be in a civilized world? There is, of course, as the Nazi press has not failed to point out, a good deal of hypocrisy in such denunciations ... German fascism is not the twin of American capitalism. But it is its older brother ... Looked at from the viewpoint of society as a whole, and especially of the workers, fascism unquestionably appears to be insane. But, and this is what the liberals forget, fascism makes excellent sense from the standpoint of the ruling class.
This showed what a powerful weapon Marxism can be, even in the hands of a Macdonald. Now is it true that in 1941 he changed his views a little. Startled, surprised, and overwhelmed by the Blitzkrieg of the well- organized and prepared German military machine, he discovered that Germany under Hitler had become a bureaucratic collectivist state, which for the sake of distinction from the Russian model, he called Black Socialism. The notion which drove him to an investigation of the new economy was the belief that only a new, collectivistic economy could produce such military victories as the easy conquest of France in 1940.
Even though he was mistaken about the German state and its economy then as he is now in his enchantment with Arendt’s work, he at least had the merit of trying to understand this totalitarian state on fundamental grounds, the social and economic nature of a society which could produce such military power. He believed that Hitler had violated the basic laws of capitalism and arrived at the conclusion that Russian and German societies were identical.
 
The reader will remember that Arendt dismisses entirely the question of the kind of society which existed in Germany and all the other totalitarian states, that totalitarianism is neither capitalist nor socialist, since these terms apply only to “Western welfare economies.” As you see, capitalism, too, is a welfare economy! However, if neither capitalism nor socialism existed in Nazi Germany, what kind of an economy did exist? Her view is obvious: she is not concerned with economics; that is why she regards all totalitarian states as identical interiorly and in the case of Russia and Germany “growing constantly more alike in exterior forms.” To those who wrote as Arendt does in other years Neumann asked whether it was possible to have “an economy without economics?” He answered this, naturally, in the negative, and went on to prove that this “economy without economics” was capitalist.
But let us proceed on the basis of Arendt’s views. Since she affirms that totalitarian states are neither capitalist nor socialist, what economic order replaced the old? Bureaucratic collectivism? A slave economy? Feudal? One which has never been heard of? She has no answer.
Yet an answer must be made to understand the phenomenon of fascist totalitarianism. How do such countries exist? Germany was a nation of 70 million people, even after the Jews and other opponents were either liquidated or neutralized, defeated, atomized, etc. Did the economy cease to exist? It seems silly to ask such a question, for obviously an organized economy had to exist, otherwise no war economy would have been possible and Germany would have been unable to fight a war. Then who owned the vast German industries and how were they organized? By and through the state? Did the bourgeoisie or some other class own the economy as private property? These are not idle questions, for we shall soon come upon the central feature of Arendt’s theory of totalitarianism, insofar as she has one.
As a matter of fact, all the evidence adduced over the years shows that Hitler Germany was a capitalist society in all its essential forms. For that country to have been transformed into a classless society as Emil Lederer contended in 1940 and as Arendt does now, would have meant that the private ownership of the means of production had ceased. We know today that this never happened in Germany, or in any other fascist totalitarian state in the West.
That this is no idle discussion is indicated by what we believe is Arendt’s central thesis and from which flows so many other of her “central” ideas.
Totalitarian movements we are told “aim at and succeed in organizing masses – not classes, like the old interest parties of the Continental nation-states; not citizens with opinions about, and interests in, the handling of public affairs, like the parties of Anglo-Saxon countries.” And this, because there has been “a breakdown of the class system [which] meant automatically the breakdown of the party system, chiefly because these parties being interest parties, could no longer represent class interests.”
Now, “a breakdown of the class system” may mean the automatic breakdown “of the party system,” but this could stand up, as we have said, only if the creator or creators of this theory could establish what should follow from this breakdown: the end of the existing economic order based on the private ownership of the means of production. It is this which has determined the nature of capitalist production and the class system as we have know it. The breakdown of the class system would presuppose the end of capitalist property relations. Arendt literally ignores this.
That isn’t all that is wrong with the above. Does she really mean that because “these parties [are] interest parties” they really “could no longer represent class interests?” It would seem ridiculous on the face of it, wouldn’t it? Well, it is, and we consider it a waste of time to cite proof that the “parties being interest parties” did and do represent class interests.
Or is it true, that the totalitarian movements succeed in organizing “not citizens with opinions about, and interests in, the handling of public affairs, like the parties of Anglo- Saxon countries?” We think that this is nonsense too. We agree with Arendt that the democratic states often are ruled through the support of only a minority of the population and that the majority of the people in a given country often abstain from participation in the affairs of that nation. But that does not mean, nor does not follow logically, that totalitarianism organizes an amorphous mass of opinionless and interestless people.
 
On such a foundation, Arendt builds the structure of her broader theory. The premise being unsound, the structure is shaky. It is not supported by the real history of the recent past.
Once the class society has been liquidated and replaced by the mass society, something has to be said about these masses and why they became the basis for modern totalitarianism. Bear in mind, however, that Arendt rejects everything in the Marxist analysis.
Before the “economies without economics” are established, they must have been preceded by the mass movements. The latter are organizable because they have acquired an “appetite for political organization.” An appetite for political organization presupposes a certain consciousness, for it indicates a measure of understanding and choice, and, as a result, an “interest.” But she denies all that when she writes:
Masses are not held together by a consciousness of common interests and they lack specific class articulateness which is expressed in determined, limited obtainable goals. The term masses applies only where we deal with people who either because of sheer numbers; or indifference, or a combination of both, cannot be integrated into any organization based on common interest, into political parties or municipal governments, or professional organizations or trade unions. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
This view, which contradicts the real world in every respect, is possible only because Arendt and those who think like her, ignore what is important in trying to understand totalitarianism and fix upon the dazzling but superficial (not in the sense of unimportant, but rather secondary) factors and features.
First we have had an arbitrary liquidation of class society and classes by the author. Thus, she accomplished with the stroke of a pen what even the socialist movement has never yet achieved. The society of masses replaces class society. But it does not follow, if we accept her theory of a society of masses for the moment, that the living masses of the totalitarian movements fit her description. The masses of the fascist movement did in fact have momentary common interests, a certain middle class articulateness, determined, limited and obtainable goals, and above all, they were not indifferent. Otherwise it would have been impossible to create the totalitarian movements. The real life of these movements, their conflicts, especially against the working class movements, their alternating periods of rise and decline, and finally their victories on the basis of organized political parties tell us that they were authentic expressions of a rapidly changing objective situation of which they were an integral part, and represented, not the total interests of society, but at least a definite and economically important section of it.
If we follow the text of the book closely, we are not always certain whether we are in agreement with Arendt on the composition of the totalitarian movements. We have already written that there seemed to be agreement that the fascist movements were composed largely of the elements described before (bear in mind that we omit Stalinist Russia from this discussion because the Russian development was wholly different from the experience in the West).
However, as we watch Arendt’s classless society, or society of the masses, emerge from the old capitalist system, we see that there are no longer present the class struggles of the old order. Now, what we really have is a new society, and the totalitarians, as the founders of this new society, are therefore anti-bourgeois and anti-capitalist. She writes that as movements of “anti-individualism,” “the totalitarian movements can rightly claim that they were the first truly anti-bourgeois parties.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
At the same time that this assertion is made, Arendt also writes about the opposition of the working classes to the totalitarians. Does the working class exist as a class in the classless, mass society? On the basis of her theory of society this would be a contradiction. Does she merely resort to an old adjective in absence of new descriptive words? Even this does not follow, for the mass society has only rulers and ruled, not classes, and it would mean that all the old classes were merged into one common ruled-over population. If she has an explanation for the phenomenon of a working class in a classless society it is not made in the book. Given that contradiction, Arendt is driven into another one. For the fact is that the working classes did oppose and remained in opposition to the totalitarians. If the fascist totalitarians were truly anti-bourgeois and anti-capitalist, as the working classes of Europe certainly were, what kept these two anti-bourgeois, anti-capitalist forces apart? Why didn’t they unite, since they had as a common aim nothing less than opposition to the ruling class of the old society. Remember, too, that many democrats and liberals appealed to the big bourgeoisie, if unsuccessfully, against the fascists precisely on the basis of the old fable about the latter’s anti-capitalism.
Now it is true that a certain kind of “anti-capitalism” did characterize these movements. But the anti-capitalism of the totalitarian movements reflected the fact that a large plebeian section of society made up its parties. These plebeian masses of the middle classes are “anti-capitalist” only in the sense that they are against the monopolism which has destroyed the base of the middle class in modern capitalist society. The limited struggle of these middle classes against capitalism is not to abolish capitalism and establish a new classless society, but to return to the 19th Century Utopia where they played a progressive, independent and powerful role. This kind of anti-capitalism has nothing in common with the program of the socialist working class.
Recalling German history there is no other way to explain why, despite Hitler’s efforts to win them on the eve of his seizure of power through emphasis on the struggle against the bourgeoisie, almost the entire German working class remained anti-fascist.
To put it another way: if the totalitarian mass movements of the West were genuinely anti-bourgeois and anti-capitalist, it would be impossible to explain why monopoly capitalism supported them.
It was not true, as Arendt says, that “Actually the bourgeoisie was as much taken in by the Nazis as was the Roehm-Schleicher faction in the Reichswehr ...” The bourgeoisie knew what it was doing! The economic history of Germany since 1932 proves that it was not mistaken. Furthermore, as a revolutionary, anti-capitalist, anti-bourgeois movement, the fascist totalitarians should have developed an all-embracing, unified, ideological program. They did not. Neumann provided us with a far better understanding of this aspect of the totalitarian movement in Behemoth when he wrote:
Behind a mass of irrelevant jargon, banalities, distortions, and half truths, we can discern the relevant and decisive central theme of the ideology; that all traditional doctrines and values must be rejected, whether they stem from French rationalism or German idealism, from English empiricism or American pragmatism, whether liberal or absolutist, democratic or socialist. They are all hostile to the fundamental goal of National Socialism: the resolution by imperialistic war of the discrepancy between the potentialities of Germany’s industrial apparatus and the actuality that existed and continues to exist ... The National Socialist doctrine may be called an “ideology” only because it competes in the world market of ideas, as it were, with other ideologies, though it is, of course, sovereign and single in the domestic market ... National Socialism has no theory of society as we understand it, no consistent picture of its operation, structure, and development. It has certain aims to carry through and adjusts its ideological pronouncements to a series of ever-changing goals. This absence of a basic theory is one difference between National Socialism and Bolshevism [add Stalinism]. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Before we finish with this point, we should like to return to Dwight Macdonald to show to what ludicrous lengths one can go in an uncritical appraisal of such a work as this. The reader has seen what his views were in 1938 and 1941.
Today, however, his rapture over Arendt’s book is so great (he wrote five articles on it) that he has lost his critical faculties. The most amusing result has been that, whereas in 1941 Hitler and Himmler were the German prototypes of the bureaucratic collectivists Stalin and Molotov, today Stalin and Molotov are the Russian editions of the “dull, stolid, bourgeois, family” men, Hitler and Himmler. When Arendt used these quoted words, she used them in a general and symbolic sense. She did not mean that either Hitler or the whole gang of the Nazi hierarchy was dull and stolid.
Dull and stolid apply rather to the members of the Russian ruling class. But the term “bourgeois” is applicable to the whole Nazi movement, as well as the other capitalist totalitarians. Yet, in Arendt’s scheme, this would make the totalitarian movement, composed of “dull, stolid, bourgeois, family” men, the first genuinely anti-bourgeois movement! That could only be made true by demonstrating that the aims of the totalitarians, especially the German (which country Arendt claims was the only genuine totalitarian state in the West) were consciously seeking a complete social overturn. Being such kind of revolutionaries would hardly make them dull or stolid, we think, though they could remain, as a result of tradition, habits, and culture, bourgeois of sorts. But if they were such revolutionaries, as Arendt insists, they would most certainly be in the process of breaking with bourgeois society ideologically and spiritually. But then, too, they would approach the Stalinist totalitarian in type, rather than the reverse, as Macdonald thinks.
We cite here portions of Hitler’s will written days before his end in the Bunker, in the presence of his close associates, Goebbels, Bormann, Burgdorf and Krebs. It is reproduced as one illustration of what we mean when we say that the ideology of the Nazis and their main leader was essentially petty-bourgeois instead of anti-bourgeois. Hitler dictated the following:
Although during the years of struggle I believed that I could not undertake the responsibility of marriage, now, before the end of my life, I have decided to take as my wife, the woman who, after many years of true friendship, came to this town, already almost besieged, of her own free will, in order to share my fate ... My possessions, in so far as they are worth anything, belong to the Party, or if this no longer exists, to the State. If the State too is destroyed, there is no need for any further instructions ... As executor, I appoint my most faithful Party comrade, Martin Bormann. He is given full legal authority to make all decisions. He is permitted to hand over to my relatives everything which is of worth as a personal memento, or is necessary to maintain a petty-bourgeois (sic!) standard of living, especially to my wife’s mother and my faithful fellow workers of both sexes who are well known to him ...
Could Stalin, or Molotov, or any other Russian leader dictate such a will, or conceive of one like it, even under conditions of defeat in a war? We hardly think so.
It is true that Trotsky once called Stalin a bourgeois. But it should be remembered that Trotsky held the view that Stalin was preparing the capitalist restoration in Russia. Trotsky precluded any social alternative to capitalism or socialism almost until his end, when he admitted the possibility of a “third” alternative, such as bureaucratic collectivism, if the working class did not take power during World War II.
 
Arendt’s lack of historical and social method is responsible, too, for another disingenuous theory of “numbers,” by which she tries to establish that there were really only two totalitarian states, Russia and Germany. The later became totalitarian only during the war, because prior to it, the country just did not have enough superfluous people to establish the true totalitarian state. She wrote:
Totalitarianism strives not toward despotic rule over men, but toward a system in which men are superfluous ... As long as all men have not been made equally superfluous – and this has been accomplished only in concentration camps – the ideal of totalitarian domination has not been achieved ...
Only where great masses are superfluous or can be spared without disastrous results of depopulation is totalitarian rule, as distinguished from a totalitarian movement, at all possible. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
She categorically asserts that neither Italy nor Spain were or are totalitarian countries, but merely dictatorships under one-party rule and adds that the small states before the war (linked together are Italy, Spain, Hungary, Roumania, etc.):
simply did not control enough human material to allow for total domination and its inherent great losses in population.
Even Mussolini:
did not attempt to establish a full- fledged totalitarian regime and contented himself with dictatorships and one-party rule ... so that it appeared that totalitarianism was too ambitious an aim, that although it had served well enough to organize the masses until the movement seized power, the absolute size of the country then forced the would-be totalitarian ruler of masses into the more familiar patterns of class or party dictatorship. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
How this “would-be totalitarian ruler of masses” could in the period of the “breakdown of the class system ... the breakdown of the party system,” establish a “class or party dictatorship,” is difficult to understand if you follow Arendt’s thoughts, and especially if you would like to know what class she has in mind.
The superfluousness of population is not an integral characteristic of the totalitarian system. Quite the contrary, to carry out its aggressive program, its population is not superfluous but indispensable for industrial and military purposes. To the totalitarian, it is not his own nationals who are superfluous (except in Stalin’s Russia, where we are dealing with a considerably different kind of totalitarianism), but the nationals of other countries. There was not in Germany, Italy, Spain or any other totalitarian capitalist country “a system in which men are superfluous.” Individuals, yes; man, no. The concentration camp makes a man superfluous, but not man, not humanity. The purpose of the concentration camp is not to depopulate one’s own nation.
Proceeding from her theory, is there a basic minimum number of people necessary before totalitarian rule is possible? The semi-totalitarian regime of Dolfuss in Austria governed over a population of 7,000,000. Fascism came to power in Italy with a population of 40,000,000; in Spain with 27,000,000; in Germany with 65 to 70,000,000. Japanese totalitarianism ruled over 70,000,000 and the Russian rules over 160,000,000. Which country has enough masses to be spared, assuming for the moment that this is the crucial precondition for totalitarian rule? A discussion of this sort could not help but reach a nonsensical level. It would reduce the study of the most complex problem of modern society to an absurd and simple plane but it would not enhance our understanding of the problem.
Along with Italy and Spain, Arendt mentions Roumania, Poland, Hungary, part of Czechoslovakia, etc., as countries which demonstrated that lack of numbers made totalitarian regimes impossible. We have already quoted from her on Italy, so that the reader is familiar with the theory.
The smaller states were not really totalitarian but dictatorial. But then no one seriously contended that they were totalitarian. They were called dictatorships of one type or another. The reason for that, however, has nothing to do with numbers. In these countries, prior to Hitler’s victory and his sweep of Europe, the preconditions which produced the totalitarian phenomenon elsewhere were not precisely present. At best they reflected the external pressure of the Nazi state and tried to mold themselves in the image of that great and threatening power. Although there is a qualitative difference between a totalitarian and dictatorial regime, in the extent of the police regime and the totality of the state power, the dictatorial regime, nevertheless, is a direct forerunner of the totalitarian, and the transition from one to the other is quite easy Such a transition would certainly not be accompanied by the tremendous social upheavals which attended the transformation of a democratic state into a totalitarian (Germany, Italy and Spain).
Mussolini’s regime was not just a mere dictatorship, but a genuine totalitarian state in all essential respects; that of Franco is likewise totalitarian. The differences among the Italian, Spanish, German and the Russian, must be expressed in degree. The basis for the differences lies not in which country had “superfluous” masses but in the nature of the capitalism in the Western European countries. Germany was the most highly developed industrial country in the world outside of the United States, and therefore the country with the most concentrated urban population in Europe. The “looseness” of the Italian and Spanish models is due to the specific character of their capitalisms, i.e., to their primarily agrarian economy and dispersed populations, the secondary role of these countries in the world scene and their specific relations to the world market. They did not have the economic, and therefore, political problems which confronted Germany. Yet even the brutal German totalitarianism, far stronger than its axis allies, was a looser regime than the Russian. (Goebbel’s diary supplies ample proof of this.)
Superfluous population does not determine the way a given national totalitarian state functions. If Stalin liquidated millions and if Hitler destroyed millions of Jews and foreigners (not “masses” of German nationals) the same cannot be said of Italy, Spain and Japan. The latter sought to solve their problems of “overpopulation” (this is the correct word, not “superfluous population.”) as did, in fact, Germany, by imperialist ventures. Mussolini and Franco did not adopt Hitler’s kind of anti-Jewish program because they were either not interested in it or had no “Jewish problems.” This was not because they were only one-party dictatorships, as Arendt insists, but for other social and historical reasons. The fact that Poland and Roumania were not, either in Arendt’s or our view, totalitarian, did not prevent their engaging in the most bestial pogroms against the Jews.
(To be continued)
* * *
Footnote
1. The concept of the democratic state in which government, church, social and economic organizations, etc. rule together and equally without the state being the sole sovereign ruler.
 



(Continued from last issue)
There remain three important closing sections to our examination of Hannah Arendt’s book: (1) The origins of Russian totalitarianism as contrasted to the German; (2) the significance and role of the concentration camps under totalitarianism, and (3) Arendt’s forecast of the likely disappearance of totalitarianism based on ideas which can best be said to bear surrealist color.
The failures of her book are many, but an important one is her insistence on the identity and common origin of Russian and German totalitarianism. She concludes this on the basis of a study of the phenomenon based primarily on German experiences and the material on Russia, much of it quite beside the point, is presented as though it related to what happened in Germany. Her original theory is, in turn, based upon an indiscriminate accumulation of facts made to fit in with a prior conception of the nature of totalitarianism. This is the manner in which Arendt “proves” that Russian and German totalitarianism were identical.
The presentation is a superficial one since it accommodates itself to the most obvious, and therefore, superficial similarities in the political regimes and avoids the considerably more difficult task of determining the social bases which produced a similar (not identical) political superstructure in two countries whose societies were different. In this case, the simple approach does not aid understanding; it confounds it. The reader ought well to remember our discussion of the social forces which made up the totalitarianism in the West. Allowing for Arendt’s fantastic theory of the breakdown of class system in the West, the abolition of the classes which made possible the rise of the totalitarian movement and the victory of Hitler, her estimate of at least the main physical forces which composed the movement is not altogether different from our own. These forces were largely the middle classes, the “petty bourgeoisie gone mad.” The leadership of the movement was composed of social rabble and scum.
The petty bourgeoisie had “gone mad” because, as even Arendt recognizes, society had failed to provide for the needs and aspirations of mankind; the breakdown of capitalist society produced a universal moral decay and degeneration. Fascist totalitarianism is an expression of that decay and degeneration – a bourgeois expression of it. Though she is less interested in the “social question” she could not help but to observe that we have been living in a decades long social crisis. She interprets this social crisis falsely as we have seen. Where the Marxists saw a stalemate in the class struggle in a number of countries and the rise of the totalitarian state in the West as a “last refuge” of the power of the monopolist bourgeoisie, Arendt saw a “classless society” of totalitarianism which destroyed the bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie and proletariat. In her analysis this new “classless society” produced the necessary numbers to overthrow the existing governments and to replace them with the rule of the lawless. Thus, a society was born, one without law or reason, without classes, but divided between rulers and the ruled, and as we pointed out, presumably an “economy without economics.”
In rejecting Arendt’s history of what happened in Germany we dealt principally with that country in our last article. The purpose was to show that the Marxist appreciation of the totalitarian phenomenon was in all fundamental respects superior to her own. We have now only to make some brief references to Stalinist Russia in order to establish the contrast between it and Germany in order to lay the ghost of her theory.
When bolshevism came to power in Russia, a social revolution had occurred. A new type of state emerged from the revolution, the Soviet system, which transferred political power into the hands of the proletariat. We cannot in the limits of this discussion consider whether the Revolution accomplished all of its objectives, or completed the tasks it set for itself. Obviously, it didn’t. But what we are primarily interested in now is what the Revolution did in the main, or tried to do.
The Soviet system was the product of a social revolution. Profound economic and political changes followed the Revolution. This new society was not yet socialist; neither was it capitalist. Its socialist direction, however, was expressed in the abolition of capitalism, the enfranchisement of the masses of workers and peasants, the raising of the working class to political power through the broad Soviet democracy and by the nationalization of the means of production. The fundamental differences between the new state and the rest of the capitalist world was thus unmistakably expressed.
As the Revolution developed, its proletarian class character was more firmly rooted, for a time at least. This was a new class state, but of a different type. It was a proletarian state based on collective property, i.e., state-owned property. With the abolition of the bourgeoisie as a property-owning class and the social reorganization which followed, we had in Russia a different type of working class. In the absence of the bourgeoisie, the
Russian proletariat was no longer a proletariat in the sense in which Marx described this class in his economic writings. For want of a better word it was used by the new state (even the Stalinist state uses the same term). Neither was there a petty-bourgeoisie identical with that class in the capitalist West.
The victory of Stalinism, of course, brought an abrupt end to the progress of the Russian Revolution. A new totalitarian system arose on the basis of the Revolutionary society. This totalitarianism achieved power through a counter revolution which began at the top, in the summits of the ruling power. It achieved power after years of intense factional warfare in the dominant Communist party. One group after another was liquidated in the seemingly never-ending conflicts with the bureaucracy which was intrenched in those areas where power resided. The counter-revolution, which lasted many years, finally ended in the complete triumph of a new bureaucratic ruling class under the leadership of the greatest bureaucrat of all, Joseph Stalin. But this totalitarianism, it should be remembered, arose in a non-capitalist state with a different and new type of social relations. In undermining the Revolution, the bureaucracy, resting upon collectivized property, slowly but firmly entrenched itself as a new ruling class, in a new society, bureaucratic collectivism. While this new state is non-capitalist, or anti-capitalist, it is also, in contrast to Revolutionary Russia, anti-socialist.
Arendt does not see Russian totalitarianism emerging from this new class stratification and the new nationalism. No, she attributes the rise of Russian totalitarianism to Stalin’s subjective desires when “he began to prepare the country for totalitarian government.” If Arendt did not have so strong a bias against science and materialism and understood the real importance of social factors, the main driving forces of her history could not be a number of malevolent men but rather the sum total of the objective factors of society and history.
In the case of Russia, this writer believes that once the working class or socialist democracy was ended, once the Stalinist bureaucracy had assumed total control of the state in a collectivized country where control or, more precisely, “ownership of the state” means “ownership of the property,” once the destruction of the Soviet system and all other forms of working class independent organization occurred, totalitarianism was the inevitable form of political rule. It arose out of the tremendous centralization and concentration of economic power in the hands of the state which controlled the entire economy.
At any rate, this happened in Russia. It does not matter that the reason for the degeneration lay in the failure of the European revolution, in the betrayals of social democracy, in the fatigue of the Russian proletariat and its turn toward national salvation, and in the isolation and backwardness of the country, the unenviable heritage of the Russian proletariat. All these factors only emphasize the roots of Stalinism. But it is important to understand this origin of Russian totalitarianism, to understand the social basis upon which it rests. Without such an understanding it is impossible to understand the specific totalitarianism, how and why it operates as it does. Even at a glance it is easy to see that the Stalinist totalitarianism is a considerably different variety than the Western type.
In Russia, the Stalinist regime does not rest upon the masses of the “petty bourgeoisie gone mad.” It is not in alliance or collusion with a bourgeoisie owning the means of production. Property and finance in Russia has not reverted to private industrialists and financiers, accumulating great fortunes, industrial capital or finance. On the contrary, the bureaucratic collectivist state was actually strengthened under Stalin by the enforced collectivization of all agricultural property.
The totalitarian regime in Russia was born inside the existing Soviet state, not outside of it, or against it, as was the case in Germany and Italy. Stalin did not come to power leading a mass movement against an existing government. He came to complete power (as matter of fact, he was in power) as the head of a tremendous bureaucracy which was the government and whose interests he personified. He did not have the support of the peasantry; he did in fact suppress the peasantry. If Stalin did not have the support (or opposition) of all the forces which supported Hitler, it was because, in a social sense, they did not exist in Russian society. He stood at the head of a party which was largely proletarian, in composition at any rate. It is true that this proletariat was a worn-out proletariat, a fatigued working class, which had given up its international hopes and perspectives. The very best elements of this class had already been wiped out in the revolution. Millions of new members flooded the old party, but they came without the old revolutionary history and traditions behind them, and they joined because membership in the Stalinized Communist Party was one way of getting ahead in the new society. These new “proletarians” were conservative and nationalist; they were the products of the Stalinization of the country. They were workers, but privileged ones. And they joined the government party, the only party which existed, because all power remained centered in this party and emanated from it. In what capitalist country is it possible to find a totalitarian state or movement which has this kind of origin or composition?
While one can equate the totalitarian states in Germany and Russia as two anti-democratic, anti-parliamentary systems, based on police terror, the prisons and the concentration camps, the origins of these states were as different as their societies. The difference in the societies explains the difference in the degree of the totalitarianization of the two countries. Given the bourgeois class character of German totalitarianism, one can understand Goebbels’ constant complaints about the difficulties and the impossibility of organizing a complete war economy in the midst of the war, about the bickering of the various government departments and the lack of cohesion and unity of the war effort. Inefficiency may be a hallmark of the Russian totalitarian system, but no such class independence, or class conspiracies were possible there as they were in Germany. The reason for this state of affairs in Germany, is that while its war economy was also “state-directed” or “state-controlled,” no social revolution had taken place when Hitler came to power. Economically speaking, there was a continuity of German bourgeois society. Consequently, with the defeat of Hitler, no social revolution or counter-revolution was necessary to reestablish Germany capitalism, for in fact, it had never ceased to exist; it merely continued on under the new conditions of Allied occupation and control.
The bourgeois totalitarian societies in Germany and Italy produced different types of individuals than the Russian; the ideologies of the inhabitants were as different as their traditions, culture and mores. These must produce great variations in psychological types. To assert otherwise, it would be necessary to say that despite the different social orders which inhere, the peoples are alike in their thoughts and habits, their aspirations, etc. In that case, “human nature,” precisely in the sense which Arendt uses it, would have to be considered immutable and anyone seeking to change this – what is it, God-given, nature-given, man-given? – would be guilty as she says, of the “criminal intent to change human nature.”
The real facts of life are that bourgeois society of classes, the private ownership of the means of production, of profits and competition, produces men who are quite unlike the men in a slave or feudal society, and also unlike inhabitants of the bureaucratic collectivist society of Russia, which is anti-capitalist, anti-socialist, and totalitarian. This does not mean that Russian society, despite the iron curtain, is a hermetically sealed society, is not reached by events, ideas, practices, habits and traditions of the world outside. These do spill over and effect individuals and groupings in Russian society; the ruling class is therefore all the more vigilant in warding off any influence from the West which might undermine this society. But in the terms of history, even if this new Russian society is rather young, the differences between it and the West are real and strong. It is in this sense that the “symmetrical phenomena” of Germany and Russia remain parallel, but never meet.
The difference between the two totalitarian systems was further emphasized in the post-war period. In Germany and Italy, where the Western bourgeois states conquered, pre-totalitarian conditions were reestablished. Democratic or quasi-democratic bourgeois states were re-established and with them came the re-establishment also of the old “class-parties” and “interest parties,” representing “class interests.”
Where Stalinism triumphed, we have had a social revolution of a new reactionary type, the establishment of new states and new societies reproducing, with variations, the Russian slave state. When Arendt says that “nothing proves better the irreparable decay of the party system than the great efforts after this war to revive it on the Continent ...,” it not only proves that, but proves something even more important: the impossibility of a finding a solution of the world crisis on a capitalist basis, totalitarian or democratic or Stalinist.
The point of emphasis here is that the victory of the West has a annihilating effect upon one of Arendt’s basic conceptions, namely, that totalitarianism arose on the basis of the breakdown of the class system and class parties, the end of class society.
Somewhere along the line, reality caught up with Arendt. She was obviously cognizant that the post-war reorganization of the two Axis powers, Germany and Italy, did something to her theory of the origins of their respective totalitarianisms. For the question must inevitably arise in her mind, if not in the minds of her uncritical critics: Why, after the breakdown of the bourgeois class society and the replacement of classes by masses, should the post-war period see the reappearances of virtually all the class and interest parties which existed prior to the war (and in Italy at the close of the First World War)? Had a social revolution, rather, a capitalist counter-revolution against totalitarian revolution taken place? Actually her theory of the breakdown of capitalist class society covered a far more extensive period than the one immediately preceding the war. In her analysis the period of this breakdown extended over many decades. Yet with a characteristic indifference to “science and materialism” she believes she covers herself by writing first that:
The moment the movement, that is, the fictitious world which sheltered them (it seemed real enough to them and us – A.G.), is destroyed, the masses revert to their old status of isolated individuals who either hopelessly accept a new function in a changed world or sink back into their old desperate superfluousness.
And then:
The members of totalitarian movements utterly fanatical as long as the movement exists, will not follow the example of religious fanatics and die the death of martyrs ... Rather they will quietly give up the movement as a bad bet and look around for another promising fiction, or wait until the former fiction regains strength to establish another mass movement.
In the first place, and as a matter of cold fact, the masses (at least large numbers of them, millions, in fact) did not just “revert to their old status of isolated individuals ... or sink back into their old desperate superfluousness.” The destruction of totalitarianism unleashed a new fervor among millions of people and a new interest in politics and organization. Old class lines, class and interest parties, trade unions, and other organizations, sprung into existence instantaneously the totalitarian regimes were destroyed. In the second place, if Arendt’s analysis of the fascist movements as revolutionary, anti-bourgeois movements, with mass fanatical support, was correct, rather than the Marxist view that they were reactionary movements of bourgeois society without a liberating social doctrine or program, then the fanaticism of its supports should have carried over in large measure. This should follow from Arendt’s theory about disappearance of the class society and the creation of a new totalitarian society which is outside of capitalism and socialism. For after the defeat of Hitler and Mussolini, we ought to have had a social vacuum in which totalitarianism should have thrived. And in the third place, if the masses have reverted to their old status as “isolated individuals” and sank back “into their old desperate superfluousness,” how account for the re-emergence of the mass political, economic and fraternal organizations?
Here is concrete proof that the kind of analysis given by Arendt, which lacks a scientific and materialist basis, has no validity in reality. The postwar period caught her by surprise. On the basis of her conceptions, we should have seen a different world than the one that exists today. Yet capitalism remains in power in the West; it never really ceased to exist, either in the bourgeois democratic or the fascist totalitarian nations. Stalinist totalitarianism remains in power in East Europe and parts of Asia, on the basis of a new social order. If bourgeois totalitarianism reappears in the West it will not be as Arendt claims because class society and the class and interest parties have broken down, but either because the class society has once again failed society, or because capitalism will be required to fight a new world war, which is the same thing as saying capitalism has failed once more. This totalitarianism may arise even before the outbreak of a new war as the means of preparing for and waging this war. Then Arendt may perhaps say: see, I told you so. But if and when it comes, it will be for reasons totally different from hers.
One final point on this aspect of the problem. If what the bourgeois West did was to revive a doomed society, in the opinion of Arendt, it would follow, would it not, that the collapse of this society and the revival of Hitlerism is inevitable? That seems to be the gist of Arendt’s thesis since the world has not reorganized on the only basis this inevitability could be avoided (we shall go into detail on this in our closing pages): the adoption of a new concept of man. In the absence of this reorganization of society, the uncritical critics of the left-of-center who accept Arendt’s views are counseling the world to support an outlived, useless and reactionary system which must reproduce the totalitarian experience of fascism.
What other alternative is there? There is the socialist alternative to capitalist and Stalinist totalitarianism. We shall see why Arendt rejects it after a brief but necessary discussion of her conception of the role of the concentration camp in totalitarian society.
The third part of Arendt’s book begins with a quotation from David Rousset’s brilliant book on the concentration camp system, The Other Kingdom. Rousset wrote: “Normal men do not know that everything is possible.” Rousset was writing about the varied horrors of concentration camp life and its effect on the prisoners. His book, and the many others that appeared since the close of the war, help to impress on doubting and incredulous minds that what had been reported about the camps was true. Even the most expressive and sensitive writers tell us that they cannot quite convey the absolute terror and misery which beset the prisoners in their daily concentration camp existence. Words merely describe the experience; they just do not have the ability to penetrate the inner effects of the physical, spiritual and moral suffering of the prisoners.
The individual camps varied in the degree of exploitation, torture and isolation. They became more refined in their organization and extermination programs with the passage of time. Torture and terror became a science and an art in the hands of the totalitarians and this was possible because behind the system stood the power of the state with all its resources available to the camp directors and organizers. Even in this area of totalitarian life, there were great differences between the camps in Germany and Russia. While in both countries, the camps originated in political purpose, the German camps were turned into extermination factories for Jews, Poles, Ukrainians and other nationals. For Germans, they were primarily disciplinary camps, punishment centers, or re-education “schools.” The incorrigible Germans often paid with the supreme penalty for their refusal to compromise with fascism. The German camps were not, however, important for any significant economic reason. We do know that many state functionaries, Nazis included, deplored the extermination program because it precluded the use of additional millions as slave laborers in German war industries.
In Russia, however, a far more extensive camp system was organized with multiple purposes, the most important being as slave labor units correlated to the general economic needs of the country. The GPU established a special labor division whose purpose it is to furnish a never-ending supply of workers for Siberian projects. It is true that there are camps whose sole purpose and function is to destroy morally, spiritually and physically then “questionable” elements. Other camps work their prisoners to death. Whatever their function, millions of prisoners make up a vast labor force who are exploited by the state and become the means of an accumulation and economic expansion of sorts.
The concentration camps do, as Arendt says, destroy human dignity while death is postponed. They destroy all individuality. They destroy the psyche without destroying the physical man. And they do all these things by methods old and new. In most, if not all camps, social criminals dominate life. They exploit, brutalize and punish inmates. The criminals are the prisoner-representatives of the state inside the camps, and in that capacity are privileged prisoners.
Once in power, the totalitarian state, in an effort to consolidate that power, establishes the concentration camp system as the means of terrorizing a whole population into fear and submission. Whether Hitler learned from Stalin, and Stalin from the Czar’s system of Siberian exile, the fact is that the camps attained their present form through an evolutionary process. The German and Russian camps based themselves on the experiences of the world, but with this difference: other camps that have existed in various parts of the world, organized in the main by the great imperialist powers, were temporary, isolated and rather mild affairs. For the totalitarian state which establishes a concentration camp system, the camps are state organized, systematically directed from the top and created on a mass scale. They are permanent. The system reflects the tension of the totalitarian rulers, their fear of the people and of rebellion.
Camps are thus a threat to the people as a whole and to any group of individuals that opposition to the rulers is dangerous in the extreme. Therefore, while we appreciate the many things that Arendt wrote on the concentration camp, we cannot accept her theory of the significance of these camps in the totalitarian scheme. Arendt writes:
Totalitarianism strives not toward despotic rule over men, but toward a system in which men are superfluous ... As long as all men have not been made equally superfluous – and this has been accomplished only in concentration camps – the ideal of totalitarian domination has not been achieved. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
We think it nonsense to say that “totalitarianism strives not toward a despotic rule over men,” for that is just exactly what it strives for, and it does so for good economic and political, i.e., social reasons. It is the totalitarian despotism which makes the concentration camps necessary and possible, but not in all totalitarian states, as we have seen. While it may be true that men are superfluous only in concentration camps, it does not follow that “the ideal of totalitarian domination has not been achieved,” if a vast concentration camp system has not been established by such a state. We have little patience with Arendt’s theory of “numbers” which, we repeat, is unnecessary to a valid theory and intelligent understanding of this phenomenon. Neither Mussolini nor Franco required an extensive camp system. Even though Arendt does not consider Italy or Spain to be totalitarian states, they were, by every important fundamental consideration of what makes a state totalitarian.
It is necessary to bear in mind that it is the totalitarian state which produces the concentration camp system and not the other way around. The reader may wonder why it is even necessary to state something which seems so elementary. But it should be clear by now that Arendt’s views, which have received such acclaim, challenge this by interposing theories and conceptions which negate the above. She gives the concentration camp system a place in present-day society and a significance it does not have. Her position, as we shall quickly show, is a compromise with totalitarianism because she rejects its essential characteristic which is despotism.
For us totalitarianism symbolizes despotic rule, the total domination of the state, the triumph of the absolute dictator, the destruction of parliamentarism, of political parties, of all forms of freedom and democracy. For us the concentration camp system is but a manifestation of the totalitarian state. But it is not the most important manifestation because no matter how extensive it may be, no matter how many millions it may encompass, the main mass of the population, the overwhelming majority of the people, remain the victims of the more generalized form of rule of this police state.
Life in the totalitarian state is alternately black and gray. The people experience a persistent, never-ending economic exploitation, a never-ending political supervision by secret police, a continuing surveillance by the ruling party, appointed and self-appointed informers and the rulers of the factories. It is the population in general, the workers and the peasants, which provides the economic basis for the existence of the new state. This state could not survive for long on the basis only of a concentration camp system. That might be possible in a very simple society; it is not possible in a complex, industrial system resting on large populations. For society to function at all today, the people as such are not and cannot be superfluous.
In addition to the above-quoted view which Arendt has on the concentration camp system, she developed a more universal theory which is unacceptable because it is in effect a reactionary accommodation to the more essential characteristics of totalitarianism as a system of political rule. Arendt believes that as long as an individual in a community, whether it is democratic or fascist, slave or feudal, (or any other social system) enjoys the same rights as any other citizen, or the same lack of rights, no matter what one thinks of the system, no special crime has been committed against an individual, i.e., no crime against humanity has been committed. The crime against humanity occurs with the establishment of the concentration camp. She writes:
For man as man has only one right that transcends his various rights as a citizen: the right never to be excluded from the rights granted by his community, an exclusion which occurs not when he is put into jail (!) but when he is sent to a concentration camp. Only then is he excluded from that whole sphere of legality where rights spring from the mutual guarantees which alone can insure them ...
Crimes against humanity have become a kind of specialty of totalitarian regimes. In the long run, it will do more harm than good if we confuse this supreme kind of crime with a long series of other crimes which these regimes also indiscriminately commit – such as injustice and exploitation, deprivation of liberty and political oppression. Such crimes are familiar in all tyrannies (and in democratic countries too – A.G.) and will hardly ever be found sufficient to justify interference with another country’s sovereign affairs. Soviet Russia’s aggressive and imperialist foreign policy has resulted in crimes against many peoples and is of great concern to the whole world, but it is an issue of ordinary foreign politics on the international level, not a concern of humanity as such – that is of a possible law above nations. Russian concentration camps, on the other hand, in which many millions are deprived of even the doubtful benefits of the law of their own country, could and should become the subject of action that would not have to respect the rights and rules of sovereignty.
Unfortunately for Arendt, the people of the world are concerned precisely with what she thinks is secondary, for she creates a purely arbitrary and artificial division of what constitutes the rights of a citizen and the division accommodates itself to the apparently lesser crimes of totalitarianism. It is like saying: if only the totalitarian state would not set up the concentration camp system, why, then, all the citizens would be equal – i.e., equally deprived – and no one could claim advantage. Now it is true that Arendt is discussing under what circumstances other peoples or nations have the right to intervene in the affairs of another country. She accepts Justice Jackson’s concept of “crimes against humanity.” These crimes against humanity seem to be the exclusive property of the concentration camps. And when that condition exists, peoples or nations may intervene in the affairs of another country – but not under any other condition, not, for example, simply because a totalitarian state has deprived its people of every single democratic right we have ever known. This is simply not enough in Arendt’s view. Why should it be if she believes “it will do more harm than good if we confuse this supreme kind of crime with a long series of other crimes which these regimes also indiscriminately commit – such as injustice and exploitation, deprivation of liberty and political oppression.”
What are those crimes? They are not new. They occur all over the world, in all countries, to one degree or another. It is true they occur all at once in a totalitarian state, but as long as all the citizens suffer equally these deprivations, these injustices, the exploitation, oppression and deprivation of liberty, there has been no “crime against humanity!” And her book is called the greatest work on totalitarianism, the most significant political writing of this century (the equal of the writings of Karl Marx, no less), the clearest examination of the great problem of our times.
We have, for example, always believed that a man imprisoned is a man excluded from his community and deprived of the rights of other citizens. If a community believes in imprisonment as a form of punishment, it may be the law that applies equally to all citizens but the man imprisoned is, by definition and fact, deprived of the rights of citizenship and excluded from his community. The concentration camp is a more severe punishment and exclusion from the community. There have been many inmates who have returned to the society which thus banished them and resumed their proscribed citizenship just as ex-criminals do even in a democratic society. The truth is that any state which deprives citizens of the fundamental rights of democracy commits a crime against humanity. Because it is under this deprivation that the dominant class in society organizes and executes its varied exploitation of the people. This is what is important and Arendt’s view is simply absurd. Her concluding chapter carries on this absurdity with a conception of the new social hope of mankind that is in some respects juvenile, in other respects simply unreal, and in still another, a defiant rejection of all the lessons of history.
Arendt’s concluding chapter is perhaps the least rewarding in the whole book. It summarizes her system, for she is a system-builder. The opening paragraph of this chapter proclaims the inevitable failure of totalitarianism; its breakdown is insured because “... the chances are that total domination of man will never come about, for it presupposes the existence of one authority, one way of life, one ideology in all countries and among all peoples of the world.” She cites how Hitler, when he was astride the European continent, was incapable of holding on to his conquests simply because the Nazis “spoiled their chances to win the sympathies, or at least the tolerance, of the conquered peoples by introducing at once the most extreme aspects of its race politics, thereby giving them no alternative but to fight back even under desperate conditions.” The same is true of Stalin. Both might have succeeded had they been willing to take less than everything. This abrupt conclusion comes after a portrait of the invincibility of totalitarianism based on the social, political and moral degeneration of our era.
So, “... totalitarianism has only one chance of eventual victory, and that is a global catastrophe which would have to occur, so to speak, at a moment’s notice.”
Two thoughts then follow, one an unjustifiable optimism, given her “theoretical views,” the other a glimmer of the reality of our times. The two thoughts follow in one paragraph, but we shall separate them because there is no necessary connection between them.
All this [the above] seems to indicate that totalitarianism will one day simply disappear, leaving no other trace in the history of mankind than exhausted peoples, economic and social chaos, political vacuum, and a spiritual tabula rasa. It may well be that even our generation will live to see a time when it is permitted to forget the holes of oblivion, the mass manufacture of corpses, and that sins greater than murder ever existed ...
Here is the other thought:
The futility of totalitarianism in the long run is as essential an aspect of the phenomenon as the offensive ludicrousness of the tenets for which it is prepared to commit its monstrosities. The tragedy, however, is that this futility and this ludicrousness are more deeply connected with the crisis of this century and more significant for its true perplexities than the well-meaning efforts of the non-totalitarian world to safeguard the status quo. It is not only human solidarity that command us to understand the holes of oblivion and the world of the dying as the central issues of our political life; the fact is that the true problems of our time cannot be understood, let alone solved, without the acknowledgement that totalitarianism became this century’s curse only because it so terrifyingly took care of its problems. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
The striking point in all of the above is that despite her confusion, Arendt did recognize that this is a century of crisis. It is rather futile, however, to argue with Arendt over the significance of the crematories and the camps. She believes them to be the “ideal” of totalitarianism, the object for which it strives. She believes the relevance of the totalitarian regimes “which is independent of their futility and ludicrousness, reveals itself most clearly in the concentration camps.” We, on the other hand, believe that the camps represent the deepest shade of black in the black dictatorship of totalitarianism. We do not agree that if no concentration camp exists there can be no totalitarian regime, or that it has not reached its “ideal,” for totalitarianism is essentially a system of political rule, with a complex political super structure of which the concentration camp system may be an important by-product, created for a specific political purpose. If we differ with Arendt on the significance of the camps in the totalitarian schema, it is not because we do not understand or feel its horrors. We are keenly sensitive to them and were so long before many democrats of our time became militant anti-totalitarians.
What, however, is the crisis of this century? Is it a moral crisis? A spiritual one? A religious one? The crisis incorporates all of these, but it is above all a social crisis reflecting the breakdown of modern capitalist society and the failure of socialism yet to replace the reactionary, outworn bourgeois society which stands as a barrier against progress. The second world war was an extreme expression of this crisis; the expansion of Stalinism is but the expression of the failures of the victors in the war to make one progressive step forward in the solution of the crisis which has lasted now for at least four decades. The crisis is further reflected in the strivings of the colonial and semi-colonial peoples of the world, and the efforts to survive the present chaos by the newly-established independent nations of the old colonial world. The crisis is still further reflected in the inability of Western capitalist society, democratic and otherwise, to respond to the innermost aspirations of these people; in their inability to fight successfully the spread of the Stalinist totalitarianism, which at least knows how to take advantage of the yearnings of these peoples for agrarian reform and freedom.
Isn’t it significant that only Justice William A. Douglas in high government echelons, seems to understand the problem in the Far East, and he has earned the enmity of the entire bourgeoisie and its press in the United States. And in Europe, the only policy the Western bourgeois under the leadership of economically and militarily powerful United States can oppose to Stalinism, is a military one. The bourgeois system is as ideologically bankrupt, as it is socially. Stalinism totalitarianism thrives precisely upon the ideological weaknesses of the bourgeois world where increasing difficulties can very easily produce new totalitarian movements.
The only hope for survival of the world, for its progress, the only guarantee that the world will not degenerate into a modern barbarism, is a socialist reorganization of society, a world system which would break down the artificial separation of the peoples by national boundaries, and the exploitation and oppression of man by the elimination of the private ownership of the means of production and by the extension of the limited democracy of bourgeoisie society to scale hitherto unknown to modern man.
If socialism does not come, then there is no reason to believe with Arendt that “totalitarianism will one day simply disappear ...” or “... that even our generation will live to see a time when it is permitted to forget the holes of oblivion, the mass manufacturer of corpses, and that sins greater than murder ever existed.” The urgency of the social crisis, a short few years after the greatest of all wars, has already shortened the memories of the world’s millions whose thoughts are all occupied with the pressing present and an unknown and fearful future of atomic warfare.
Toward the end of her book, Arendt states that “The structurelessness of the totalitarian state, its neglect of material interests, its emancipation from the profit motive, and its non-utilitarian attitudes in general have more than anything else contributed to making contemporary politics well-nigh unpredictable.” Every point in this analysis is quite wrong and bear no relation to real history. It is painful to argue that material interests, the profit motive and utilitarian attitudes have had everything to do with totalitarianism, its origins and development. The history of the phenomenon is really an open book. Moreover, predicting, in general, what the totalitarians would do, was also possible provided political blinders were removed. It is not necessary, nor is it possible, to predict the political future of mankind (and of course, the economic future), in every detail in order to forecast it in general terms, in the same way as the second world war and the post-war period was predicted by the genuine Marxists. Given the experience of the past twenty years, it is not only possible, but necessary to predict the return, a return of totalitarianism in the absence of any fundamental changes in society.
Arendt has a glimmer of understanding of the problem, so she presents a new world program to prevent a recurrence of totalitarianism and to solve the crisis for all time. Where does she begin? With society? With economics or politics? No! She begins with man, as though man were an abstract category, independent of his environment, unrelated to and untouched by the society in which he lives. To avoid the darkness of totalitarianism, that revolutionary, anti-bourgeois, invincible movement of reaction against which “common-sense trained in utilitarian thinking is helpless,” a new beginning has to be made. It has to be made because the bourgeois era has come to an end and because “... the whole of nearly three thousand years of Western culture with all its implied beliefs, traditions, standards of judgment, has come toppling down over our heads.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.) No less than that. So where do we begin?
Politically, this means that before drawing up a new constitution of a new body politic, we shall have to create – not merely discover – a new foundation for human community as such.
Shall it be on the basis of Edmund Burke’s assertion that human rights were an “abstraction” and that the only true rights were “entailed inheritance,” the rights one transmits to one’s children and the “rights of an Englishman” rather than the inalienable rights of man? Arendt cites Edmund Burke’s view that rights spring “from within the nation.” And she adds approvingly: “The pragmatic soundness of Burke’s concept seems to be beyond doubt in the light of our manifold experiences.” Yet it was these concepts which led Burke into uncompromising opposition to the French Revolution and the liberating ideas associated with it. He opposed any ideas which might challenge the national state. Shall we then begin the “new foundation for human community” with a nation, a world system of nations, the very system which stands in the way of progress? Yes, but with something new added. Arendt says:
In historical terms this would mean not the end of history, but its first consciously planned beginning, together with the bitter realization that nothing has been promised us, no Messianic Age, no classless society, no paradise after death. Such a consciously planned beginning has obviously never been possible because mankind was only a concept or an ideal, never a reality.
Why was mankind only a concept or ideal and never a reality? It could never be a reality because all previous social organization, based on a division of the world into states, strong and weak nations, property owners and propertyless, exploiters and exploited, precluded the evolution of mankind into a world unity based upon economic and social security, peace and cultural progress. Rather than striking out boldly in this direction, Arendt puts all responsibility for the future on an abstract mankind.
Mankind will either find a way to live in and rule together an overcrowded earth or it will perish – an event which will leave the sublime indifference of nature untouched.
One has to get beyond this sweep of rhetoric which is the style of Arendt and which employs the language of bourgeois thought and bourgeois categories, for all her protests to the contrary. Nature’s interest or indifference to the fate of mankind has really nothing to do with this discussion at all. Man’s interest in his future is ever-present. If there were not this interest no hope for the future would exist. But Arendt does not provide such hope. Her great discovery for the future turns out to be so small an idea so inconsistent with life itself, as to become, despite its really human desire, a little bit ridiculous.
“This situation,” she writes, “the emergence of mankind as one political entity, makes the new concept of ‘crimes against humanity’,” expressed by Justice Jackson at the Nuremburg trials, “the first and foremost notion of international law.” This concept, you see, “enters the sphere of law that is above the nation’s.” Above all nations! We submit that a new concept of mankind is impossible on the basis of a nationalist division of the earth. Justice Jackson’s pronouncement can only be what it is now, a weapon in the hands of any victor in any war against a defeated enemy. Goering was realistic above all when he called the Trials a political weapon of the victors.
The concern of this new kind of law cannot be such crimes as aggressive and criminal warfare, breaches of treaty, the oppression and exploitation of one’s own and foreign peoples. All such transgressions must be met in the future, as they have been met in the past (pity poor mankind for that – A.G.), by the concerted action of those nations which are the offended parties. Within the framework of present political organization and under the circumstances of sovereign statehood – circumstances which in no way contradict the simultaneous political existence of mankind (!) – they can hardly be outlawed otherwise than by international or reciprocal treaties and alliances ...
No more than this need be quoted to prove that Arendt has not been able to extricate herself from her bourgeois environment and ideology. Present political organization and sovereign statehood is an unmitigated evil and the obstacle to social progress. It upholds bourgeois society and Stalinism: it is the basis for nationalist totalitarianism. One could wonder how Arendt can be reduced to this kind of political program after reading the scattered material in her book, were it not for the fact that she reveals, in the absence of a scientific and materialist method, an incapacity to understand the significance of her own material. Her great proposal to save mankind thus amounts to a fantastic manipulation of a bourgeois political idea which is quite consistent with this contradictory society. Arendt foresees no change whatever in the present organization of society – the national states. She foresees no economic or political change of society All she calls for is the adoption of Justice Jackson’s “doctrine” to be superimposed on the imperialist system, which is, according to her, responsible for the present evils. And yet, she talks about the end of the bourgeois era!
Arendt continues: “If there is any sense in the 18th Century formula that man has come of age, it is that from now on, man is the only possible creator of his own laws and the only possible maker of his own history.” What is new about this? Man has always done this. He has done it well; he has done poorly. He was always the maker of his own laws and his own history, but on the basis of the conditions at hand, against the background of specific social developments. Yet even if we accept Arendt’s formula, how will that bring about, or guarantee the great social reform?
When Arendt says that “We can no longer believe with Lenin that a people will gradually become accustomed to the observance of the elementary rules of social life that have been repeated for thousands of years,” what right has she “to try for what Burke’s great common sense deemed impossible: ‘new discoveries ... in morality ... or in the idea of liberty.’ ” If mankind cannot become “accustomed to the observance of the elementary rules of social life” how can it make “new discoveries ... in morality ... or in the idea of liberty.” The trouble with Arendt is that she views mankind as one common mass, rather than divided into nations and classes, reflecting an archaic, retrogressive social order.
The decline in morality is progressive; it is noteworthy particularly in the richest and most powerful of all the western nations, the United States. This degeneration cannot but continue as long as capitalism and the present system of national states exist.
The only alternative to the resentment of the “nihilist,” according to Arendt, would be “a fundamental gratitude for the few elementary things that are indeed given us, such as life itself, the existence of man and the world.” What does this gratitude expect? “... nothing, except – in the words of Faulkner – one’s “own anonymous chance to perform something passionate and brave and austere not just in but into man’s enduring chronicle ... in gratitude for the gift of [one’s] time in it.” This, then, is Arendt’s program for a solution to the world’s ills; this is her hope for a “consciously planned beginning of history ... a consciously devised new policy ...” It is a small, a utopian ideal because it is divorced from reality. Certainly it is not nearly enough even for a new beginning of history.
In the closing part of her book everything revolves around the concentration camp victims. All her ideas for a new organization of life follows from this concern, as a result of which, she has lost sight of the more important and fundamental questions that weigh heavily on all of mankind and not a segment of it, namely, how shall society be reorganized to wipe out its present ills and to put mankind on the high road to social peace and progress. Precisely, at this point, Arendt’s great ideas become commonplace, and as we have said, utopian. Commonplace, because they are a collection of old and worn-out schemas; utopian, because like so many of her predecessors, she hopes to bring about a change in the human condition without changing the social relations which have produced the crisis and the challenge of the century. She has little or nothing to say about the real social problem.
The truth is that the Origins of Totalitarianism is a disorganized and chaotic work which does not grasp or understand in clear terms the social basis for the phenomenon, the real extent and limitations of the system. Thus, there is outrage where cold analysis is required, despair where hope should be present, and hope where there is really none.
Arendt has rejected all known panaceas, the good and the bad. The ideas of the French Enlightenment, the progress of modern science, utopian socialism and the scientific theory of Marxian socialism. Marx’s theory of the classless socialist society is likened to the Hebrew myth that “a lost paradise would be rediscovered in the Messianic Age ...” To her “Only the French and American revolutions made a weak and fumbling attempt to come to a radically new concept, not of human history but of its ultimate meaning.” (They were really not weak and fumbling but powerful stimulants to the great progress which society did make in the century that followed.) The errors, or the failures of these two tremendous historical events, Arendt says, is that they proclaimed “human rights” as independent of historical rights; they replaced historical rights with natural rights, “put ‘nature’ in the place of history and ... tacitly assumed that ‘nature’ was less alien to the essence of man than history.” The fact is that Arendt simply does not understand historical progress, the progress and development of ideology on the premise of man’s social development. It was fortunate for history and society that the revolutionaries of France and America did have a better grasp of the social problem of their time than Arendt has of the social problem of today.
All talk about the dignity of man, the preservation of life, the organization of a new community, of a planned beginning of history and a consciously devised polity, becomes a pure parlor exercise when it does not understand that what mankind needs above all is a radical reorganization of society.
The dignity of man, the rights of man, natural or historical, a new spiritual and cultural development of man can never be realized in any social environment based upon economic and social inequality, exploitation, oppression, national and race antagonism, imperialism and war. All of these factors militate against genuine social and human progress. Yet these are the social conditions under which mankind lives. Given these social conditions in an era of the universal decay of modern society, then degeneration, which is expressed in such large measure by totalitarianism, is inevitable.
Marx knew all about these things one hundred years ago. When he analyzed the nature of class society, especially capitalist society, forecast its inevitable decay and degeneration, and heralded the coming of socialism as the only way to avoid modern social barbarism, it was not because he was aesthetically enamored of machinery, modern production, and the machine-man, organized by capitalist society. No, his devastating criticism of the exploitation of capitalist society was based on an appreciation of and love of man, on a deep faith in the future of human society and in the firm conviction that only socialism would usher in the real beginning of human history, make possible unlimited cultural and intellectual development, and create the conditions for genuine social progress.
Despite the efforts of the ideologues of bourgeois society, the organization of its vast powers against it, despite the absolute evil influence of Stalinism, Marxism remains the only relevant system that provides a hope for the future. Arendt’s book only emphasizes this, even if in a negative way.
 



The abundant skill of Whittaker Chambers as a writer is revealed in the way he has dramatized his career as a second-rate Stalinist functionary in the legal as well as the illegal apparatus, making himself appear as a star performer. Without the fortuitous circumstances of the Hiss case, however, Chambers could never have been catapulted to such public fame. Yet, in less skillful hands, the story of his “ordeal” in the long pages of The Witness
[1] might well have been a bore. Despite the chiaroscuro tones of this utterly humorless work, and the atmosphere of unrelieved doom and gloom which pervades its pages, the book is an exciting narrative.
What makes the book important is the political climate of our times, for, whatever else it may contain, The Witness is concerned with the essence of politics in the Western world today: the struggle to defeat world Stalinism, the mortal enemy of bourgeois society, as well as of socialism, the working class and all humanity.
Chambers confronts the reader with a dilemma: the necessity of a war against Stalinism which, he asserts, capitalism cannot win. This does not, by any means, reflect the prevailing mood of the bourgeoisie. The problem faced by it, and especially its liberal wing is how to organize a successful struggle against Stalinist totalitarianism without at the same time destroying all of organized society.
The dominant trend is toward war. The Right would wage that war with or without the maintenance of democracy and democratic institutions ... it all depends. The liberal wing also believes that war is inescapable, but it would prefer to wage the war democratically, through the extension of its new ideal, the “mixed economy,” as the means of curbing reactionary monopoly capitalism.
In the present world situation, Chambers’ book is a call for a Crusade of the Right. That is why the liberals, unavoidably united with the most backward segments of society around the principle of pure and simple anti-Stalinism, have been shocked by the essentially reactionary nature of The Witness. Pure and simple anti-Stalinism, on the other hand, seems to me to explain Sidney Hook’s extravagant commentary in his critical review of the book when he wrote that “this volume (is) one of the most significant autobiographies of the twentieth century ... throws more light on the conspiratorial and religious character of modern communism, ... than all the hundred great books of the past combined (how the hundred great books of the past could have shed any light on the twenty-five year old Stalinist phenomenon, only Hook could venture to suggest).” Time will show that The Witness does far less for our understanding of the Stalinist phenomenon than dozens of other books have done, including several writings of Hook himself. It teaches us less than nothing about the basic characteristics of Stalinist totalitarianism.
The outstanding characteristics of Stalinism have been described long ago, while Chambers was still one of its agents, by the socialist and Marxist movement, by the Trotskyists of the Thirties, and above all, most intelligently, by the Independent Socialist League and the New International.
The Witness is typically American in reflecting the political thinking of a section of the most powerful bourgeoisie in the world, its saber-rattling and its insularity. It is inconceivable that such a work could have been produced in Europe where the witchhunt atmosphere is absent; it is inconceivable that a European Stalinist agent, in breaking with that movement, would have embraced God and Religion in so primitive and philosophically reactionary way that Chambers did. At least, we know of no such similar occurrence though there have been many agents of the Stalinist underground who did break with it. In the majority of those instances, the men broke on avowedly political grounds without seeking safety and salvation in the supernatural.
What surprises is not that Stalinism was able to spawn a Whittaker Chambers, but that so tiny a figure as he could, as a result of the Hiss case, in the current political climate of the country, rise to the level of an important figure. What saddens is that this depressing book is hailed by so many as a work of genuine stature, even by critics who assert that there isn’t a single important thought in the book, or by those who reject almost every historical, political, and philosophical premise of the author.
One or two of the more perspicacious reviewers of the The Witness, correctly observed that the book would redound to the ultimate benefit of Stalinism, for Chambers reveals in his thinking, his religious conversion and zeal, his medieval philosophy, and above all, in his present politics that he remains a Stalinist type. Throughout the book there is ever-present, whether consciously or not is of no importance, that reverence for power, typical of Stalinist cynicism which Chambers has in abundant quantity.
If you take Chambers’ belated description of the evolution of his break with Stalinism as the gospel truth, then you must conclude that he was not fully possessed of all his senses. But he was, and the book shows him to be an extremely conscious and often sagacious interpreter of his acts and his goals.
Despite Chambers’ contention that his break with Stalinism was the result of a protracted evolutionary process, the facts show that it must have occurred rather abruptly. Though intending to convey that the process of disillusionment was a long one, Chambers himself unwittingly reveals that it occurred rather swiftly.
Until now, even the most critical reviewers have granted that the book is an “honest” account of Chambers travail, his role in the Stalinist party, his political doubts, and finally, his resolution to sever all ties with Stalinism. Yet we believe that giving Chambers all the benefit of doubt, his account of the break with Stalinism strains logic, if not credibility. Unhappily, the political situation, has made an objective appraisal of the book difficult. Critics may, for example, deplore Chambers’ reactionary attack on philosophy, science, materialism and the significance of modern industrialism, as Hook does. They may, also, deplore his attack on the New Deal and Roosevelt as many others do. But for all of that, the unifying force of pure and simple anti-Stalinism, which makes of the fight against Stalinism a simple thing, excuses many things, and the critics lend their several authorities to raise the stature of the man and to strengthen his essentially reactionary influence. The failure to understand the nature, significance and place of Stalinism in modern history leaves many critics confused and disarmed.
We believe that there is one other factor which makes itself felt in the reviews and which explains in part the perplexity of so many critics. It has to do with Chambers’ religious conversion, which lies like an opaque film over his story. Yet it is considered bad taste to question a man newly come to God. It just isn’t done. The assumption is made, that since the man has turned to God and religion, his description of the conversion must be true. How can a man lie about something so close to his soul? What right has another man to judge? If the story of his conversion is true (can it be false?), then everything else he writes about himself must, by the same token, be true. For no man can bare his soul as Chambers did and not be truthful about it. Fortunately, the literature of modern psychology and psychoanalysis teaches us much about the complexities and contradictions of man’s conduct; it warns us against accepting the obvious, the expressed and avowed motives, and prepares for the surprises of the unconscious, the unavowed, the concealed. Good manners aside, the truth is more important than Chambers’ conversion. He has no right to use God and Religion as a shield, but if he does so use them, they should be ignored, if we are to seek the truth and judge the credibility of his testimony.
 
Chambers bares much of his character by what has already been termed the masochistic revelations of an unattractive personality. There are moments when he writes as though he lay on an analyst’s couch describing the very depths of the childhood and family misery that went into forming the character of the man. Though we are unable to understand the full significance of the traumata of his childhood life, the effects these had on the malformation of his personality, are described somewhat fully by the author himself.
It appears that a rather repulsive act, not uncommon among children, which occurred at school in his early boyhood, imbedded itself so deeply in Chambers consciousness that he is able to write: “I think it was at that point that I developed a deep distrust of the human race.” His whole early life was one of solitude. He had no love from his father, and no friends. He felt himself unattractive to girls and avoided their company. The absence of family warmth, of the lively existence of children’s society, the sympathy and affection of mature people, only added to a bleak, empty and harmful environment. These explain in part, the cold, suspicious and essentially cynical nature of the man he became.
Chambers reached maturity in the years following the First World War. The economic and political world crisis of the time had a radicalizing influence upon him. He describes this development as it occurred while attending Columbia University. A trip to Germany during the inflation period of 1923 confirmed his radical views. He came back from Europe a communist. Now, the reasons why a man becomes a socialist are many: some are attracted by its ennobling ideal; others by intellectual conviction that Marxism supplies the answer to evils of modern society and the hope for the future of man; still others become socialists through the economic, political and social pressures of capitalism. Once a socialist, however, a man becomes attracted to its ideal, its promise for mankind, no matter how his political conversion occurred. Insensitive indeed is the man who becomes a socialist and who has no regard or emotional feeling for the promise of the good society which socialism conveys. Such a man may cite scripture, and understand “historical law,” and the “processes of history,” but he remains a poor socialist, indeed.
Chambers conversion to socialism is a cold-blooded process, based on an icy objectivity. He saw Europe and he saw capitalism in disintegration. He was convinced that it was a doomed society. The future was represented by the Russian Revolution. Placed alongside the decay of European capitalism it reflected the power of the new, the promise of the future, and above all, it was successful!
In accepting Marxism and the pre- Stalinist communist movement, Chambers says little about its theories and principles, its program and policies, its strategies and tactics. The book is ideologically barren and this is all the more striking if we bear in mind the stages of political development which through Chambers lived. This, too, is an index of the man, for it becomes apparent that in becoming a socialist, he was motivated solely by a personal war with society and was never able to transcend this narrow motivation in the interest of the greater ideal. One can detect in Chambers’ “political system” a respect for power per se. He was picking a winning side and this is reflected in the way he became a member of the Communist Party and the work that he did. You do not feel any surge in the man upon becoming a socialist; there is no sentiment, no emotion.
This is what we do learn! Whittaker Chambers joined the Communist Party in 1925. Almost immediately he became a functionary of the party by obtaining a post on the Daily Worker, of which he soon became an editor. Even though he was assigned to a branch, night work on the paper prevented his attendance at meetings. Although other night workers attended day branches, Chambers never sought out the affairs of the basic unit of the party. He was a member at the top, and as a result, became identified with the party bureaucracy.
In a party riven with factionalism, going through the process of transformation into a Stalinist organization, he manages to work quietly doing his job, i.e., writing upon the instruction of political superiors. He never expresses his own ideas, his own interpretations of events and problems, but merely writes on reflecting the rapidly changing positions of the party. Chambers says, he was repelled by the struggles which raged around him. He tried to rise above them. He was offended and aghast at the bitterness of the factional quarrels when there was so much to do towards the building of the party. Foster Group, Lovestone Group, Cannon Group, the expulsion of the Trotskyists which marked the first decisive step in the Stalinization of the party – all of this, the real political life of the organization, interested him not at all. There is not a single reference to a single political idea in this whole section of the book.
The story he tells, however, is incomplete. His indifference to the political struggles, to the ideas in dispute, and to the great schisms which developed, above all in the Communist International, were balanced off by a faith in the current party leadership, the Lovestone faction. It happened to be the leadership of the party, and that was enough for Chambers. He supported that leadership and that is why he had the reputation in the party of being a Lovestonite. It was this adherence to the Lovestone leadership which was responsible for his subsequent sabbatical leave in 1931 and 1932, an action which Chambers now describes as his first “break” with the Stalinist movement.
Although he “left” the party, the party did not take him seriously. And even when he refused to appear before the Control Commission as requested, the party permitted him to write for the New Masses, its cultural magazine. In 1932 he became the editor. Chambers could never have assumed this post if there was any question about his loyalty, and he does not in fact, deny that he was loyal to the now completely Stalinized party. It was as editor of the New Masses, that he joined the party underground relinquishing a post he enjoyed so much. After a brief period with the party underground he graduated into the Russian military intelligence.
Now, in The Witness, Chambers describes with considerable skill that almost from the very beginning he was assailed by doubts about the movement and his work in it. He describes himself as an almost innocent man, more gullible than the average. His doubts about the movement drew him to religion. All of this began, he says, years before he actually broke with Stalinism!
Now, let us see what it is that strains logic and credibility, in the Chambers story. On page 26, he writes: “There is a difference between the act of breaking with Communism, which is personal, intellectual, religious, and the act of breaking with the Communist Party, which is organizational. I began to break with Communism in 1937. I deserted from the Communist Party about the middle of April, 1938.” (Emphasis mine – AG) The reader is asked to focus these dates sharply in mind, for they reveal Chambers’ effort to absolve himself from Stalinist guilt, in what we shall attempt to show is reconstruction of his political biography.
We use the word reconstruction, because that is the only accurate way to describe the kind of personal history which Chambers has written. We do not doubt Chambers, the Stalinist; we do not challenge his description of the Stalinist conspiracy, or rather, that single aspect of it which engaged him. But we do say that the autobiography which he constructs is entirely too smooth, too pat, too self- serving for complete acceptance. Let us see why.
1925. The Witness recites the events which led to the suicide of his brother Richard Chambers. Whittaker Chambers had a close relationship with his brother though their lives followed different paths. The brother lived a hopeless existence, finding life oppressive and not worth living. Like Chambers, he had a strong suicidal urge. But where Chambers saw a way out of life’s despair in the hope of socialism and in the activities of its movements, Richard Chambers saw only emptiness, wastefulness, uselessness. They conversed quite openly on the matter of suicide, Richard trying to convince Whittaker that they ought to take their lives, the latter urging his brother to become a socialist and find a reason for living. He pleaded in vain, for his brother replied that all were alike – capitalism socialism, communism, freedom, dictatorship – life itself was oppressive and therefore nothing mattered. Unable to convince his brother, Chambers found himself saying suddenly: “The Kingdom of God is within you.”
Chambers reproduces this incident in the book for the obvious purpose of impressing the reader with his innate religiosity; that even though he became a communist and then a Stalinist, he was not one of the Godless, but really a believer, if unconsciously. Is this really credible? We have only Chambers’ word that the event occurred as he described it. The reader should remember that at the time it occurred, Chambers was about to embrace the Communist Party. He had no strong religious background and regarded himself as an atheist. He was endeavoring to win his brother to his beliefs, to make a communist of him and to inspire him to live on the basis of a new revolutionary doctrine. The brother rejects Chambers’ plea in behalf of the vitality of life and struggle. “I was,” said Chambers, “speaking as a Communist.” But if all that Chambers could finally find to say in answer to his brothers’ mood is that “the kingdom of God is within you,” we can understand Richard’s laughter and reply: “That’s junk.” In any case, it would seem that this final plea, coming from a revolutionary, a communist, a man who would redeem the world, was about all that Richard Chambers needed to convince him that his way out was the only one.
1928. We have already mentioned the fact that Chambers was a functionary from the beginning of his membership in the Communist Party. The pages dealing with the first years of his membership are noteworthy in their failure to refer to the ideas of the pre-Stalinist party, the program it followed or the activities that occupied it. Yet these were important years in the political history of the movement. It was precisely then that the historic struggle between Stalin and the Left Opposition was taking place in the Russian party and the State. Stalin was already reaching out to take over the Communist International which he did speedily.
This great dispute was no mere struggle for power. It revolved around the basic ideas of Marxism and socialism. It saw the adoption of the anti-Marxist doctrine of “building socialism in one country.” There was involved the whole matter of what program the International should follow, which course of internal construction should be taken by the Russian party. The International was shaken by the conflict, yes, even the isolated and somewhat backward American party. Behind the apparently blind and pointless factionalism in the American party, was Stalin’s fine hand manipulating all, fanning the factional quarrels today, cooling them tomorrow, but always keeping them alive until he succeeded in breaking down a recalcitrant native leadership into a docile Stalinist cadre. What has Chambers to say about all this? Literally, not a word!
Yet, in 1928, when he read the cable announcing the deportation of Trotsky to Alma Ata, in Siberia, Chambers wrote that the event left an “ineradicable char” on his mind! Why? There is no motivation for the remark. So “ineradicable” was this “char,” that Chambers soon became an agent of Stalin.
The relation of this incident is one important test of Chambers’ credibility. It might be said that in those years it was quite possible that Trotsky was a hero in the eyes of Chambers as he was to the revolutionary movement everywhere. There is no evidence of this, however, in Chambers’ book. The deportation and expulsion of Trotsky was accepted by him, as it was by most party members, as a necessary step in the defense of the Revolution against one of its brilliant, but erratic and undisciplined sons. In any case, we have Chambers’ word that his revolutionary heroes were of another type altogether. Ordinarily, a person, young or old, when becoming a socialist has his heroes, but as a rule they are the great masters of socialism, Marx, Engels, Kautsky, Plechanov, Lenin, and Trotsky, or such great leaders as Kier Hardie, Jean Jaurès and Eugene V. Debs. In the case of Chambers they are none of these, none of the thinkers and none of the great leaders. They are Djerjinsky, the organizer of the revolutionary Tcheka; Eugene Levine, who when sentenced to death for his participation in the Bavarian Soviet of 1919, said: “We communists are always under the sentence of death”; and the Russian revolutionary Kalyaev, who in protesting the flogging of prisoners in Siberia, drenched himself in kerosene and set himself aflame! The name, Carl, one of which Chambers assumed in the underground was in honor of a young Lettish terrorist named Karl Trauberg. The attraction of these personalities for Chambers seems indicated; they were symbols of the conspiratorial, of physical struggle, of terror, of pain, of death.
So, we say, Chambers comment about Trotsky’s deportation, a sentiment which was not repeated when the Trotskyists were expelled from the American party, seems incredible and illogical, when placed against the evolution of his career.
1929. In this year, Jay Lovestone, indisputable leader of the Communist Party, supported by the overwhelming majority of the membership, was removed with his faction, from the leadership of the party. They were shortly thereafter expelled from the party and reconstituted themselves as the Communist Opposition. Chambers, who supported that leadership, and was known in the party as a Lovestoneite, remained silent throughout the period of the official campaign against the Lovestoneites, whose greatest crime was that they supported Bucharin, the official leader of the Communist International, at the precise moment when Stalin’s “corridor congress” had already decided to remove Bucharin and to destroy him politically and, eventually, physically.
The Foster faction, together with the craven renegades of the Lovestone group, was subsequently to reconstitute a new leadership in the party whose only claim to this position was a declaration of unquestioned faith in the leadership of Stalin. Chambers writes that he was “confused and troubled” even though he survived the purge of the party after Love- stone’s expulsion. He said he felt he had “no moral right to continue editing the Daily Worker where I had daily to set forth a political line with which I found myself in deep disagreement ...”
The events surrounding the expulsion of the Lovestoneites were “something for which nothing in my Communist experience had prepared me and which would soon cause my first break with the Communist Party,” Chambers writes. At the time he thought the event had simply “the imprint of the peculiarly malevolent character of Joseph Stalin, his personal perversion of what in itself was good.” It was only much later that he learned that it “was not that Stalin is evil, but that Communism is more evil, and that, acting through his person, it found its supremely logical manifestation.” So at that time his break was not an intelligent one, he adds, and therefore was not a real break at all.
What Chambers felt at the time really was outrage at the decapitation of a leadership which he supported. The Lovestoneites, however, were expelled in 1929 and Chambers’ outrage did not assert itself until ... 1931! How did he break with the party? He merely walked out of the Daily Worker office. He did not rise to his feet and protest, he did not write anything, he did not publicize his break (he was to repeat the same thing in 1938), and ... he did not join the Lovestoneite or any other political current outside of and opposed to the Communist party. He was, in effect, a non-dues paying, non-card holding party member.
The test for this is the attitude of the party toward him. This we know by years of experience. Chambers never responded to calls from the Control Commission to appear and explain his conduct. Yet, he managed to write for the party’s cultural magazine, in 1931 and 1932. He became the editor of that magazine in 1932. Now this could never have happened if the party had regarded Chambers persona non grata, and Chambers knows this to be the fact. The party permitted him to contribute to the New Masses and to become its editor because it regarded him to be a safe member and a victim only of pique. If his appointment as editor of the New Masses is not sufficient proof of this, then certainly his invitation to become a member of the underground apparatus, clinches the point.
1932–1938. We have passed through “the kingdom of God,” the “ineradicable char,” his “first break with the Communist Party.” Chambers’ career in the Stalinist movement now begins to zoom. In June, 1932, he was “invited” to become a member of the party’s illegal apparatus. The invitation created a minor crisis for Chambers, but it was short-lived. Despite the objections of his wife he did join the party underground. Before long he was assigned to the Russian Military Intelligence and remained with it until he broke away in the middle of April 1938.
Why did he join the underground? We believe it was in accordance with the man’s nature. The misanthropic Chambers, remember, had always a “deep distrust of the human race.” He “never had any real friends” and always felt that “I am an outcast.” Evidently, never very comfortable in his relations with either individuals or groups of people, he felt attracted to a clandestine, lone existence, where responsibility for his actions would be on the heads of others. Despite his “misgivings” he is able to explain: “As a Communist, I felt quiet elation at the knowledge that there was one efficient party organization and that it had selected me to work with it.”
The “quiet elation” was for a man of his temperament really enthusiasm. The ordinary person is repelled by the kind of activities and existence which composes the life of the espionage worker. It is a life based on subterfuge, misrepresentation, disguise, and entrapment of people. The espionage agent is a silent servant in a profession whose aims and strategy are uncontrolled by the participant. Independence of thought and action would violate the profession’s credo: carry out instructions. Yet the circumscribed existence which his new role required gave Chambers a sense of being and power. Listen to how he describes his own reaction:
“There was also a little electric jab in the thought. In the nature of its work, such an organization could not pick its personnel at random. Therefore, for some time, it must have been watching me. Unknown to me, eyes must have been observing me. ... It was clear that, reaching out, from where I could not tell, something completely unforeseeable had happened to me, which could only mean a turning point in my life.”
(My friend, Max Shachtman, told me that as early as 1929, long after the expulsion of the Trotskyites from the party, Chambers confided to him that he was then working for the GPU. Just exactly what this meant is hard to ascertain. Chambers may have acted as a courier on occasion, used his address for secret mail, or run errands for the illegal apparatus. The point is, that Chambers told this to Shachtman with evident pride. No greater responsibility could have been given him than to work for “the Russians.” This helps to explain why Chambers so readily joined the GPU apparatus at a time when he presumably “broke” with the Party. And we are right in assuming that the party knew its man well.)
Chambers dropped out of all public life. From then on and for the next six years he remained a devoted, indefatigable worker for the Stalinist underground apparatus. It was an unspectacular activity, sometimes of little or no value, since he was more often than not a courier. But all of this was only preparation; before long he was assigned to one of the Stalinist cells in Washington to act as the liaison between the Russian representative of the Intelligence and the cell of government workers. In the book version of his life, Chambers asserts that even though he functioned in this apparatus and carried out instructions, the seed of his break was long ago implanted, unconscious though it may have been. The reasoning is teleological. The break began with the affirmation: The Kingdom of God is within you; it continued with Trotsky’s deportation and the expulsion of the Lovestonites. So that even if Chambers did dig deeper into the Stalinist movement and serve it in a most loyal and efficient manner, this was only the conscious, the material, and therefore, superficial man acting. The soul of Chambers was preparing itself for the inevitable break with Stalinism. The reader therefore, should have nothing but compassion for the material Chambers, the Stalinist agent.
Within this period of six years, Chambers alludes to several important episodes to prove that in reality (that is, reality for a mystic) he was moving away from Stalinism.
Episode one: 1933. In that year, when he was already an underground agent, his wife became pregnant. The decision to have the child was a turning point in his life, because “If the points on the long course of my break with Communism could be retraced, that is probably one of them – not at the level of the conscious mind, but at the level of unconscious life.”
Episode two: 1935–36. The great purges in Russia began in 1934 and lasted for four years. Along about 1935 or 1936 Chambers began to feel that something was wrong! Let him describe in his own way:
“In 1935 or 1936, I chanced to read in the press a little item of some nine or ten lines, perhaps less. The story said that Dmitri Schmidt, a general in the Red Army, had been sentenced and shot in Russia. I have forgotten whether it said ‘for treason’. I had never heard of Dmitri Schmidt before. I still do not know anything more about him. He is a ghost who appeared to my mind a few hours after his death, evoked by a few lines of type.
“I do not know why I read and reread this brief obituary or why there came over me a foreboding, an absolute conviction: Something terrible is happening.” (Emphasis mine – AG)
Why is it incredible that Chambers should be shocked at this event and that it should give him reason to pause? Because up to that point, and after it, he remained indifferent to the violence of the Stalinist counterrevolution. Trotsky had been deported from Russia and hounded by Stalin across the European continent. Zinoviev, Kamenev and Bucharin had been arrested and jailed. Rakovsky was in exile. The terror after the Kirov assassination went on unabated. Frame-up trial followed frame-up trial. The pistol shots in the Lubianka rang without cease. Hundreds and thousands of the outstanding figures of the revolution had been destroyed or were wasting away in Siberia. The suffering of none of these touched Chambers. He lived through a counter-revolutionary terror which began in the late twenties and remained indifferent to it, according to his own story, until he read an item about the execution of an unknown Red Army General. But if it gave him cause for disturbance, enough to call it to the attention of his underground boss, J. Peters, it had no effect upon his work. It changed nothing in his way of life. He continued on as a Stalinist agent with even greater enthusiasm – if one is permitted to use such a word in relation to Chambers – than ever.
In an effort to lessen his guilt of silence and acquiescence to Stalin’s reign of terror, and to explain away his own culpability in remaining an agent of this regime, Chambers dates the Stalinist counter-revolution to coincide with his final break in the year 1938, when in fact it had already taken place almost ten years before. It was the success of that counter-revolution which made the purges and trials possible. The success of the counter-revolution also brought Chambers into the Stalinist apparatus. So Chambers does not want the reader to miss his kindly, Christian compassion for those purged: He writes:
“The human horror of the Purge was too close to me to grasp clearly its historical meaning. I could not have said then, what I knew shortly afterwards, that, as Communists, Stalin and the Stalinists were absolutely justified in making the Purge. From the Communist viewpoint, Stalin could have taken no other course, so long as he believed he was right. The Purge, like the Communist-Nazi pact later on, was the true measure of Stalin as a revolutionary statesman. That was the horror of the Purge – that acting as a Communist, Stalin had acted rightly.”
By what Communist, and not Stalinist, theory? What idea? What single thought? By none! Every totalitarian, reactionary, terrorist movement, carries on its violence against individual man and society because it believes itself to be in the right. Every dictator destroys any opposition to his rule, unleashes a reign of violence against the people because he believes himself to be right. The dictator and the totalitarian movement behave in this fashion – in the name of society and for the good of the people. But why must the rest of the world accept the premises of their terror and violence? Chambers can write as he does, because despite his conversion, despite his Christianity, he remains in ideology, in temperament, a Stalinist. Stalin is not a great revolutionary statesman; he is an evil counterrevolutionary who has set back the progress of society. He represents power, the evil inherent in unbridled power, power for reactionary purposes. It is this power which still fascinates Chambers.
Episode three: 1936. In the summer of that year, the Chambers and Hiss families went house-hunting to Bucks County, Pennsylvania. The Chambers family found a lovely stone house near New Hope. The family, including Chambers’ mother, spent a congenial holiday there during the Christmas of 1936. Of what importance is this sentimental vignette to the Chambers’ story? Merely this: “In retrospect, it is clear that our life in the stone house had influences on us which, at the time, and even much later, we did not realize. I suspect that in that simple, beautiful and tranquil haven, and from the warm neighborliness of the Marshalls, a subtle chemistry began its work, which if it were possible to trace it, would be found to have played an invisible part in my break with Communism.” (Emphasis mine – AG)
Episode four: 1937. At this time Chambers is supposed to have read Assignment in Utopia by Eugene Lyons, and its “fierce indictment of the Soviet Government and Communism ... was one of the books that influenced my break with Communism.”
Episode five: The exact year is not stated, but sometime in this period, Chambers states that he read Prof. Vladimir Tchernavin’s I Speak for the Dead. The book had such a profound effect upon Chambers that he concluded about Russia and Communism: “This is evil, absolute evil. Of this evil I am a part.” He is now shaken for the ... how many times was it, six, eighth, tenth time?
It would appear from Chambers autobiography that he was in an almost continuous process of breaking with Stalinism. The dates run closely together: 1928, 1929, 1931–32, 1933, 1935, 1937. By 1937 life had become completely intolerable and he must break quickly with his movement. But not yet. He was to go on for another year and half, quietly, efficiently and loyally executing all his assignments.
In 1937, after the purges, the stone house, Lyons and Prof. Tchernavin, Chambers was preparing the introduction of his new boss, Col. Bykov, to Alger Hiss. Of Bykov, he said: “He was, in general, so unimpressive, his manner was so rude and his cynicism so habitual, that I was afraid that his effect on a man like Alger Hiss ... would be a little short of disastrous.” And so solicitous was Chambers about the underground, that even though he was breaking with the Communism which was “absolute evil,” he began “... to prepare Alger for a disillusionment. I warned him not to expect too much, that Bykov was by no means the best that the underground had to show, but that in him we served the party and not the man.” (Emphasis mine – AG)
At another undated meeting with Col. Bykov in this period, he took the initiative to suggest contacting for the underground, an explosives chemist, with whom another apparatus had once had relations. Still later on in 1937, he spent an evening with Julian Wadleigh at which both discussed their troubled lives. Chambers says “it was the night when I faced the fact that, if Communism were evil, I could no longer serve it, and that that was true regardless of the fact that there might be nothing else to serve, that the alternative was a void.” It was that void, having no one to serve, that kept Chambers working on for another year in the Stalinist apparatus, and caused him to remain silent for so long after he broke with it.
Chambers speaks of the “screams” of Stalin’s victims, and their effect upon the devoted Stalinist. What Chambers does not say, is that through the whole period of the several Moscow Trials, the formation of the American Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky, and the Commission of Inquiry into the Moscow Trials, headed by John Dewey, he was silent – the screams did not reach his ears. He would not have been the first Stalinist to have heard and remained silent. What is incongruous is that he remained silent when he already believed his movement to be “absolute evil.”
Of what purpose is this summary of Chambers’ rationalization of his career as a Stalinist agent? Is it only to say as Manes Sperber writes in the The Burned Bramble that all of it is “as untrue as all autobiography?” No, there is truth there, but Chambers cannot tell the whole truth; he is not an objective historian or politician.
 
The story of how he broke with the apparatus and the movement forces doubts about his version of the affair and the purposes of his actions. Was he disillusioned truly with Stalinism? Very likely. But the book does not, despite its great length, make very clear the propelling reasons for it, except that he lost faith and believed the movement was evil. But he had not yet joined a church. In the whole period between the preparation for the break, the break itself and his future association with the church, he devoted his time to a brief attempt to win to his side those people in the apparatus whom he liked; then he went into a silent underground of his own. Safeguarding the life of his family and his own from the long arm of Stalinist vengeance was his paramount aim. What Chambers did when he became an informer, however, was something he was determined not to do in 1938.
I believe it is fair to say that Chambers wished only to retire to an anonymous existence; to leave the party quietly and to live quietly. The great motives which he now spins for his “courageous” decision to come out into the open are part of the vast construction of the book.
In 1938, Chambers decided that the only way to escape the vengeance of the Stalinist underground was to go underground from the apparatus itself and to show the party that he meant it no harm, planned no public demonstration or exposures. His own awareness of the problem is clearly stated in the book:
“When a man deserts from such a concentration of hidden power as I have described, and the much greater power that lurks behind it, he challenges the underground in the one condition without which it cannot exist: its secrecy. The mere fact that the deserter, by an act of his own will, stands outside the control of the Communist Party is a threat. All revolutionary experience shows that there is only one guarantee of a deserter’s silence: his death. Both the Communist Party and the deserter know, too, that if he goes to the police and informs against it, it will scarcely be worth the party’s while to kill him. Thus, a race often develops in which the party’s killers try to reach the fugitive before he can reach the police.”
Actually, experience has shown that not everyone who has quit the Stalinist underground, made public his break with Stalinism and put himself at the disposal of a national state, escaped the Kremlin’s pistol. But many have survived by doing exactly what Chambers described above. Why, then, did not Chambers avail himself of this measure of safety? Apparently because none of the great and moving principles which he now describes as the reasons for his course during the Hiss affair were in his consciousness then.
So quietly did Chambers depart his post, and so clear did he make it to the Party that he intended it no harm, that when he began to work for Time, the Stalinists and Stalinoids welcomed him and told him how glad they were that he got the job and not that Trotskyist, Philip Rahv. It is impossible, of course, to speculate what the Party and the illegal apparatus actually thought about Chambers actions. It is possible that in the beginning they believed that Chambers was merely repeating his action of 1931 and 1932; that it was harmless pique asserting itself once more. For, again, Chambers did nothing, said nothing, wrote nothing. The apparatus and the party were safe from exposure. This was true for a time, but as we now know, it was not a short time. Almost a decade passed before Chambers, who made one timid effort in 1939, spoke out fully and completely. He cannot, even with his own interests uppermost in mind, and with amazing skill for rationalizing the past, make out a good case for the long years of his silence. After reading the long chapters on the period in which he finally decided to become informer, it becomes clear that the decision to do so lay more in the pressures which were imposed upon him from the outside than from any inner moral urgings.
The real explanation for his strange behavior is that there was no ideological basis to his break with Stalinism at the time it occurred. The following paragraph will show that in 1938 there was no doubt in his mind that his future as a Stalinist would remain unchanged.
Chambers has used God and religion as a shield for his equivocal conduct and only the great services he performed for the government freed him from the necessity of defending legally his own ambiguous activities and evasions which continued up to the very eve of the Hiss trial. For “until 1937, I had been, in this respect, a typical modern man, living without God, except for tremors of intuition. In 1938, here seemed no possibility that I would not continue to live out my life as such a man. Habit and self- interest both presumed it. I had been for thirteen years a Communist; and in Communism could be read, more clearly with each passing year, the future of mankind, as, with each passing year, the free world shrank in power and faith, including faith in itself, and sank deeper into intellectual and moral chaos.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
The sudden break followed. Chambers went underground without undertaking any great crusade for God and liberty. It was in 1938, some months after he quit the apparatus, that he first met Isaac Don Levine, the notorious “expert” on all things radical.
Chambers talked to Levine about writing “two or three pieces about the underground, notably the case of Robinson-Rubens. Nothing came of the project, about which, in any case, I was only half-hearted.” Levine urged “me to take my story to the proper authorities. I had said no.” Chambers was still wary. But Levine told him he would try to arrange a meeting with President Roosevelt and that reassured Chambers and he agreed. At this point the narrative is halted and months pass and we come now to the fateful year of 1939.
Apparently Levine did not succeed in arranging a meeting with Roosevelt and in the meantime Chambers began to work for Time magazine. He now made the acquaintance of General Walter Krivitsky. It was Krivitsky who convinced him to become an informer. Krivitsky is dead and there is no way to test the veracity of Chambers’ story, particularly that Krivitsky asked him to arrange for his instruction and communion into the Episcopalian Church, a tale which other acquaintances of the ex-general find hard to believe.
In any case, in September of 1939, almost a year and a half after he left the Stalinist apparatus, Chambers made his first disclosures to Adolph Berlt, then Assistant Secretary of State. The meeting was arranged by the insistent Levine. Chambers named the groups to Berle and listed the members who composed them and their activities. Berle made notes of his disclosures for the purpose of informing the President of Chambers’ story. The facts about what happened then become quote obscure. Roosevelt is supposed to have laughed away the charges against Hiss. The administration did nothing. And, Chambers, too, did nothing. Neither he nor Berle remember too clearly what he reported. All that remains of this meeting is a written memorandum which the assistant secretary made at the time.
Chambers returned to his post at Time magazine. He was next visited by the FBI in 1941, the first time he had ever seen its agents. They came to see him because Ludwig Lore, now deceased, had denounced him as a Stalinist agent. FBI agents came to see him again in 1942 and 1944. He claims to have told the FBI’s representatives part of the story of The Witness – not all of it by any means, however. They were as excited about it as Berle was in 1939. But nothing came of their visit in that year or subsequently.
Chambers now believes that it was because of the alliance between the U.S. and Russia during the war and the fundamental affinity between Stalinism and the New Deal. He asserts that the failure of the FBI to pursue their visits and to use his material was the “resolute lack of interest outside the FBI circles far above it (the Roosevelt administration) ... which was slowly becoming an open secret known to government officials and newsmen. Meanwhile my own feelings about informing underwent a decisive change.”
Chambers was now advancing up the promotional ladder at Time magazine and had decided that since the administration would do nothing about his disclosures, he would shift his fight against Stalinism to his columns in Time magazine!
Many of Chambers’ opinions about the role of the administration in this period are based on inferences, as he frankly admits. But he need not have retreated so quickly. He could have gone to the Un-American Committee of the House and thrown the spotlight of publicity upon the Stalinists. Surely, that reckless body could have accommodated him as they accommodated lesser lights in the period of its complete disregard for congressional decorum and legal procedure. But Chambers didn’t avail himself of this accommodating body. He preferred not to pursue the matter, because the initial impulse for his disclosures to Berle was not the desire to begin a crusade against Stalinism, but to respond to the political exigencies created by the Hitler-Stalin pact in August of 1939.
When war broke out in September 1939, Russia was an ally of Germany and was to remain so until August 1941, the month the Wehrmacht swept across the Russian borders. The correct inference to be drawn then, is that Chambers acted out of a cunning appreciation of the meaning of the Hitler-Stalin pact and the outbreak of the war, which must eventually involve the United States. In 1939 he had “no heart” for the business of informing. At the most he wanted to write a few articles on the underground and let it go at that. The pact and the war spurred Chambers on to Washington. But the first failure of the administration to respond enthusiastically convinced him to withdraw. And, of course, the evolution of the war which made Russia an ally of the United States undoubtedly militated against the hope that he might succeed after his first failure. It wasn’t until many years later, in the reaction which followed the war, that Chambers had his second chance, and under the pressures exerted upon him, became the witness that the government sought against the Stalinist agents in its midst. What happened in the years of 1947–48–49 are too familiar to require any comment by us. Hiss was finally convicted and Chambers felt himself vindicated. For us, that is of the smallest importance. Without prior knowledge of a single fact which Chambers related about the Stalinist conspiracy, our understanding and appreciation of Stalinism was sufficient for us to assume the existence of a vast Stalinist underground here and abroad, wherever it could establish itself.
Chambers, however, has given an insidious interpretation to the exposure of the underground. He has assisted the reactionary, Neanderthal elements of the Republican Party to make a political issue of the affair, namely, that the Stalinist underground conspiracy could only have existed and prospered in a Democratic, New Deal Administration. There is a partial, but insignificant truth in this. But the whole charge is dangerous because the truth is, and Chambers knows this to be a fact, that the Stalinists seek to penetrate any state administration and have succeeded on a world scale to do so, whether the regimes are reactionary, reformist, or even fascist. The Chambers line (and McCarthy’s and Nixon’s too) is dangerous and disarming because it proceeds on the theory that Stalinists could not penetrate a Republican administration. We are not experts on the profession of espionage but common knowledge compels a rejection of that theory. The only way any administration could neutralize the Stalinist conspiracy, or any other nation’s, is by counter-espionage, or the revelations of an ex-agent like Chambers.
 
In the very opening of his book, Chambers begs the forgiveness of society by describing the immensely moral and brave decision he made to act as informer. Naturally if he were going over to a winning side, it could be said, with considerable justification, that he became afraid and acted out of cowardice to embrace the most powerful political and military coalition in the present world situation. But, no. Chambers would have you believe quite otherwise. He writes about his elation at the decision to leave the Stalinist movement thus:
“This elation was not caused by any comparison of the world I was leaving and the world I was returning to. By any hard-headed estimate, the world I was returning to seemed, by contrast, a graveyard. It was, in fact, the same world I had abandoned as hopeless when I joined the Communist Party in 1925. Only, now, its crisis, which a few men could diagnose thirteen years before, had reached the visible brink of catastrophe. And still that stricken world did not know the nature of the catastrophe ...” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
In order to leave no room for doubt, Chambers adds:
“I wanted my wife to realize clearly one long-term penalty, for herself and for the children, of the step I was taking: ‘You know, we are leaving the winning world for the losing world.’ I meant that, in the revolutionary conflict of the 20th century, I knowingly chose the side of probable defeat. Almost nothing that I have observed or that has happened to me since, has made me think that I was wrong about that forecast. But nothing has changed my determination to act as if I were wrong – if only because, in the last instance, men must act on what they believe right, not on what they believe probable.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
No doubt, but in the case of Chambers, he has discovered, late in life, to be sure, God, and it is God, the all-powerful, the omniscient and the omnipotent, that has given him the strength to go on with his great crusade, even though this same God and his newly found religion, failed him on several occasions in his great travail, and will eventually fail him if we take earnestly his opinion about the world struggle just quoted.
Chambers does not always remember what he writes in this large book. For elsewhere in its pages, he states the matter of his role in the following way. It was a question of whether this “sick” society could “still cast up a man whose faith in it was so great that he would voluntarily abandon those things which men hold good, including life, to defend it.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Who is Chambers talking about? Himself, of course. For truly, is he not a brave man to have such faith in this society though it be “a graveyard,” the “losing world,” the one which will undergo “probable defeat” at the hands “of the future.” This is a man of great faith, indeed!
The story of Chambers’ return to God, religion, and the 15th Century, is dreary and despairing. It is essentially primitive; in parts it is altogether adolescent; it is his “enlightenment” through the adoption of new dogma, the religious dogma, the religious dogma of the believer. His assertions about God and Religion are Stalinist in manner and tone, for they proclaim that his is the God, the New Testament, the religion, in a world divided between the Believers and the Godless.”
At the risk of taxing my kind readers, I shall return once more to a new “origin” of Chambers disillusionment with Stalinism. While a number of “breaks” have been cited, all of them tending to show that Chambers actually began to break from the Communist Party even before he joined it, we are compelled to cite one other because it introduces us, at the same time, to Chambers’ religious conversion. His break with Stalinism began, as he claims and as you already know, before he “heard the screams” of Stalin’s victims. “I do not know how far back it began,” says Chambers this time. But “avalanches gather force,” you know, and he finds a new date for his break with Stalinism. The year nineteen thirty-four. He writes:
“... I date my break from a very casual happening (now he is certain, you see – A.G.). I was sitting in our apartment on St. Paul Street in Baltimore. It was shortly before we moved to Alger Hiss’s apartment in Washington. My daughter was in her high chair. I was watching her eat. She was the most miraculous thing that had ever happened in my life. I liked to watch her even when she smeared porridge on her face and dropped it meditatively on the floor. My eye came to rests on the delicate convolutions of her ear – those intricate, perfect ears. The thought passed through my mind: ‘No, those ears were not created by any chance coming together of atoms in nature (the Communist view). They could have been created only by immense design.’ The thought was involuntary and unwanted. I crowded it out of my mind. But I never wholly forgot it or the occasion. I had to crowd it out of my mind. If I had completed it, I should have had to say: Design presupposes God. I did not then know that, at that moment, the finger of God was first laid upon my forehead.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
God, indeed, had even spoken directly to Chambers. During his great personal crisis, when the Hiss case was brought into the open, and when he felt he could not go on, that he must surrender to his weaknesses, he heard His voice. It occurred one day as he was coming down the stairs of his home in Baltimore:
“As I stepped into the dark hall, I found myself stopped, not by a constraint, but by a hush of my whole being. In this organic hush, a voice said with perfect distinctness: ‘If you will fight for freedom, all will be well with you.’”
What God meant by freedom, Chambers does not say, but what the author of The Witness means is clear enough. He describes it by saying that “freedom is a need of the soul, and nothing else.”
No wonder Max Ascoli is forced to write:
“... it is difficult to see how Chambers’ god can keep his part of the compact, for he is a horribly weakened god, abandoned by large masses of men who have gone to the other side – the side which Chambers maintains is winning. There is not much hope to be found in this book that the trend may be reversed and that the attempt to stop Communism can be anything but a suicidal foray on the advancing conquerors. Yet, through Chambers, this god asks for the tribute of men ready to die.”
With that declaration, however, it is easy, to understand the evolution of this man from authoritarian Stalinism to authoritarian religion, from political dogma to religious dogma. Both conversions, the Stalinist and the religious, are coolly and calculatingly achieved with a similar cynicism about mankind, society and life in this world, and man’s real history.
What is wrong with this world, asks Chambers? Is it economics? Obviously not.
“Economics is not the central problem of this century. It is a relative problem which can be solved in relative ways (!). Faith is the central problem of this age. The Western world does not know it, but it already possesses the answer to this problem – but only provided that its faith in God and the freedom He enjoins is as great as Communism’s faith in man.”
Is this what will win the masses of the world, the great bulk of the peoples who inhabit Asia and Africa, to the struggle against Stalinism? Does a Stalinist break “because he must choose at last between irreconcilable opposites – God or Man, Soul or Mind, Freedom (Chambers’ brand) or Communism.” The Stalinists must be roaring out loud, indeed, if this is the Western program of struggle against it. But there is no halfway house for Chambers, the man who had “tremors of intuition,” to whom God has spoken directly and personally. He lumps together and condemns science, rationalism, the Enlightenment and human progress.
All of history is so simple that Chambers can pronounce: “There has never been a society or nation without God. But history is cluttered with the wreckage of nations that became indifferent to God, and died.”
Chambers reduces the world struggles to his own terms as: “Faith in God or Faith in Man? is the challenge.” And he answers this challenge by declaring that the world can only be saved by “Faith in God.” He identifies intelligence, science, materialism, rationalism and progress with man, and then equates these with Stalinism! Therefore, only theists can resist Stalinism and save mankind, asserts this morbid and cynical man. Mankind thus has only one of two alternatives: worship God or Stalin! Is it any wonder that a Pennsylvania judge called the book propaganda for Stalinism?
The truth is that Chambers has no genuine sense of values, no high purposes, no real moral faith in life and man. He is a self-confessed mystic, and a nihilist. He still retains a deep distrust of the human race, shows no passion for mankind, for the life itself. His return to the soil is a flight from life. That is why he concludes his book by describing his wait for death. No wonder, Ascoli wisely wrote that “According to Chambers, a well-spent life seems to be a form of staggered suicide.”
 
The vicious political conclusions of Chambers brought a sharp protest from his liberal critics. In ending his story he explained his difficulty in exposing the Stalinist apparatus not on his own malefactions but the obstructions of the Democratic administration resting upon the “philosophy” and practices of the New Deal. Here he joins hands with the most reactionary forces of American life.
“The simple fact,” writes Chambers, “is that when I took up my little sling and aimed at Communism, I also hit something else. What I hit was the forces of that great socialist revolution, which, in the name of liberalism, spasmodically, incompletely, somewhat formlessly, but always in the same direction, has been inching its ice cap over the nation for two decades. This is not a charge. My opinion of that revolution is not at issue. It is a statement of fact that need startle no one who has voted for that revolution in whole or in part, and consciously or unconsciously, a majority of the nation has so voted for years. It was the forces of that revolution that I struck at the pont. of its struggle for power.”
Elsewhere he writes:
“I saw that the New Deal was only superficially a reform movement. I had to acknowledge the truth of what its more forthright protagonists, sometimes unwarily, sometimes defiantly, averred: the New Deal was a genuine revolution, whose deepest purpose was not simply reform within existing traditions, but a basic change in the social, and, above all, the power relationships within the nations. It was not a revolution by violence. It was a revolution by bookkeeping and lawmaking.”
There follows then an indictment of Congress, the Supreme Court, and all other agencies of the government as the instruments of this revolution. Is Chambers naive? Does he really believe the above? Or is he a mischievous, malicious, diabolical creature. He may be all of that, but he is certainly an irresponsible one. The whole thing is simply incredible for below the level of the writing, in the man’s heart and mind, is a vicious hatred for all progress, even meagre bourgeois progress, if it violates in any way the dark, reactionary moods of the ex-Stalinist, Chambers. It would be a vain and thankless task to discuss this “statement of fact.” For Chambers, this indictment of so large a segment of American bourgeois society, the majority, it would seem, only narrows his host of believers and makes the struggle against Stalinism more hopeless even than he avers. In psychological terms, it would seem that in his own lunge toward self-destruction, he would take the whole world with him.
The absence of clarity of the liberals, ex-radicals, ex-socialists and ex-Stalinists on the nature of Stalinism, creates enormous political difficulties for them and prevents them, for example, from speaking out more bluntly on Chambers and his book. They have looked at the skilful writing and admired it. They have read his vigorous description and indictment of an aspect of Stalinism and praised it with far less intelligence than we had expected. Some are appalled at the book’s authoritarian tone, its religious absolutes, and its dogmatic assertions – the style of them borrowed from the Stalinist school of knowledge.
What they will not recognize and understand is that Stalinism is a new social and political phenomenon, without precedent in history, and the product of modern social conditions in bourgeois and Russian society. To say that it emerged from the mistakes, of the Russian Revolution, from the movement of Marxism and socialism, is not to say very much instructively about it. By the same token, Marxism, socialism and the Russian Revolution arose out of capitalism; they could arise out of no other social order.
Stalinism is a distinctively new social movement having nothing in common with the great ideas of Marx and the great ideal of socialism. The great Socialist vision of a classless society has been replaced with the reality of a Stalinist class society. Freedom from class oppression and exploitation has been replaced by a new class oppression and the worst exploitation that modern man has known. The hopeful democracy of the early Revolution, a Revolution which the Western bourgeoisie helped to strangle, has been replaced by the most immense and intense police regime known to us. There isn’t a single important idea in Marxism, not a single socialist ideal, embodied in the Stalinist regime. Stalinism is something new in social development and it should not be difficult to see its characteristics as a new exploitive society based upon collective, or more precisely, state ownership of the means of production – a new class division between the dominant bureaucratic collectivist regime and the mass of people. It is a productive system based in considerable part on slave labor.
Stalinism is the greatest enemy of the working class, of socialism, of the future. But by the nature of its system, it is also anti-capitalist. It employs socialistic slogans; it appeals to the masses demagogically, yet cleverly exploits its desires and needs. It is successful because the bourgeois world, reactionary and motivated by retrogressive self-interest, produced, in turn, by its class nature and class interests, does not begin to understand how to struggle against this vast plebeian movement.
The liberals and the Exs join the reactionaries in treating Stalinism as though it were socialism, the Russian system as Marxism. In this way they play into the hands of reaction; they stimulate opposition to the merest of reforms and the least of the hopes of the liberals. To reactionaries, the “mixed economy” is merely another form of collectivism and therefore socialism.
What great hope, what vision, what future do these new friends and defenders of bourgeois society offer the new generations of the Western world? None but war and military victory over Stalinism, a military victory that could never be achieved without the veritable destruction of all society. In ranting and raving, as the bourgeoisie does, that Stalinism is conspiracy, the liberals and the Exs strengthen the Kremlin. It is not the spy or the espionage organization, or even the Stalinist agitator, who threaten society. It is the objective social condition, the poverty, the misery, the hunger, the suffering and the hopelessness of present society that gives Stalinism its strength.
Granville Hicks almost touched the problem in his review of Chambers’ book when he wrote:
“I have talked to undergraduates about the character and the danger of Communism, only to be asked to give them a program that would do for their generation what Communism did for mine (he is referring to the dynamic character of Stalinism in the crisis of the Thirties), and I have realized with despair that I had failed to teach them the one lesson I wanted to teach – that our basic mistake lay in demanding the way of salvation.”
Was that the mistake? Or was it that he offered them no way of salvation. Having fled Stalinism, which he mistakenly identified with socialism, he now rejects socialism itself. In rejecting socialism, the common ailment of the Exs, he has nothing left to offer except that he failed to teach that “our basic mistake lay in demanding the way of salvation.” His dilemma will become even greater when he attempts to describe the ways of salvation. For he will remain where he is now, without any way of salvation but the counsel to await social doom and to hope in vain that somehow, somewhere and in some way, mankind will emerge from its present impasse. Who will be inspired with this message? It is on such emptiness that the “spirit” of Chambers soars.
The discussion over Chambers’ book emphasizes again that only socialism can free society from the threat of Stalinism, for as long as capitalism remains, as the barrier to all social progress, Stalinism will be with us. Of the many things that have been said about The Witness, one thing, however, has been omitted: it is, if nothing else, a well-invented book.
* * *
Footnote
1. The Witness, by Whittaker Chambers, Published by Random House. 808 pages Index. $5.00.
 

Gates: Gerhart Eisler – A Key Figure in the GPU Gang (24 February 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Gerhart Eisler: A Key Figure
in the GPU Gang
Sudden Attack by U.S. Govt. Motivated by Diplomatic
Conflict with Eisler’s Master, Stalinist Russia
(24 February 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 8, 24 February 1947, p. 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE case of Gerhart Eisler has several interesting aspects. One of these is that so long as the military alliance between the United States, Great Britain and Russia seemed enduring, this known GPU agent was permitted to go about freely in his assignment of strengthening Stalinism in this country. But as soon as Anglo-American-Russian relations began to deteriorate, the administration arrested Eisler with a well-documented case of his activities. In addition to the materials furnished by the FBI, which seemed to have a rather complete dossier of Eisler’s activities, it had the services of Louis Budenz, recently reconverted to Catholicism.
We are not greatly concerned with the technical-legal aspects of the Eisler case. As Labor Action has repeatedly asserted, all governments spy upon each other. Eisler is not charged with being a government spy in the ordinary sense of the word. And even if he was, it would make no difference since spying is one of the arts of imperialist government. The Eisler case interests us because Gerhart Eisler is not a spy in the ordinary meaning of the word. Eisler is a unique type of Stalinist agent who operates behind the scenes to manipulate the workers’ movement through the Stalinist parties. And it is as an instrument of the GPU, as one who commits the greatest crimes against the working class, that Eisler interests us.
An Eisler is the highest authority in the Communist Party of whatever country he may be assigned to by his superiors in the Kremlin. This authority extends over elected and appointed officials, even though technically, a man like Eisler is not even a member of the party. He determines party strategy and tactics based on the latest instructions from Moscow. He may even preside over the appointment of party officials. A man like Gerhart Eisler fits in perfectly with the totalitarian system of Stalinism where the control of the party by its membership is made impossible by the very nature of its hierarchical system.
Our interest in the Eisler case arises from our determination to defend the workers’ movement from the reactionary and counter-revolutionary influence which he exerts as a representative of Stalin’s bureaucratic regime. It is this aspect of the case which is most important ... That the U.S. government pretends to be horrified by its “discovery” that Eisler is a Russian agent, is merely evidence of Its own hypocrisy.
Eisler was known to the FBI for a long time. It was common knowledge in the workers’ movement in New York that Eisler had been here for years and directed the affairs of the American Communist Party and the Stalinist forces in German refugee circles. Ruth Fischer, a former leader of the German Communist Party and sister of Eisler, has been writing about his activities for over two years – they were disclosures based on intimate knowledge of his past.
 
Never a Public Figure
Eisler’s career in the workers’ movement is indeed curious because it has never been open and, public.
He was and is an adventurer type to whom principle and ideals mean nothing. While for many years a member of the German Communist Party, he was never a public figure in that organization. As an appointed functionary, Eisler’s political career always depended upon his being in the good graces of his sponsors, or more precisely, upon adapting himself to the constantly changing policies of the Stalinist leadership of the Communist International.
At one time, for example, his Intervention in the affairs of the German CP as an oppositionist to the Thaelman leadership resulted in his exile to Moscow. In order to make his isolation from German affairs complete, it is reported that he was even forbidden to read the German press. Then began his period of adaptation.
As an apparatus man of the Comintern, Eisler was sent to China, Austria, Czechoslovakia and elsewhere. During the years 1929–33 he was not in Germany at all, except possibly in transit to some other country. He, therefore, could not have been a refugee from German Nazism in the same way as thousands of others. Everyone employed by the Comintern apparatus knew that Eisler was in the United States between 1933 and 1938.
 
Returns as “Refugee”
He returned to the U.S. as a “refugee” in the early forties claiming that he was not permitted to go on to Mexico but was retained in this country against his wishes. And this is indeed a curious phenomenon, since hundreds of refugees with transit visa did make their way to Mexico through the U.S., while hundreds of others were not even permitted to land in this country on the way to Mexico. But Eisler, curiously enough, was permitted to land and was forced to remain here against his wishes!
Eisler was interned in the refugee camp at Vernet, France, not because he was a refugee, but because he was a Stalinist agent. All the Stalinist refugees were interned then because they were defenders of the Hitler-Stalin pact and supported, in effect, Germany’s war against the Allies. At Vernet, Eisler set up the Comintern apparatus which determined those individuals who by their loyalty to Stalinism, were picked to go as refugees to Mexico, Cuba and the United States. Those whose loyalties were questioned, remained in France, many of them later to succumb to the brutalities of the German Gestapo.
The most curious part of Eisler’s career is the fact that he survived the many purges in Moscow. In Germany, he was at one time an “oppositionist.” He was known as a protege of Hugo Eberlein in Germany, and of Bukharin in the Comintern. Both Eberlein and Bukharin were murdered in the purges. In addition, the German Communist refugee movement in Moscow was practically wiped out in the purges of 1937–38.
 
Why Did He Survive?
Eisler’s survival is mysterious precisely because he was, in the context of Russian and Comintern politics, an oppositionist, a Bukharinist. In addition, he was the brother of, Ruth Fischer, who was long associated with Zinoviev and had been close to the Trotskyist movement. Ruth Fischer was linked to Zinoviev in his trial, and also to Trotsky. But strangely enough, while all of Eisler’s friends and co-workers were picked up in the net of these purges, he survived. It is this which lends credence to the belief that Eisler’s role in those years was as an informer on his former comrades.
This, then, is the man who was brought before the House Committee on Un-American Activities, as vile a congressional committee as has ever been devised by the little men in Washington. So far as the state conflict between Russia and the U.S. is concerned, we say a plague on both their houses and their imperialist intrigue. So far as Eisler is concerned we say: this man is a GPU agent, a dangerous enemy of the working class, a despicable apparatus man who manipulates the workers’ movement in behalf of the cruel totalitarian regime of Joseph Stalin.
The workers’ movement can have no responsibility for a Gerhart Eisler. Its task is to root out these elements, deprive them of all influence and control of the revolutionary socialist movement. In this respect, Ruth Fischer, whatever errors she may have made in her campaign against her Stalinist brother, was absolutely correct when she stated:
“I consider Eisler the perfect terrorist type, most dangerous for the people, and particularly the socialists of both America and Germany ... In fighting. Eisler here in the states, I hope to give some slight help to my socialist friends in Germany, who have to do the same thing but under immeasureably more dangerous circumstances.”
 

Gates: Note on Jewish-Arab Position (6 January 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Readers of Labor Action Take the Floor ...
Note on Jewish-Arab Position
(6 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 1, 6 January 1947, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The letter of Comrade Findley raises a question which made up part of the discussion at the Labor Action School Forum where the two of us spoke on the Jewish question in relation to the current situation in Palestine. At that time; Findley asked why I kept admonishing the Jewish people and their organizations, inside of Palestine and outside, to adopt “a friendly, internationalist, socialist attitude (which) ... could overcome the propaganda of the reactionary Arab leaders.” Why did I not make the same plea to the Arab people and their organizations and leaders? The same question was asked of me when I spoke in Philadelphia.
I tried to make clear the reasons for the particular emphasis which I put on this question. In my speeches and rebuttals, a proper evaluation was made of the part which the Arabs play in the present situation, but I deliberately concentrated the main burden of attack upon the Jewish organizations, their leaders and their members. My demand is not “onesided, unilateral,”. and this is why:
In the context of the real situation the Jews want to settle in Palestine and demand the right of free immigration. For a number of reasons already stated in columns of our press we are in favor of and support this desire on the part of the Jews. But they wish to go to a country which is Arabian in its vast majority. Both Arabians and Jews have one common enemy, British imperialism, which blocks the road to the immediate primary need of Palestine: complete independence. British imperialism has succeeded, with the assistance of the Arab overlords, in whipping up resistance and resentment of large segments of the Arab masses to Jewish immigration. But British imperialism is also vigorously assisted by the attitude of the Jews toward the Arabs, when the latter express themselves toward the Arabs in a language that is, from the point of socialism and internationalism, impermissible, reactionary, coupled with overtones of “racism.”
If goes without saying, and as a matter of fact we have said it repeatedly, that we, want the Arabs to approach the Jews in the same way as we ask the Jews to approach them. And if we were debating this question before an Arab audience we would most certainly stress this factor on the basis of our revolutionary socialist program. But we are not speaking to such audiences. We are discussing the question before audiences which attract many Jews, and the majority of them do not have, what is in our opinion, a clear and correct position on the question. We are appealing to them because we have direct contact with them and because they hold a key to the solution of this whole question.
There is still another reason for our emphasis. It is a concrete and practical one. The Jews desire to go to a country which is predominantly Arab. In coming to such a country, the responsibility of Jews for a correct attitude toward the Arab is greater than that of the Arabs, especially because of the latter’s hostility to increased Jewish immigration. The Jews have to overcome this hostility and win the Arabs to their side; they cannot do it except on the basis of our program.
To separate the question of the democratic right of “majority self-rule!” from the “life and death need” of the Jews, and to decide which is more important, is foolish in this case. The two questions are joined in one, because saving the European Jews is completely related to Palestinian independence and the constituent assembly. Our whole position is based on the premise of equality, as our resolution, as well as Findley’s, acknowledges. Emotion and sentiment, however understandable, will not solve the problem of the Jews in Palestine. It makes even a discussion of the problem extremely difficult and unrewarding.
 

Gates: Why the CIO-Nathan Report Threw the NAM Into a Panic (13 January 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Why the CIO-Nathan Report
Threw the NAM Into a Panic
(13 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 2, 13 January 1947, pp. 3 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE publication of the now celebrated and sharply disputed Nathan Report for the CIO in preparation of its struggle for nation-wide and industry-wide wage increases has brought forth an official “refutation” from the NAM through its hired economist, Prof. Ralph Robey, as well as numerous replies from the editorial and financial writers of the daily press. Many reams of paper are now being filled in a battle of statistics, the net effect of which is to obscure the real issues involved, namely: whether industry and finance are in a position to grant new wage increases without increasing prices.
Mr. Nathan maintains that on the basis of present profit levels and the prospects for 1947, it is possible for industry to grant a 25 per cent increase in wages without increasing prices. He did not say that all branches of industry, or that every company within a given branch, were capable of granting such increases. As can be seen from the report, its greatest validity applies precisely to large-scale, monopolistic, mass production industries where the CIO is concentrated.
Drs. Robey and Jules Backman, the latter associate professor of economics at New York University who joined Robey in an attack on Nathan, are both spokesmen for big business. Robey, for many years connected with New York University, is a “business man’s” economist, and the economics department of the school has long been noted for its outspoken bias in behalf of big business and the profit system. Robey and Backman deny the ability of industry to pay wage increase without again increasing prices. Echoing the interests of big business, they declare that “if things could remain as they are competition and the old law of supply and demand would prevail and the national economy would straighten out.”
In behalf of the NAM, Robey proposed either:
“1. Hold wages steady and thereby keep the way open for competition and buyer resistance to hold prices to proper levels.”
Or:
”2. Give another round of wage increases and thereby force prices still higher – higher, as shown by the experience of earlier this year, by just about the amount of the wage increase.”
The history of the nation shows that while in general, competition and the law of supply and demand effect the level of prices and contribute to their fluctuations and adjustments, the era of monopoly has mitigated this law considerably; it no longer operates as freely as it did during the years when a free and competitive economy was the outstanding feature of capitalism. Again, the real economic history of the nation shows that even when competition and the law of supply and demand did operate more freely, wages never kept abreast of prices, and certainly, they never kept abreast of profits which always outdistanced the income of the wage earner.
When Robey and his like-minded economists ask for the operation of so-called natural laws, they are merely asking the mass of people in this country to await adjustments in the economic situation initiated by the capitalists themselves – adjustments which can only come at the expense of labor.
If labor is to hold its wages “steady” and await this period of adjustment, i.e., “for competition and buyer resistance to hold prices to proper levels,” the mass of people will in the meantime continue in its present economically depressed state as it has for a considerably long period of time already. That Robey himself does not believe in “buyer resistance” is disclosed in the rather violent interview he gave to the press which is recorded in Washington Memo of the New York Post:
“Did he (Robey) favor organized consumer resistance to higher prices including mass pledges to boycott high-cost goods? Robey doubted that such methods would be ‘effective.’”
The interview revealed that Robey was not a disinterested professor seeking answers to an economic problem, but was an extremely conscious capitalist economist serving his one real master: the National Association of Manufacturers. The Post report recorded the following exchanges:
“Could he offer any advice to families that were unable to purchase vital foods? Robey pointed out that diets were flexible things; beans could be substituted for meat until prices fell ... Another correspondent, voicing polite impatience over Robey’s insistence that prices would automatically decline, if wages were curbed, asked how low-income families could be protected in the interim. ‘By the American system that has made us the envy of the word,’ Robey replied sagely and vaguely ...
“Finally, a correspondent stood up and said a little heatedly (the press conference was indeed a stormy one, with reporters unable to get an honest objective statement of facts from the professor) that it was fine to debate mathematics, but what hope did the NAM offer to a family head earning $45 a week – or less – in inflationary times,
“‘I don’t know what he can do,’ Robey began. As the critical silence deepened, he added, hesitantly:
“‘He can bargain for more. I’m all in favor of his bargaining.’”
 
How Can One Judge?
The details of the Nathan report are not too important. What does stand out in it, is that profits are now the highest in history. From the point of view of profits and the welfare of the capitalist class (and Nathan is a pro-capitalist economist!) it is more than able to increase the share of the worker in the national product. It is entirely beside the point that Nathan’s prognosis of 8,000,000 unemployed after the war did not actually occur. (We might advise these gentlemen of the NAM that as long as they hold the reins in this country, they will not be disappointed in respect to mass unemployment. Even a Robey will recognize the long lines of jobless.) But there is one important dispute between Robey and Nathan: Robey insists the way to proceed in this present desperate situation is to permit prices to decline and allow an adjustment in the living standards of the people to occur in this way. Nathan says that prices will never decline to proper levels and the way to achieve a balance is to increase wages – otherwise, the country is faced with a sharp crisis.








Robey insists that Nathan cannot judge profits because he cannot know what 1947 will be like. Backman joins him in saying that the Nathan report is “speculative.”
The hypocritical New York Times, which has repeatedly criticized the Nathan report editorially, and is the most consistent spokesmen for big business profits against higher wages, was compelled in its New Year financial page to record two important facts about the prospects for 1947. In one article entitled Big Year Expected in Heavy Industry, its writer, Hartley W. Barclay, writes:
“Record backlogs and firm orders for durable goods, equipment, tool and machinery lines now on hand point to 1947 prospects for stabilized production at a high level, with the major trend of increased productivity In evidence as assurance of a strong upward surge in this field of business.
“The underlying post-war development which provides proof of the further bulwarking of the American economic scene, largely based upon ‘capital goods’ investments, is the further increase in the investment of capital in heavy equipment to create bath output and employment, as well as profits.”
Elsewhere in these pages, C.M. Reckert writes:
“Corporate net income in 1946 reached the highest level in the history of the nation despite the fact that about one-third of the year was beset by non-production occasioned by strikes. The result of industrial manufacturers as a whole in 1947 may surpass even this impressive showing, providing further disruption of the national economic situation does not take place.”
By “further disruption” this gentleman has in mind strikes for higher wages. But if labor was able to produce record production and profits for big business despite all the strikes, its productive feats for 1947 without any strikes will surpass even 1946. This would mean even greater profits in 1947 than in the record year 1946. Then, actually, what the capitalists are asking of labor is that it keep quiet and accept its present conditions, while industry and finance continue to reap the greatest profits in history. And nothing so gives away the capitalist game as the real estimates of the capitalist economists when they are not speaking directly to labor or answering its queries.
But disputing with the professional economists and statisticians over figures is a pretty fruitless game. Even reliance on a report such as Nathan made is fruitless. All the Nathan report can do is add to the ammunition which the labor movement already has in abundance. A page of statistics won’t add to the worker’s dissatisfaction which exists when he gets his pay envelope and tries to stretch it to meet the needs of his family. It is only additional proof of what he already knows. What is really involved, and this is what the obtuse labor leaders do not understand, despite their endless experiences, is that in this kind of struggle, the demands of labor strike at the very heart of the capitalist system itself.
The capitalist economists who represent big business are defending the right of the industrialists and financiers to make profits off the labor of the millions of wage earners in the country. The more profit they make, the better it is for the prosperity of the system as a whole – especially for economists who are on the payrolls of the business institutions. The share of labor, they freely admit, is a minor share, enough to keep “body and soul” together. And that’s enough. If labor’s share gets too big, then the profits will decline, industry will close, unemployment will rise. For after all, they say with monotonous repetition, without profits, there is no incentive for big business to produce. It follows, therefore, the greater the profits, the greater the incentive. But it also follows, since wages are directly linked to profits, the smaller they are the greater the profits, the higher, the less the profit. Therefore, keep wages as low as possible and thus insure greater profits.
The labor movement cannot therefore enter the war of statistics as though it were its main struggle. At one time or another it has to say: We don’t give a damn about the profits of a handful of monopoly capitalists who control the wealth of the nation. We are interested in the welfare of the people, of the mass of wage earners who make up the overwhelming majority of the people of the country. It is they who produce the wealth of the nation and the profits of the bosses. If the capitalists cannot run industry unless their profits are safeguarded, if the people have to live at sub-standard levels to guarantee these profits, then, we can get along without the capitalist parasites. Labor can run the industrial machine without any help from’the coupon clippers. Eliminating the profiteers will make it possible to really increase productivity, the wages of workers, and the level of existence of the whole people.
But until the labor movement reaches that kind of maturity, it must still carry on the big fight: profits or higher wages; profits or a higher standard of living; profits or food, clothing and decent shelter. But then, too, labor will have to grow up politically. That means, its fight will have to become a political struggle as well as an economic one, to defeat the capitalists and their government which daily acts in the interests of the profiteers. And for that, labor needs its own party, an independent labor party to fight for a labor program of plenty for all.
 

Gates: Truman Reports on Labor, Budget and Taxes Before 80th Congress – The Budget (20 January 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Truman Reports on Labor, Budget
and Taxes Before 80th Congress
The Budget
(20 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 3, 20 January 1947, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

AGAINST the background of the opening session of the 80th Congress, President Truman gave his report on the State of the Union and then sent to Congress his economic report and budget message. These will form the basis for the struggle which will occupy the two legislative bodies, as the Republicans take over this branch of the government. All preliminaries for this battle have been ended; the GOP has taken over all congressional committees in the reorganized Congress. The two principal problems around which all others revolve is the labor question and the budget.
The Republicans, as the most direct representatives of monopoly capitalism, will certainly alter several important sections of the President’s reports and proposals. In the absence of any fundamental differences in foreign policy, they will concentrate all their attention on domestic questions.
With a new confidence growing out of their election sweep, the Republicans will certainly reject the compromise proposals of Truman on the most important sections of his reports. But as has already been pointed out by most reporters from Washington, the extreme reactionary anti-labor Congressmen of the GOP and the Democratic Party will not prevail, for reasons we will indicate herein.
In his report on the State of the Union, Truman presented a most optimistic picture of the economic situation which is characterized by the greatest total employment in the history of the nation, as well as record-breaking profits.
After recommending “broadening the coverage and increasing the payments of Social Security,” extending the wages and hours law and increasing the minimum wage, and adopting a “broad program of health insurance, public welfare, federal education aid,” the President went on to the most important topic of his report, the question of wages and prices.
 
The Budget Report
Unable to evade the real facts about the decline in living standards as a result of the continually rising standard of living, the President proposed to lower prices and increase wages, wherever possible, and at the discretion and responsibility of private enterprise. “Wherever possible” is vague enough. But the Republican bloc, already preparing anti-labor bills, will oppose any readjustments in wages on the theory that prices will decline on the basis of increased production. (Neither the President or the GOP made mention of the fact that despite record inventories piling up in the warehouses, prices have continually risen.)
The whole problem of wages and prices is related, however, to the legislative plans of the congressional majority on the budget and labor.
The presidential budget is symptomatic of the changes that have taken place in the world and America’s new role as the leading imperialist power in the world. Increasing militarization of the country as a whole is reflected in the enormous military expenditures called for in the new budget and the placement of military men in the key positions of the Administration and the State Department. Thus, the new budget of $37.5 billions calls for a direct expenditure of $11.3 billions for the Army and Navy. In contrast to this, the total social welfare budget calls for an expenditure of $1.7 billion, of which $88,000,000 is for education. That Truman’s request for a “broad program” of social welfare is not seriously meant can easily be seen from the emphasis of his budget message.
But the Republicans will not accept the budget report, principally because its acceptance would require no change in the present tax structure. Where shall the budget be reduced? Since the GOP is committed to maintaining the enormous military budget, it must be cut in all other respects: social welfare, international affairs, domestic outlays, pruning of the federal payroll (but not senators and representatives). If the Republicans succeed in reducing the budget by $4 billions (advocated by Taft) or $7.5 billions by those who want a drastic reduction of taxes on industry and high incomes, moneys allocated to the military will make up a third or more than a third of the entire budget!
 
Anti-Labor Laws
The President called for legislation outlawing certain union practices but not “the collective bargaining processes.” By certain union practices he referred to “jurisdictional strikes.” But for the time being this is a total evasion on Truman’s part of the real struggle that will take place in Congress. Jurisdictional disputes are an almost totally meaningless aspect of the labor situation. But with his eyes on the 1948 elections, the President, already seriously compromised with labor, hopes to regain this lost support by opposing the efforts of the GOP and his colleagues from the South. They will make it easier for him by the bills they have introduced so far.
The Case Bill, once vetoed by the President, has been reintroduced in more severe form. As is characteristic of so many bills, this one too provides for government by injunction and the curbing of strikes. Senator Ball is pressing for his open shop bill, which calls for an end of industry-wide contracts between corporations and the unions. These are only two outstanding examples of what will come before Congress.
The big whips of the GOP, however, will oppose these measures, not because they lack any sympathy with them, but also for political reasons. For the first time in sixteen years, the GOP has a fighting chance to win the presidential elections. They are fully aware that they cannot win by alienating the labor movement. As the party most closely allied with big business, however, it must answer the needs of its many sections.
But no matter which of the policies of either party wins out, neither will be able to forestall the inceasing class tensions which are characteristic of social instability. Since the GOP and the Democrats are committed to a maintenance of the present system, their differences are merely tactical. The fundamental causes for a collapse of the profit economy in this country will roll over both political parties of monopoly capitalism.
 

Gates: NMU Struggle Goes to Ranks; Curran Meets Stalinist Attack (27 January 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
NMU Struggle Goes to Ranks;
Curran Meets Stalinist Attack
(27 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 4, 27 January 1947, pp. 3 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The battle lines in the National Maritime Union are sharply drawn and the internal struggle between its president, Joseph Curran, and the Stalinist faction in the leadership, which began more than a year ago, has reached a new stage. Curran’s resignation from the Stalinist-dominated Committee for Maritime Unity touched off the latest explosion in the union. Our readers are familiar with the reasons Curran gave for his resignation. He explained his step as deliberate, provoked by the control of the CMU by four craft unions under the leadership of Harry Bridges, which made a captive of the NMU, adopted policies against his union’s best interests, and then arranged for the NMU to bear the main costs of the committee’s activities.
Whatever the reasons Curran gives for his resignation, the fact is that the action reflects Curran’s desire to cut himself off completely from Stalinist influence and control. When the news of Curran’s resignation was made known, the Stalinist gang in the NMU, headed by Joseph Stack, Howard McKenzie and Ferdinant Smith, rolled into action. Their factional groups were set in motion in all the important ports.
The initial action of the Stalinists was to try to mobilize the ranks of the union against Curran on the ground that he violated a union decision when he resigned as one of the officers, co-chairman, of the CMU. Curran pointed out that he merely exercized his right; that the NMU was still affiliated to the CMU. Therefore, no decision of the union was violated. In the port membership meetings, Curran won the first fight. Although the Communist Party faction won a majority of the ports, they lost the most important meetings attended by the overwhelming majority of the members. In New York Curran won a three to one victory in a meeting of several thousand members.
 
The Stalinist Campaign
Smarting under the defeat administered to them by the rank and file members, the Stalinists then turned to the National Council which they control. This special meeting was devoted wholly to the Curran situation and the CMU. Over Curran’s protest, they refused to accept his resignation from the CMU, although they knew that their action could in no way compel Curran to continue to function on it. The council reindorsed the CMU and then continued to discuss the internal situation of the union.
The Stalinist tactics are familiar. First comes innuendo, then the lies and slanders: “Curran is making some deal with Lundeberg and other AFL maritime leaders; Curran is splitting the unity of maritime workers and strengthening the bosses.”
In addition, it is whispered that Curran is really not a good union leader; that he has become a red-baiter and wants to drive Communist Party members from the union. And finally, the Stalinists have brought into question Curran’s role, record and integrity as a union leader. It was this last that compelled Curran to make some closing remarks which presage a more intense struggle inside the union.
 
Curran Fights Back
Declaring that he had hoped to patch up the present fight, Curran stated that this is no longer possible since the CP gang has gone beyond permissible limits in the inner union fight. Harking back to the last union elections, when he first raised the question of excessive expenditures by officers, Curran said:
“I said sometime ago that I was not satisfied with the last elections. I have been gathering the facts and material since then, and when I am In full possession of the facts, they will be released to the union, and everybody concerned in them will be in [possession of] those facts for what they are Worth.”
He then went on to criticize the Council’s decision on his demand for an “immediate referendum” of the membership on whether the NMU should continue its affiliation to the CMU. The Stalinists pulled a typical trick on this question. They accepted in “principle” the idea of a referendum of the membership but postponed it until after the March meeting of the Committee for Maritime Unity. To this meeting, the majority decided to send a rank and file delegation of fifty. But this time Curran saw through the scheme and protested the idea of sending a rank and file group to attend a conference dominated by the officers of other unions. The Stalinists hope by this action to win the union for their policy by means of window-dressing and exploiting the decent sentiments of the membership for Maritime Unity. Curran has right on his side when he charges that “the CMU is narrow.” He might have added that it is a Stalinist set-up with the aim of controlling the waterfront in the interests of its political policies which begin in the Kremlin.
Curran was especially bitter at the Stalinist slander campaign and promises to tell the truth about the CP faction in the leadership. He already revealed that it was Stack who wanted to chase Smith out of the union on the charges of being “a fink.” “I didn’t raise any of that muck, and rake it before the Council, that he was in office illegally,” he said.
In answer to the charge of red-baiting, he said: “I have not started any war to oust the Communists out of this union, nor will I. But if a group of people, who call themselves Communists, who are officers of the union, are attempting to utilize that party (Curran may or may not be naive)—then I think that party should disassociate themselves from these people, because they are not Marxists by any stretch, not from the small study I have made of Marxism; the party must disassociate themselves from these people.” Elsewhere, Curran adds on this point: “I think the Communist Party, if it is a Marxist Party, today has allowed itself to degrade down to the point where it is nothing but a job security amalgamation on the waterfront, and a rule or ruin group on the waterfront.”
 
What Should Be Done
Curran is correct when he denies that the Stalinists in his union are Marxists. But conclusion to be drawn from that is not that they are different from the Communist Party, or that their “Marxism” is slightly off, but that the Communist Party itself is not a Marxist Party; quite the contrary, it is anti-Marxist. The Stalinist gang is not merely a “job security amalgamation” but a well-organized political group in the union, acting according to the “party line” and fighting for the political interests of Stalinism.
If Curran does not bear that constantly in mind, he will never understand why the Stalinists act as they do. If he does not understand the intimate relationship between Russian foreign policy and Stalinist policy in this country, he will never understand the Stalinist role as agents of totalitarian Russia. No, the Communist Party will not separate itself from its creatures in the NMU; on the contrary, it will only organize their fight more cleverly and more systematically.
There appears to be no halting this fight. The Stalinist gang is out to get Curran; he is too dangerous to their interests. And for Curran, this is a fight for his life in the union, whether he understands it or not. After many years of association with the Stalinists, he is beginning to learn that they are the greatest internal danger to unionism. But Curran will come to understand that he cannot fight them successfully unless he has a superior program of progressive and militant unionism. He must know that the Stalinists can change their line repeatedly, appearing one day as super-patriots, the next, as militant unionists. Therefore he will have to expose their lack of principle and their trifling with the interests of the union.
It is good that Curran refuses to engage in a red-baiting campaign. That would be the worst thing he could do; it would be self-defeating. At the same time it should not deter him from an open and vigorous fight against the Stalinists who can best be defeated by superior policies. An organizational fight against them would resolve nothing and create the dangers of a reactionary turn in union politics and tactics.
Curran is on the right road in trying to organize a fight against government encroachment on the rights of the maritime workers. He is correct in trying to establish unity between all maritime unions, CIO and AFL. There are, however, some dangers ahead in the craft ideology of the AFL unions, their practice of Jim Crow and red-baiting. But if Curran is uncompromising, he can do a great deal to change these conditions. Unity of all maritime workers and unions would make them an unbeatable force on the waterfront but it can only be done by a genuine and vigorous union program, by defeating the government policy, the shipping companies and the Stalinists.
 

vis: Critical Opposition Rises in the Stalinist Party (20 January 1947)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Internal Cracks in a Totalitarian Structure
Critical Opposition Rises in the Stalinist Party
(13 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 3, 20 January 1947, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

FOR a considerable period after the expulsion of the groups of people mentioned in my articles on the situation in the Communist Party in the United States, the Stalinist press made little or no mention of them. It had hoped to avoid any public discussion of this situation by keeping silent. The party bureaucracy was not a little embarrassed by the expulsions. This was the first time in many years that the thoroughly bureaucratized and monolithic Stalinist organization had members and groups which were actively opposed to the party line. But the public activity of the expelled made it necessary for the party to take notice of them and to reply to their printed material in public.
The December issue of Political Affairs, the theoretical organ of the CP, carried a long article entitled The Struggle against Deviations and Factionalism in San Francisco, by one Oleta O’Connor Yates. The Daily Workers for January 8, 9 and 10, published three articles by its “literary critic” Samuel Sillen, which was devoted entirely to the statement of Ruth McKenney and Bruce Minton (analyzed in Labor Action, December 23 and 30). The attention given to the activities of the expelled groups indicates that the problem of the dissidents has not ended, but that inside the party other groups and individuals are continuing to fight along the same or similar lines as the expelled.
The whole situation is indeed significant. The fight that broke out over Browder was the first internal struggle the American Stalinist Party had since the expulsion of the Trotskyist Opposition and the Lovestone Group. Since then, the party became truly monolithic. No groups, factions, or theoretical and political views which differed from official positions were tolerated. But there was no need to exert any great effort to effect this condition. All individuals and groups which had any degree of independence, or theoretical and political competence were ousted from the party during the long process of its Stalinization.
 
Stalinist Monolithism
The monolithic character of the party was achieved almost “naturally” with the ousting of these opponents, or anyone else with independent views, and the Russifying of the organization, i.e., its transformation into an appendage of the Kremlin. In its unquestioning acceptance of Stalinist ideology, the American CP could not help modeling its party after Stalin’s party. Thus, the bureaucratic and opportunist leadership of Browder, who was bureaucratically placed at the head of the party by Stalin, adorned itself with all the trappings of the Russian master: policies were adopted and changed without the intervention of the membership, much less a discussion in its ranks. All discussions were post-facto events: they were Stalinist innovations which permitted the membership to discuss an already new line and to be educated in it. Within a few years the party became a monolithic machine which operated in push-button fashion and with deadly uniformity.
Whenever a change in Russian foreign policy took place, the CP in the United States, as elsewhere, reacted according to a proscribed formula: Whatever the Russian Party decides is automatically the policy for the American CP. It wasn’t necessary for the party to receive Instructions for every change of its line. That is one of the things which so-called “Communist experts” fail to understand. It is the system itself which is pernicious. The party reacts like a hypnotized victim. And this corresponds to its true character as a once-revolutionary socialist party which became transformed into an appendage of a new nationalist, counter-revolutionary center in Russia under the leadership of Stalin. The main task of the party was now to act as an outpost for Russia’s new ruling class.
When Stalin liquidated the Communist International (a purely formal act, which had no real practical significance), Browder liquidated the CP and transformed it into a political association. Lacking state power and the resources of its European sister parties, the CP suffered some serious reverses. And as often happens in this country, by movements, ideologists or individuals who borrow from European sources, the American product appears in exaggerated and distorted form.
Browder went a little too far in his effort to placate American imperialism and to strengthen the alliance between Russian and Anglo-American imperialism. He made some impermissible observations about the nature of monopoly capitalism and socialism (different only in degree from what the Russian and the European Stalinists were saying) which did not set well with the more militant elements in the party. What these elements did not and do not yet understand is, that Browder was not pursuing an independently thought-out policy, but rather the general line of Stalinism. Otherwise, he would have been called to a halt long before Duclos intervened in the American situation in 1945.
It was only after the war, when the necessity for a close Anglo-American-Russian alliance had diminished, that Stalinism the world over began to act more independently, more militantly, not in the interests of the masses, but against its rival imperialists. And the purpose of this was to provide for Stalinist forces in the Capitalist nations who were to act as allies in Russia’s struggle for Europe and Asia, and specifically to defend Russian interests against American imperialism. When it was necessary to change the line of the Communist Party in the U.S.A., Browder was superfluous.
He could not carry out the new line, so badly had he compromised himself by a foolish and unwarranted (in Stalin’s eyes) application of the general line. Those in the party who had hoped that the ousting of Browder would mean a return to a militant, class struggle policy (reminiscent of the Stalinist “Third Period” days) were doomed to disappointment when they observed that the Foster-Dennis leadership produced not a new line, but a toned-down version of Browder’s “revisionism.” The above, then, is the real explanation for the existence of the National Committee for Publications Group, the San Francisco opposition, the dissident groups in New York, and the Minton-McKenney defection.
 
A Stalinist Polemic
Sillen’s articles in the Daily Worker on the Minton-McKenney statement referred to above is a silly and stupid piece of hack writing. Knowing how the CP functions, we have no doubt that Mr. Sillen was asked to lend his great “authority” as a “literary man” to attack two oppositionists who are literary people. His reply to their statement is typically Stalinist in that it evades what they really said in their statement in order to attack them without discussing their main arguments. He substitutes slander for argument, which is a basic Stalinist method of discussion with opponents. The slander is supplemented with misquotations from Lenin and other socialist authorities, spiced up with political vulgarity. An example of this is his reply to Minton’s and McKenney’s attack on the CP attitude toward the United Nations which they characterize as another League of Nations. They quoted Lenin to the effect that the League was a “den of thieves” of imperialists who divided the world amongst themselves. Sillen replies to this by defending the UN as a body totally different from the League. Why? Because Stalin’s Russia participated in its establishment and is the leader of one of its imperialist blocs. So this vulgar literary man proceeds to misrepresent Lenin when he quotes him to say:
“Only those who have no self-reliance can fear to enter into temporary alliances, even with unreliable people; not a single political party could exist without entering such alliances.”
Lenin did not have the League of Nations in mind, which is the implication Sillen sought to convey. He was talking about the revolutionary party of the working class entering, into alliances with other parties in a struggle for certain, specific demands or on certain specific issues. And Lenin recognized that a workers’ state, so long as it was isolated and no other revolution came to its assistance, might, because of its weaknesses, have to play one imperialist power against another, and even enter into a temporary alliance with one powerful nation or another as a means of defending itself. But Lenin never forgot to add that no revolutionary party should surrender its internationalism or its revolutionary struggle at home, when and if a workers’ state entered into such an alliance.
If Lenin were alive today he would characterize the UN in exactly the same way as he did the League of Nations – as an imperialist body wrangling over who shall have the lion’s share in carving up the world. And he would call upon the masses to oppose it.
Elsewhere, Sillen denounces Minton and McKenney for having “smuggled” their line “into a branch discussion.” How else McKenney and Minton could have presented their views to the party, this Stalinist hack does not say. But it is evident that what he is trying to say is: if the party bureaucracy had known what your views were they would never have permitted you to present them to the party. And we agree with Sillen. If the Party leadership had known what the above were going to say to the party, they never would have had the opportunity of acquainting even their branch with those views. They would have been expelled for merely holding such views.
Finally, Sillen calls attention to the fact that Minton did support Browder’s revisionism, but protested only that some people were “carrying it too far.” Sillen intends thereby to convey two impressions: (1) that Minton is really a Browderite today; (2) that the whole party and its leadership (especially Sillen) were really opposed to Browder, but that by some magic power, Browder carried out his line over the protests of the whole leadership (read: bureaucracy), first line and secondary. This is a lie on the face of it. The fact is that the whole main leadership endorsed Browder’s anti-Marxist, anti-socialist views and policies, and none more so than Mr. Sillen himself. Be that as it may, Minton and McKenney are certainly not Browder followers today. What is most important, the CP line has not changed fundamentally. From the point of view of socialism, of Marxism, the CP line remains what it was under Browder: an adaptation to the needs of Russian foreign policy, or the state interests of Stalin’s ruling class, under new conditions of the end of the alliance between Russian and American imperialism.
 
The Frisco Situation
The article by Yates in Political Affairs is a more rounded attack on another group of dissidents, of the CP, the group of workers expelled in San Francisco for opposing the strike-breaking policies of the Stalinists there in alliance with their outstanding ally in the CIO, Harry Bridges. One of the difficulties on the Coast, she says, was that a “left” opposition to party policy developed on the ground “that there is no difference between the character of the coalition envisaged by the party today (coalition with liberals, intelligent capitalists, and progressives), and the concept of the coalition developed by Browder.” Miss Yates then proceeds to defend the party’s efforts to break the machinists strike in San Francisco, the issue which led to the expulsion of some union militants and the break-up of their party cell branch. “Their opposition to party policies,” she writes, “led them to factional attacks upon the party leadership, as well as to violation of party discipline and the principles of democratic centralism.”
She then proceeds to outline what is the prevailing Stalinist concept of a monolithic party and says: “The party’s greatest strength comes from its monolithic unify – unity of ideology, policy and strategy. Those who disagree with the fundamental ideology, policy and strategy of the party must either renounce their views or take themselves elsewhere.” Behind this description stands the monolithic party in which centralism prevails but no real democracy. This is followed by the impermissibility of opposing views in the party, or for those who hold such views, to maintain them and fight for them. The result of this bureaucratized, monolithic character of the party is that there is no independence of thought, no education and learning, no growth of the membership. They have neither the right nor the ability to intervene in the affairs of the party. The party has developed a sickening unanimity of thought and action creating a completely automatistic organization.
 
Make a Clean Break
The difficulty in trying to analyze the expelled groups and individuals is due to the disparity of their views and the common confusion which they have on the nature of the Communist Party and the perspectives of their struggle. In calling for the creation of a real, revolutionary Stalinist Party, as some of them do, they seem not to understand, that there is a real Stalinist Party in the United States and that is the CP. That it is not a revolutionary party flows from the fact that Stalinism is a counter-revolutionary manifestation inside the working class.
The opposition is really groping blindly toward understanding. It is only in the vaguest sense that they know what they want. They still live in the militant days of the “Third Period” and regard that abortive stage of Stalinist development as the reflection of a revolutionary stage of party development. They are influenced by old party, worn-out and degenerated figures like William F. Dunne and Sam Darcy, who have some understanding of what the party was in the days before its Stalinization, but who have themselves been corrupted through years of silence and repeated adjustments to the “party line.”
There is only one hope for the new CP opposition: get rid of all the ideological rubbish you have absorbed in the past ten years, at least, of Stalinist opportunism. Go back to the classics of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky. Learn what revolutionary theory and practice is. Find out what a real Workers’ State is. Learn the meaning of socialism and then compare it with Stalin’s prison of the masses. Try to understand what a revolutionary socialist party is and learn how far the CP is and has been from being such a party.
Once you have done that, you will learn that there is really only one way out: a complete break, not only with the American CP, but with Stalinism. If you really want to be revolutionary socialists, if you feel that your socialist integrity ds at stake, if you feel that your internationalism has been violated, then move forward toward the only representatives of revolutionary theory and practice in the world today, the Trotskyists. Otherwise you will find yourself in the inextricably difficult position of trying to be revolutionary socialists on the basis of contradictory, mutually exclusive theories.
 

Gates: The Jewish Problem After Hitler (September 1947)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Jewish Problem After Hitler
Palestine and the Fourth International
(October 1947)

From The New International, Vol. XIII No. 7, September 1947, pp. 206–10.
Transcribed by Ted Crawford.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





“What is obvious is not always known,
And what is known is not always present.”
– Samuel Johnson



The reaction of the official Fourth Internationalist organizations to the Jewish question and the problem of Palestine, in the new situation produced by Hitlerism and the war is a measure of their incapacity to free themselves from outlived theories and political positions. This results in a dreary reaffirmation of old ideas and programs accompanied by the repetitious explanation that “there is no reason to change our position” since “there is nothing new in the situation.” Thus it is the same with the Russian question, the national question and the Jewish question. For the most part, these organizations, most notably the Socialist Workers Party in the United States, have remained virtually silent on the Jewish question. The silence is not wholly accidental; it is a reflection of policy. Real and concrete new problems of the day are approached with extreme caution and conservatism.
 
I
In relation to the current world Jewish question, the leading spokesmen of the official Fourth International rely upon theoretical and political reasoning which has its roots in the by-gone eras of 1905 and 1917-23.
Aside from a short statement or two dealing with the concrete problem of Jewish immigration, and a rather long and abstract article on Palestine by T. Cliff, the Fourth International and The Militant in this country, as well as the press of other Trotskyist organizations, have refrained from comment on the Jewish question on the ground that there is really nothing different to say about this complicated international problem from what has already been said for dozens of years. That is, until the Fourth International reprinted an essay by Ernest Germain entitled The Jewish Question Since World War II. This essay first appeared as the concluding chapter of the late A. Leon’s book, The Materialist Conception of the Jewish Question.
Germain is the new theoretical luminary of the official Fourth International; his writings read like a lawbook; he is regarded as the outstanding interpreter of the theories of Trotskyism, especially on the Russian question, wherein he “brilliantly reaffirmed” (according to James P. Cannon) the outlived theory of the “degenerated workers’ state.”
 
The First Attempt at an Answer
Germain’s essay, which marks one of the first efforts of the official Fourth International to speak somewhat concretely on the Jewish question, is distinguished by its utterly detached and abstract approach to the problem, but which is characteristic for its unquestionably correct interpretations of parts of an old Marxist position which has little to do with life today. Where Germain is on his own, i.e., where he is compelled to concern himself with the concrete problems of the day, he is thrown into one quandary after another. But they are of no consequence, for thereafter he sweeps away the whole problem with lofty disdain born of the supra-historical approach.
We had occasion to direct attention to this type of theorizing in an earlier article in the NI in which we referred to T. Cliff’s competent analytical work on Palestine, and here, too, we observed a fine study of the economic growth and problems of the Middle East and the place of Palestine in that situation. Yet the whole work was outstanding for its studied evasion of the political questions of the class and national struggle taking place there. He even failed to mention the slogan of an all-Palestinian constituent assembly in the struggle for independence and against imperialism. Since that time, it is true, Cliff has dealt with the problems of Jewish immigration, bi-national state, constituent assembly, etc., but these have not been made public and we cannot therefore comment on them.
Germain’s essay, however, is a public document. Not written as a reply to the position advocated by the Workers Party, The New International and Labor Action, it nevertheless has been published by the SWP (Fourth International, April 1947) as a polemical gesture, for in their minds the Germain essay is an answer to what they call our “right-wing” position on the Jewish question.
Some of our readers may be aware that one of the main differences between us and the official Fourth International and the SWP is on the question of the right of the Jews to free immigration to Palestine. In advocating the right of free immigration to all countries, and in the first place to the United States, we advocate, at the same time, that democratic right for Palestine. The Fourth International and its adherents, however, are in favor of free immigration of Jews to all countries, the United States, Great Britain, France, Australia, etc.; but ... not to Palestine – the one country to which they want to go! Germain’s article seeks to give the theoretical and historical justification for this obviously contradictory position.
This article can be summarized briefly: The Jews of Europe have undergone almost inhuman suffering; this is due to the nature of capitalism. But the Jews are not alone in this suffering. Other peoples, other national minorities are faced with the same or similar prospects of extermination or near-extermination. This is a symbol of the decay of capitalism. There is no hope for these people except in the victory of socialism. It is true, the Jews may be entirely exterminated between now and the future, but ... oops, sorry ... that can’t be helped, you know. That’s capitalism for you. The Jews, despite this grim prospect, must not allow themselves to be emotionally worked up by the fact that six, seven or eight millions of them have been wiped out in Europe!
 
II
The first part of the article summarizes the bestial nature of a society which destroyed five out of six million European Jews. Why and how did this happen? “Reason refuses to admit,” says Germain, “that material interests could have coldly dictated the extermination of these countless defenseless beings.” What then did? Capitalism, he answers! As though capitalism did not embrace material interests and factors. This general answer is undoubtedly correct, but it is much too simple. One has to go further and examine the concrete conditions under which this extermination took place at the hands of it specific German fascism. Germain’s failure to go beyond his generalization produces, in turn, a faulty approach to the problem of the “guilt” of German fascism, its hierarchy and its bourgeois sponsors.
If one approaches the question of “material interests” from the narrowest of premises, then it would be difficult to say: yes, this factor or this person alone was responsible. Material interests did play an important contributing role to the actual unfolding of events in Germany. But if one understands the general social conditions which produced the fascist movement, the class warfare and the capitulation of Stalinism and social democracy, which insured the victory of Hitler, and understands at the same time the fact that the fascist movement embraces the “social scum” of society, it is not difficult then to grasp the multiplicity of factors which produced this situation, the great historical factors, as well as the mean ones, the big bourgeoisie which enriches itself on the basis of state policy and the fascist agent who enriches himself from the disfranchised and murdered Jews. For this one must understand the molecular process induced by the specific features of German decay after the First World War, and the plane to which violence is raised as a method of solving the social crisis in declining bourgeois society. Violence has universal traits in bourgeois society, but it also has some specific national characteristics and forms which the Marxist cannot overlook.
Germain characterizes the experiences of the Jews as a symbol of the fate of humanity in general and as the product of a sick society. And he adds: “The tragedy of the Jews is only the herald to other peoples of their coming fate.” The correctness of this generalization has a strange ring: the expression of sympathy for the Jews seems constantly to be apologized for and qualified by the observations that their sufferings are socially and historically conditioned, as if that in some way mitigates the condition of this people.
Thus, after describing the unrelieved horrors of the Jews, Germain is under compulsion to write:
“Alongside of five million murdered Jews are sixty million victims of imperialist war. The barbaric treatment of the Jews by Hitlerite imperialism is only an extreme expression of the barbarism of the general methods of imperialism in our period. As against the Jewish deportations we now find the deportation of millions of Germans from Poland and Czechoslovakia.”
 
The Purpose of Comparison
What is the point of these comparisons. To show the Jews that there is nothing unique in their position in European society today? But that is silly, for the conditions which the Jewish people face are unique. While it is true that Germans have been deported from Poland and Czechoslovakia, undergoing severe suffering in the process, the comparison ends at that point. For these Germans return to their own nation, however divided it maybe under conditions of military occupation. They may return to friends and relatives. They do not remain in concentration camps where their families and friends had been exterminated by the hundreds of thousands and millions. They do not return to a hostile country which hates them.
Chancing the charge that I do not have real feeling for the sixty million victims of the imperialist slaughter, I still say that the comparison made by Germain is false. The Jews were not merely victims of an imperialist war; they were the victims of a social and political program of German fascism serving its big business masters, and would have faced the same extermination whether there was a war or not.
But is there not some special point to Germain’s observation? Yes, there is. It is to affirm by commission and omission that there is really nothing unique in the position of European Jewry, no special problems created by their homelessness and landlessness. We shall soon see exactly how this penetrating method settles the problem of a displaced people who face, by his own admission, total extermination.
The “historical” fixation, the extreme impartiality of Germain in assessing the responsibility for the extermination of the Jews in Europe produces some curious reasoning. For, if the position of the Jews in Europe today is a product of a sick and dying capitalism – and this is undeniable – how can you blame Germany alone? No, it is quite obvious that all the imperialists are equally responsible. All? Yes, all ... except the “Soviet Union,” the “degenerated workers’ state,” a land without soviets and where the workers do not rule, have no rights and are at the mercy of a ruthless bureaucratic ruling class. As Germain writes:
“The very fate of the Jews in Europe was determined as much by the calculations of American imperialists as by the direct massacres of Hitler ... If Hitler constructed the trap for the Jews, it was the Anglo-Americans who sprang it. The blood of the innocent falls upon their heads as well as upon the Nazis.”
 
A Warped Analysis
As a historical generalization describing the imperialist world, this is true, but as Germain applies it to the concrete situation involving the Jews, it is only half true, for the logic of the point he pursues is to blur the differences between the imperialists and to make it impossible to distinguish the elements of conflict in state policy of the various powers. Having made this generalization, how does it alter what happened in Germany and Europe during the years 1933 to 1945? One can say, correctly, that Great Britain and the United States did not do anything because they did not help the Jews to emigrate from Germany. But that is not the same thing as saying they are responsible for Hitler’s internal policies. Hitler was prepared to carry out his extermination program no matter how many protests were made. The extermination of the Jews was part of his national program. Not even the threat of war would have deterred him, if it is conceivable that Great Britain or the United States would have gone to war on behalf of the Jews.
In attacking British and American policy as equally responsible for the plight of the Jews in Germany, Germain; very gingerly by-passes critical comment about Stalinist Russia and its role in the slaughter of Europe’s Jews. The only reference made to Russia is the quoted charge of the Polish resistance movement that it was betrayed by the British, Polish and Russian governments. But again Germain even twists this with his own comments directing attention only toward the capitalist imperialists, because, as everyone knows by now, he not only does not believe that there is such a thing as Russian imperialism; but continues to find something magically progressive in that slave society. Beyond that reference there is not another word about Stalinist policy!
This conception of the responsibility of German fascist barbarism for the Jewish slaughter produced some bizarre reactions in the SWP. Working from the same analytical premises adopted by Germain, The Militant denounced the first reports and pictures of the massacres in Buchenwald, Belsen and elsewhere as fakes, “war horror” and “atrocity stories” that could not possibly be true. Certainly The Militant understood, that the publication of these reports and pictures had the purpose of inciting greater support of the masses for the war, but it was not necessary to deny their authenticity in order to recognize the purposes of the Allied governments in publishing them. The Militant’s reaction, however, revealed a “touchiness” on the Jewish question that is reflected again in the Germain opus.
All sense of proportion is lost in the methodology of Germain. He still has to explain: why did this happen in Germany and not in the United States? Why was not this vicious anti-Semitism, an integral part of Italian fascist policy as it was of the German? What is responsible for the terrible legacy of virulent anti-Semitism, on the whole continent today and in Russia, too, where it has never really been stamped out by the Kremlin but, on the contrary, is slyly fostered by it?
Germain passes these questions by. Given his Russian position, he is congenitally unable to introduce into this discussion of responsibility or guilt for the extermination of the Jews the role of Stalinist Russia. If Great Britain and the United States sprang Hitler’s trap, what did the Stalin-Hitler pact of 1939 contribute to the well-being of the Jews? Did the pact relieve the sufferings of the Jews or intensify them? Did the closed borders of Stalinist Russia assist the Jews or help seal their doom in Europe?
No, Germain has no time for such trifles. He has a theory and he is on his way. Do you want proof that Great Britain and the United States are co-responsible with Hitler for the extermination of the Jews? Well, here it is: Allied war prisoners in Germany and German war prisoners in Allied countries were treated “tolerably” well, but not so the Russian prisoners. This is supposed, to prove by some method or other that the Russians could in no way be held co-responsible for the fate of the Jews. Nay, if the Germans treated Russian soldiers worst of all, then it is proof that Russia must have been trying to do something to relieve the sufferings of these people. Absurd, you think? Then how else follow Germain’s logic?
But, as a matter of fact, the whole point Germain tries to make is absurd. The treatment of U.S. and British prisoners in Germany and vice versa was a product of the war, of military policy and not of good will. If the Germans treated the Russian prisoners worst of all, you can be sure that Stalin did not turn the other cheek. The methods of the Third Reich and the “degenerated workers’ state” were strangely similar. How does the fact fit into Germain’s schema that tens and hundreds of thousands of German prisoners in Russia were also treated “tolerably” well? The reasons for this were entirely political and the fruits of the policy can be observed now in Stalinist policy in Germany. And again, if one is to measure the Jewish question by the yardstick employed by Germain, what is one to say about the extermination of the Poles, civilian and military, by both Germany and Russia?
 
III
The lofty historical point of view taken by Germain has led him into devious roads. At one point he shows the condition of the European Jewry by calling attention once more to the fact that there are less than a million of them left on the whole Continent.
“The war,” he writes, “has brutally cut all the roots that nourished them in their social environment. If they cannot develop new roots elsewhere, these people are condemned to perish.”
Yes, yes, yes. How true! And that isn’t all.
“More than 100,000 Jewish fugitives in Germany ... one year after their liberation continue to live under the infamous conditions of concentration camps, and are subjected to a thousand and one frauds on the part of the military authorities.” (Emphasis in the original – A.G.)
Yes, Germain proves beyond peradventure of doubt that the Jews cannot remain in Europe unless they accept their total extermination. Therefore, since the capitalists themselves will not succor the Jews, it is up to the workers’ movement, especially of the more advanced and better situated countries, to “advance this demand of elementary humanity: Open the doors of the United States, of Canada, of Australia, of the five continents to the victims of Nazi persecution!” (Emphasis in the original – A.G.)
Germain argues that the countries named could easily absorb these few hundred thousand Jews. No doubt. But, the nub of the problem is the ugly fact that none of these countries will take them in and that a great deal of opposition exists to their immigration among wide layers of people. Let us leave this for the moment and go on.
Germain adds:
“The development of anti-Semitism, the result of definite social and historic causes [this obviously places it on another plane entirely!] is producing the spread of Zionist nationalism among the despairing and declassed petty bourgeois Jewish masses. The brutal equalization of Jews of all strata in the extermination camps sharpened nationalism even among Jewish workers, in the degree that international solidarity remained too weak on the part of the workers of other nations.”
So what is to be done? The workers in “a favored position as compared with the Jewish workers take the leadership now and bring about freedom of immigration into their countries for the survivors.” To save them from extinction? Undoubtedly! But, in addition, because those in “a favored position” may “win the Jewish workers from the Zionist utopia.”
This, you see, is the gravest of all problems. The fact is, however, that the Jews have not turned to Palestine because they have become Zionists. That they have become nationalist, have developed an increased consciousness of their existence as Jews, goes without saying. To expect anything else, after their experiences of the past decade or more, their absence of any place to live and in a situation where the world revolutionary socialist movement is for all practical purposes almost non-existent is to expect a miracle.
 
The World Is Closed to Them
Germain contradicts himself in the very next paragraph of his essay when he adds:
“If thousands of Jews in Europe are now demanding the right to migrate to Palestine, the primary reason for this is that the doors of the rest of the world are closed to them: It is also the product of the incredible persecutions of the past years and the relative passivity of the world proletariat.”
I could not put it better myself. Unwittingly, Germain stumbled on what is crucial. The Jewish question is a part of the broader national question today, in its altered forms resulting from the successive defeats of the revolution, the Hitler experience and the rise of Stalinism. For the rise of the national question in its varied forms is dependent in large measure on the size, influence and integrity of the revolutionary socialist movement. Given the absence of such a viable movement, the problems of today necessarily assume new forms and seek different solutions.
Where does this bring us? To Germain’s blind alley: the Jews cannot live in Europe. They must leave. However, there is no place for them to go. The brutality of the conditions they experience daily and their homelessness has resulted in their universal desire to go to Palestine. Therefore we are for opening the doors of the whole, world – five continents, no less, Africa included – but ... not Palestine! Why not Palestine? According to Germain:


From an economic point of view, Palestine and the whole Middle East will suffer terrible devastation in the coming world economic crisis. That means, no future for the Jews there.
From the “socio-economic” point of view, “the forces opposing this immigration have a crushing superiority over the Palestinian Jews and over world Zionism.”


But from an economic point of view, the whole world will suffer just as severely from the coming world economic crisis, and from the “socio-economic” point of view, the populations of other countries are just as opposed to the migration of the Jews as the Arab nationalists. No matter. This does not deter Germain and his co-thinkers from demanding the right of the Jews to enter those countries. And so we find that the slogans for the right of free immigration for Jews to all countries and to the five continents did not, in Germain’s mind, mean complete free immigration, and not to all countries.
Are the Arabs right in opposing Jewish immigration? If the demand for free immigration is a correct democratic, socialist slogan, shouldn’t revolutionary socialists issue it despite the opposition of the Arabs and try to convince, not to oppose it? Is there any special merit in criticising only the reactionary positions of the official Jewish organizations and to say not a word about the reactionary feudalistic concepts of the Arab chieftains? On our part, we have made our severest criticisms of official Jewish policy, but we have not lost sight of the false attitude of the Arab rulers whose opposition to immigration has a strong reactionary base and coincides in part, with British imperialist policy. For the truth is that the British use both Jews and Arabs, with varying success.
And yet the fate of the Jews is sealed. The continued existence of bourgeois society will mean not merely the extermination of the Jews in Europe but over the whole world, and especially in the United States. Can anything be done about it? No, not really, for “the only way out which still remains open to humanity is at the same time the solution of the Jewish question.” Worse than that, “the peculiarities of Jewish history have only determined a special subordination of the future of this people to the outcome of the unfolding social struggles.” Only the Jews? And other peoples? Apparently not. In this case, the Jews are unique, says Germain. For them there really is no hope unless socialism comes and quickly, too. Even if we are to agree that the prospects of Jewish survival are slim indeed, must revolutionary socialist policy rest upon this prospect of extermination? Is it not likely that the extermination of the Jews of the world will be accompanied by a descent of all society into barbarism? Even so, revolutionary socialists do not therefore treat the daily problems of the class struggle (of which the national and Jewish questions are a part) with historical aloofness and a fatalism which springs from the conviction of inevitable doom. They try to do everything in their power to prevent the doom of society. This would seem to dictate the formulation of a policy, a realistic one too, that would offer some prospects of reversing the dominant social tendency and to reverse it in the direction of socialism.
 
Germain Holds Out a Hope
Does not Germain, who on so many other questions holds ultra-leftist positions, offer up some hope to the Jews? Yes, he does in the following paragraph:
“As the most sorely wounded, the Jews have especially allowed themselves to be carried away by the psychosis of despair and demoralization [!], which has been further sharpened by the specific social structure of this people [?]. But in a few years, the immediate effects of the nightmare will disappear ... Since we have no reason to doubt the fate of humanity, let us also not doubt that the Jewish working masses, after passing through a series of disappointing experiences, will recognize their future is indissolubly linked with that of the proletariat and the revolutionary movement, and that they will again, as in the past, take an important place in this movement, and will owe their final emancipation to a devoted struggle, for the cause of socialism.”
Fine words, these. But in the meantime? Suppose the previous forecast of Germain is realized and the Jews are exterminated? What then? Well, that’s just too bad. The fault will be capitalism’s, not ours.
 
IV
Only dogmatic and schematic thinking could produce such abstractions on the current Jewish question. The fundamental error of Germain’s approach is that, its thinking is rooted in the “assimilationist” era of the movement at a time when the Jewish question seemed close to solution. At the same time he suffers myopia produced by his inability to understand the Jewish question today as part of the national question, i.e., national question of 1939–47 and not of 1917–23. As will be clear to any reader of Germain’s essay, he rejects the thought that the Jewish question in Europe today is a part of the national question; moreover, he does not grasp the full meaning of the consequences of the new position of the Jews on the continent. To appraise this new position, one need only recall the position of the Jews in the pre-Hitler period.
For decades the conditions of the Jews in Europe had steadily improved. Centuries of oppression, persecution, discrimination and ghetto life seemed to disappear in the advance of capitalism and the expansion of its modern industrial system. While the position of the Jews had improved everywhere, it reached its height in the advanced capitalist countries. In those nations, assimilation of Jews went on uninterruptedly. So deep-going was this process that many Jews came to believe that the days of great trial for their people had ended. Only in the most backward nation, Czarist Russia, did the Jews still face the problems of another age. There the putrescent nobility and its camarilla still employed the “pogrom” as an instrument of state policy for the purpose of preserving their rule. But even the capitalist world was aghast at the treatment of the Jews in Russia.
For the most part, the Marxist movement regarded the occurrences in Czarist, Russia as an “aberration” not characteristic of world capitalism. And on the scale of world history, the persecution of 10,000,000 scattered people, residing in small numbers in dozens of countries, would have been a truly grotesque and senseless practice. Persecution of the Jews had, in any case, ceased to be an international practice, or, if it had not ceased entirely, at least the tendency was unmistakably toward an end of such persecution and for assimilation of large and ever-increasing numbers of Jews in the general national patterns of the countries in which they lived.
 
Aspects of the New Situation
Given this general objective situation, one could understand the validity of the old Marxist position, most forcefully expressed in the old Russian and Polish revolutionary parties, the Bolsheviks as well as the Mensheviks, in favor of “assimilation” and against the revival, or survival of Jewish nationalism, which sought to reverse the process of history. In the eastern European movement, the Jewish Bund remained the strongest force which fought for the maintenance of “Jewish integrity,” a Jewish national life, and a Jewish national culture. Lenin, for example, opposed this part of the program of the Bund as reactionary, as an attempt to move backward on the Jewish question, at a time when everything pointed toward a progressive solution of the problem, particularly in view of the rise of the revolutionary socialist movement, the imminence of the revolution in Russia and the prospect of a not-too-distant world socialist victory.
The Jewish problem today is so different qualitatively from the past, that it is almost entirely a new one demanding new solutions. This much was already indicated by Trotsky shortly before his death when he forecast the extermination of the Jews during the war. Trotsky’s prediction was nearly realized in the tragic extermination of from five to six million Jews in Europe.
As a measure of the difference of the modern Jewish problem, consider the tremendous revulsion of the whole world to the Czarist pogroms in the 1905 period and the relative indifference of a world accustomed to mass destruction of wealth and peoples to the scientific mass murder of the Jews in the Hitler era. Then the world was horror-stricken; yes, even the bourgeois world was aghast at the cruel slaughter and persecution of the Russian Jews. Cruel slaughter and persecution! Lenin recorded the depth of these pogroms when he wrote:
“It is calculated that in 100 cities at that time 4,000 were killed and 10,000 were mutilated.”
But the Jews could flee Russia to havens of safety. There was the United States with free immigration and its vast areas of land. There was western Europe – the center of modern capitalist civilization. As a result, there was no mass movement to Palestine in those days and no amount of Zionist agitation could create one. The Jews as a whole did not seek “national survival,” a “Jewish state,” a “homeland.” They were content to be permitted to reside in the countries of their choice and to become full citizens of those lands on a free and equal basis with other inhabitants.
Is that era comparable to the present? All one has to do is to examine the real world of today to see how clearly different it is, how completely insecure is the position of the Jews now. Is it an exaggeration to say, after more than ten years of Hitlerism in a decaying world characteristic for its social degeneration, that the existence of the Jews is as perilous in 1947 as it was in 1940? The virus of anti-Semitism has spread to all borders and has infected nations and peoples whose relative tolerance was conspicuous in former years. The truth is that the Jews have no place in Europe to live. They cannot return to their old homes and resume their former occupations. They are for the most part, the few hundred thousand European Jews who are left, inhabitants of former concentration camps in an atmosphere polluted with the stink of crematories, dungeons and fresh-dug graves. A person would have to be thick-skinned indeed not to feel the depths of despair which have seized hold of the Jewish population of the world, especially those who remain in Europe today.
 
Some of the New Problems
Out of the cemetery in which the remnants of European Jews now temporarily reside has come a mass desire for emigration to Palestine, a desire which took almost spontaneous form. Why Palestine? Why not the United States, Australia, South America, England or France? The principal reason, as Germain himself admits, is that none of these countries will permit the entry of Jews or other displaced persons. In these circumstances, the Jews have, in fact, only one place to turn to that offers them some realistic prospect of salvation, namely, Palestine. Without going into a discussion now as to all the reasons why emigration to Palestine is justifiable, let me cite an important reason for it. More than one-third of the population of Palestine, who are Jews, want their fellow nationals to come there. The weight of persecution has created a deep bond of solidarity between the European and Palestinian Jews. Palestine can absorb these several hundred thousand European Jews and offer them a haven in a world whose doors are closed to them. In a way it is an answer to the disgusting, hypocritical sympathies expressed for the Jews by the United States, Great Britain, Russia and the leading powers of the UN who are using the Jewish question as a political football in the new imperialist struggle for world domination.
To recognize the validity of these national aspirations for survival among Europe’s Jews is not a violation of Marxist principles. On the contrary, to deny them would reveal not only an obstinate misunderstanding of everything that Lenin wrote on the national question, but a failure to understand what has happened in Europe in the past twenty-five years.
There are many other aspects of this problem, Arab-Jewish relations, policies of the official Jewish organizations, binational state, partition and some broader aspects of the national question which we must leave for another article.
But we cannot leave off at this point without reminding Germain and his co-thinkers that, no matter how successful they may be in evading concrete answers to new problems by the dogmatic assertions of old theory, they must still answer the living questions of the day – and answer them correctly. For, whatever Germain may think, events in the Middle East rush on swiftly.
ALBERT GATES
 

Gates: Taft-Hartley and Labor Politics (August 1947)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Taft-Hartley and Labor Politics
The New Urgency for a Labor Party
(August 1947)

From The New International, Vol. XIII No. 6, August 1947, p. 164–167.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


The passage of the Taft-Hartley anti-labor bill presages a new
period in class political relations in the United States. More than
ten years after the beginning of the New Deal, Congress passed a bill
which would:

weaken or destroy the Wagner Act;
undermine the right to strike;
upset established collective bargaining methods;
create again the possibility of “government by injunction”;
create the basis for the revival of company unions;
open the door for government intervention in the internal
affairs of the unions;
restrict the operation of welfare funds by taking them out
of the hands and supervision of the unions;
modify and cripple the Norris-LaGuardia Act and the
National Labor Relations Act;
bar unions from effective political action.

By its own lack of clarity, trick language and complexity, coupled
with lack of agreement among its sponsors as to its intrinsic
meanings, the bill will create, as Senator Morse has said, a
veritable lawyer’s paradise. We can well imagine from the past
experience of the New Deal era how gleeful the legal vultures must be
at the prospects for clients offered up by the new legislation.
It would be an error, however, to regard the passage of the bill
as an accidental or isolated event. No, this kind of repressive
anti-labor legislation was prepared during the war, in the regimented
and state”directed economy, which in turn emphasized a new
relationship between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. New
Dealism, which had ceased to exist in fact during the war, was
formally doomed when the Republicans won their sweeping electoral
victory in 1946. This did not mean that all the social welfare
legislation passed under the successive Roosevelt administrations was
to be erased by the legislative acts of the new Republican majority.
But it did mean, if the aims of the GOP leadership were carefully
studied, that a new relationship to labor was to be established.
It is easy to see in retrospect why New Dealism could not survive
the war. Its “philosophy” and practice were the products of
economic crisis and incipient disintegration of the social order; it
represented bourgeois reformism on an American scale, i.e., economic
and social reform measures which, in one form or another, had existed
for many years in the older European capitalist nations. Obviously,
such a system of state” inspired reformist policies could arise
only in a period of economic instability and increasing class
conflict, and given the decay of world capitalism, in a comparatively
rich country. Such measures would have been entirely superfluous, as
indeed they were, in a period of expanding capitalism and economic
prosperity such as characterized the United States in the decade
following the First World War.
It should have been no surprise to any thinking or conscious
person that Roosevelt, the father of the New Deal, began to rid
himself of his New Deal colleagues when the war broke out. What good
were these reformist experts now? They were no longer really needed.
The demands of modern total war changed overnight the economic scene
at home. The sick economy became suddenly a very prosperous and
thriving order. To recount the achievements of the war economy now
would, for the purposes of this article, be superfluous. It is only
necessary to recall that beginning with 1940 a spectacular turn took
place in domestic economic activity. With all the efforts of the New
Deal, the national economy achieved a record peacetime production
with a mass army of between nine and ten million unemployed. But the
year 1941 marked a turning point. In that year, the War Deal began in earnest.
 
The Effect of the War Economy
The entire economy was “organized.” In conjunction with the
War and Navy Departments, the Administration worked out a master plan
for mobilizing all of the economic, political and material resources
of the country to fight the greatest war in the history of mankind.
The most important link in the vast mobilization for war was the
establishment of national class unity. Roosevelt’s role in this
achievement has not yet been fully explained nor extensively written
about. But historians of the future will have to return to this
subject in order to explain that the whole success of America’s war
program depended on the acquiescence of American labor, already
allied to the state administration through the New Deal.
The acquiescence of the labor officialdom to the demands of the
war administration was accompanied by an abject surrender of some of
the most important interests of the working class as a whole. Thus,
the labor movement found itself in support of the “Equality of
Sacrifice Program” and the “War Economic Stabilization Act” to
the detriment of the interests of the people at large. Under these
policies initiated by Roosevelt, American finance and industry were
able to recoup the losses they took during the long years of crisis
by means of enormous profits guaranteed by the government. Labor, on
the other hand, accepted a “wage freeze” after agreeing to a “no”
strike pledge.” The present lamentations of the labor leaders that
the Taft-Hartley Bill is repayment in bad coin for the services of
labor during the war, is a pathetic reminder that it is precisely the
conduct of labor during the war, which makes possible the present
political reaction. And if current anti-labor legislation is the
product of a reactionary GOP, it is also the result of foolish and
criminal policies of an ideologically backward labor leadership.
The labor movement exchanged its hard-won rights and fairly strong
class position during the war for a worthless promissory note given
by a rapidly disappearing New Deal administration, which was to be
honored in the post-war period. For labor’s agreement not to strike
and not to fight for higher wages, greater consumer goods,
indispensable housing and a whole series of social measures,
Roosevelt promised that all of these things and more would be “given”
to the working class in the post”war period. Labor kept its
promises. Indeed, it kept them too well, for during the five years of
the war the c1ass peace which it underwrote succeeded in effectively
under” mining labor’s powerful positions while the bourgeoisie
gained a new confidence with its increasing economic strength. The
attempt to explain the present position by Roosevelt’s death and
the arrival of a new administration under the less capable Truman, is
completely superficial. That would assign to the personality a power
out of all proportion to reality and grant to an individual an
independence of action which does not correspond to life.
One can explain the present situation largely upon the newly found
economic strength of .the American bourgeoisie and the political
factors produced by this rise in the fortunes of the bourgeoisie.
 
The Bourgeoisie Gain Confidence
The war economy and the military victory which placed the United
States at the top of the heap of imperialist powers, provided. a new
surge of life to the bewildered, unsure ruling class of the 1930s.
The war restored its profits, renewed and expanded its industries,
brought about total employment and a vast production without risk and
without strain, and gave it sufficient resources to carry over into
the post-war period when, instead of an immediate economic collapse,
the country entered into a boom which has not yet ended.
Toward the end of the war the bourgeoisie as a class, thoroughly
awake to the meaning of its new prosperity and the likelihood of a
continued high level of economic activity in the post-war period,
began to press for a diminution of government intervention in the
economy, a repeal of economic and social measures which on a national
scale were costly to the bourgeoisie, and a curb on the powerfully
organized labor movement which, while still politically backward and
in a class sense unconscious, was capable of transforming itself overnight.
The over-all strategy of the bourgeoisie today is to strengthen
its own profit positions by reducing through legislative measures the
offensive power of the labor movement. The Taft-Hartley Bill
apparently was to be the culminating act of a concentrated offensive
against labor. To carry out this legislative assault, the ruling
class effectively organized its political wing, the Republican Party,
together with its reliable reserve, the reactionary bloc of the
Democratic Party. First, price control was killed. The capitalist
class could thereby pick the population clean of its reserve savings
accumulated during the war. Even more important, price increases
nullified all wage increases won by labor in its short post-war
struggle. The total effect of the continuous rise in prices:
reduction of the over-all standard of living of the masses.
The real estate and landlord lobbies got their legislative
subordinates to bar a nation-wide housing program which could only
have been carried out at the expense of the profits of an antiquated
industry. To date, no decent minimum wage law has been passed. Other
measures, not directly economic, but promised and. unfulfilled by the
government, include: legislation on health and insurance, anti-poll
tax, anti-lynching and FEPC. All of these were sidetracked for
consideration of a tax bill calculated to reduce the income tax
payments of the mass of people by a few cents a week and that of the
bourgeoisie by millions of dollars. The culminating point in the
reactionary legislative drive of big business, the fruit of the GOP
electoral victory, was the passage of the Taft-Hartley Bill. The GOP
victory itself was a sign of the times. It coincided with the
decomposition of the Democratic bloc. The sweep of the Republican
Party gave evidence that the middle class was fed up with its
“alliance” with the “liberal” Democratic Party and labor. It
held the Democratic Party responsible for the chaos on the price
front, the absence of consumer goods and housing, and regarded
labor’s strike struggles as the impediment toward an improvement of
its own middle class position. Ten years of the New Deal and five
years of war brought the middle class face to face with an impending
disaster. It characteristically sought to blame the Administration
and labor for its ills, rather than monopoly capitalism, which won
the middle class to support its panacea of “free enterprise,” the
operation of which could only destroy the highest aspirations of the
middle class. One of the reasons for this about-face on the part of
the middle class is that it was offered no attractive independent
leadership from labor, which continued blindly to follow the
Democratic Party.
The Marxist who failed to see the ebb and flow of the political
struggle and interpreted the victory of the GOP and the reactionary
political turn which followed it as an expression of a militant labor
offensive would be a poor Marxist indeed. The victory of the GOP was
a defeat for labor – not a defeat on a grand social scale, to be
sure, but one of those defeats that occur in every country, in every
long-drawn-out and normal class struggle. That is not to say that the
American working class has been irretrievably set back. But to say
that the GOP election victory reflected the new strength and
confidence of the bourgeoisie, and that the ruling class is now on an
offensive, is merely to analyze accurately the present situation –
which is, of course, transitory.
 
Aim of Taft and Hartley
The passage of the Taft-Hartley Bill was not the bourgeois answer
to a labor movement militantly engaged in a wide struggle. If the
labor movement were so engaged we doubt very much that the
bourgeoisie would attempt to pass such a measure at this time. The
passage of the Taft-Hartley Bill was possible at this juncture of the
class struggle because the initiative is in the hands of the
bourgeoisie. This is true even though the aims of the bourgeoisie are
themselves contradictory and they are unclear as to the bill’s
total objectives. Does this mean that the labor movement is weak and
unmilitant? To raise this question indicates that the answer to it
cannot be yes or no. The answer to the question is complex because
the weakness or strength of American labor today cannot be measured
solely by numbers or militancy but by the economic and political
policies and activity of the union movement. In this case, it is
necessary to say that the actions of the GOP are as much a product of
the ancient and ineffectual methods of struggle of the labor movement
as of its own confidence and strength.
The truth is that the labor movement has reached a fork in the
road. It cannot meet the problems of the worker in the present period
of capitalist development with the economic and political policies of
Gompersism or its many variants. The political backwardness of the
American labor movement, more than anything else, is responsible for
the present situation. So far, if we are to judge by the
pronouncements of the labor leaders, the lessons of the immediate
past have not yet been understood by them.
What did the bourgeoisie seek by the passage of the Taft-Hartley
Bill? Does it want to smash the union movement? Or does it merely
want to curb and control labor? As a general proposition, it is
correct to say that the bourgeoisie would like to see no labor
movement at all. But we are far beyond that early stage of capitalist
development. The bourgeoisie has to reckon with an existing mass
labor movement. If it tried to smash the union movement now by a
frontal assault, it would produce a situation which it is uncertain
of winning. Moreover, the chaos that would result from such a policy
would make it impossible for the economy to function, and most
important of all, would destroy any possibility of American
imperialism carrying out its aim of dominating the world economy.
Some sections of the bourgeoisie, more sensitive to the .new place of
the United States in the world economy, were against the bill. Truman
undoubtedly spoke the truth when he said that many leaders of finance
and industry called upon him to veto the bill in order to prevent a
certain chaos in class relations. The report that Secretary of State
Marshall, in cabinet sessions, called upon the President to veto the
bill makes sense, considering the task the former Chief of Staff has
in furthering America’s imperialist interests abroad.
But it is true that the bourgeoisie as a whole welcomed the bill
as a measure which would make possible some means of legal control
over strike activities and union finances, and to blunt the economic
and political weapons of labor. That is what the bill set out to
accomplish. Given the complex nature of class relations and
intra-class rivalries, it is understandable why the GOP mavericks had
such a time of it in trying to get agreement on a bill between the
House and the Senate.
How much will the bourgeoisie achieve in practice with this bill?
That depends in large measure on the labor movement and its strategy
in the coming period. It is true, as David Dubinsky has said, that
the bill is “full of double-talk, tricky language and hidden
traps.” Some of this is calculated; some is the result of the fact
that its sponsors were themselves not sure of just exactly what they
were doing. They, like so many labor leaders, are waiting to see how
the bill works out in practice.
 
Reaction of the Labor Leaders
The initial response of the labor leaders to the bill was a
curious spectacle and illustrates what is wrong in the American labor
movement. Naturally, the labor leaders understood the practical
significance and consequences of the bill. No one can deny that
instinctively, at least, the American labor leader can smell a
legislative rat. In that sense he is extremely acute. His long years
of experience have not been without their positive sides. But it is
in the field of constructive action against bourgeois legislation and
bourgeois politics in general that the average American labor leader
reveals himself barren of elementary class instincts and class
ideology. The labor officialdom as a whole, particularly in the AFL,
is capitalist-minded; its class political understanding is at a low
level. It is this ideological backwardness, in contrast to the acute
consciousness of the bourgeoisie, which sometimes makes a spectacle
of labor’s “political” struggles.
When the bill was passed Bill Green and Phil Murray both made
statements charged with anger and invective. Against whom? The
politicians and the impersonal National Association of Manufacturers.
At the convention of the International Ladies Garment Workers, Green said:
And are we to be compensated for the great service we
rendered during the war (!) by being now subjected, I say,
truthfully, to a condition of involuntary servitude in a very large
way, and to slavery in a comparative way? Is that our compensation?
Are we to be treated in that manner? Well, they may say yes, but we
answer with a loud and emphatic NO! And we say this to them. If you
will not listen to our voices now, if you ignore our pleas, if our
voices fall on deaf ears, let us tell you that you will listen to the
election returns when the next election day comes.
What is this? Does Green threaten to do something on election day?
No, nothing more follows on this point. Green concluded:
If they attempt force, if they penalize us, if they
intend to make slaves of us and rob us of our freedom and our
democracy, we will fight to the bitterend because the words
“surrender” and “defeat” are not in the vocabulary for the
American Federation of Labor.
Strong words! Challenging words! Threatening words! But, on what
labor shall do, Green is silent. Let us turn to Phil Murray, head of
the CIO. In his statement adopted by the CIO, Murray declared:
The purpose of this bill is to render unions powerless to resist
wage cuts, speed-ups and restoration of sweat-shop conditions. It has
been made completely unworkable so that workers will be robbed of
even the meager protections which survive in the bill.
But, what shall labor do? Murray states:
Our responsibilities require us to work immediately for a
repeal of the law and for the defeat of those forces in our political
life which have sponsored it and worked for its passage. We shall not
shirk those responsibilities ...
From this day forward we dedicate ourselves to the
mission of obtaining a repudiation of this infamous legislation and
of the reactionary program of which it is a part. We will expose to
the entire American people the reactionary forces which have produced
this legislation. We will bring our message not only to workers but
to farmers, small businessmen and other groups whose economic welfare
this legislation threatens ...
We hereby dedicate our organizations and the entire
membership to work unceasingly in the political field in complete
unity with all labor organizations, and other progressive groups to
insure the political repudiation of those reactionaries who are
responsible for the Taft-Hartley Bill and to preserve a free America.
Nothing more from Murray! We now hear from Jack Kroll, director of
the CIO Political Action Committee:
This organization of ours is not going to lie down and
die just because a Taft or Hartley or a Van Aken says we are going to
die. The Taft-Hartley Bill and the Van Aken Bill in Ohio will provide
the spark that will set off effective PAC activities for 1948.
 
The Important Political Lesson
And thus we have finished with three spokesmen for the labor
movement. From each we have been given a fair share of rhetoric, but
from none of them a single, important, practical, new proposal that
can lead to a progressive solution of the problem that faces labor.
That problem is how to defeat monopoly capitalism on the political,
as well as the economic front. Labor’s reaction to the Taft-Hartley
Bill is vigorous enough. It will undoubtedly carry on an effective
legal struggle against it as well as against the numerous state bills
that were enacted as safety measures just in case Congress failed big
business. Unions have announced that they will not make their
customary rush to the NLRB since under the new law it will be a body
stacked against labor. We can understand that and agree with it. We
have no doubt either that the labor movement will find ways in which
to carry out effective economic action even under the bill, either by
evading, or to use a Holmesian phrase, avoiding, the strictures of
the bill, or else by fighting it head-on in a testing challenge of
its legality. Murray and Green are both preparing now to test the
political restrictions of the bill.
But beyond that the labor officialdom gives not the slightest
indication that it has learned the most obvious political lessons of
the struggle around the Taft-Hartley Bill: that the government is a
capitalist government, that Congress is composed of two capitalist
political parties and that at all decisive moments the government and
Congress act openly in the name and interests of capitalism. If labor
continues to compete with big business in its own arena of the
Republican and Democratic parties it will do so to its own detriment.
Any victory labor might gain in that arena can only be, as it has
been in the past, of the most tenuous kind in which organized labor
and the whole working class will be the final loser.
The fusion of economics and politics in present-day capitalist
society makes it evident that labor cannot fight a merely economic
battle, defensive or offensive, for its rights. The increasing
intervention of the capitalist state in the economic life of the
country has releaved how archaic is a purely “bread and butter”
struggle, since the economic gains of a generation of workers can be
wiped out overnight by a single legislative act. For example, the
wage increases won by labor in the post-war period were wiped out in
reality by the absence of price control. That is why the action of
the UAW in the General Motors strike which sought to link its wage
demand with price control was of such tremendous significance. The
UAW demand, “Open the Books” was likewise, on an American scale,
a revolutionary demand, for it challenged in effect the property
rights of the bourgeoisie and introduced, in its elementary form, the
idea of workers’ control. Whether wholly conscious or not, the
action of the UAW in the General Motor’s strike was a recognition
of the fact that in present-day American society, “bread and
butter” struggles are insufficient; they have to be linked with
broader social and political concepts.
The path that labor should follow was clearly indicated when
Congress outlawed portal-to-portal pay. In this case, labor won an
economic demand by struggle and legal action. Overnight, this gain
was lost by a political act of Congress.
How then is labor to avoid a political defeat of its economic
victories? The very simplicity of the idea advanced in this question
is obscured by the action of the labor leaders who continue to think
politically in the terms of “reward your friends and punish your
enemies,” even in its most refined variations to suit present times.
Labor needs to declare its political independence. It needs to
organize a party of its own and to break, once and for all, with
capitalist politics. If it is to assume the leadership of the nation,
if it is to win the support of the middle class, the poor farmers,
the disillusioned white collar workers, and such social categories,
it will have to strike out on its own to challenge the economic and
political power of monopoly capitalism and to provide the nation with
an economic, political and social program which truly represents the
interests of the people against the bourgeoisie.
But it can only do this by the organization of an independent
labor party. Lacking this kind of perspective, the labor officialdom
can only talk in bold and empty words. They can shout from now until
doomsday about “we’ll meet you on election day,” and “we will
never surrender.” So long as this means, as apparently the labor
leaders mean it, to support one or another of the so-called liberal
or progressive candidates of the Republican or Democratic parties, it
will ever mean that the “liberal” and “progressive” candidate
of today will be the “reactionary” who betrayed labor on the
morrow. Just think, William Green endorsed Mr. Hartley as a candidate
for Representative from New Jersey! In this act alone, he epitomized
what is wrong with labor politics today! And now Green, and Murray,
again threaten to take “political action” against the enemies of
labor, but it is political action limited by a bourgeois horizon.
The labor movement engages in class politics, but it is the class
politics of the bourgeoisie, not independent labor politics.
It is merely “independent” labor politics in behalf of one or the
other of the capitalist parties.
Before any lasting progress of the American working class can be
made, it must break decisively and conclusively with the bourgeoisie
on the political field, as it has done on the economic. Without that
step, the labor movement will suffer economic and political defeats
which will begin to undermine its very powerful foundations. We
believe the present situation has created enormous possibilities for
a labor party. The disillusionment of the masses will increase as it
passes out of its present state of bewilderment. The only thing that
holds them back now is the labor leadership which has learned only to
threaten and to howl, but not to take effective action. But that too
will come, and soon, we believe. If the labor officialdom will not
arrive at the understanding for the necessity for this indispensable
next step for labor, it may well be driven into it by an emboldened
bourgeoisie which may overestimate its present political victories
over labor and an enraged rank and file. When labor takes that
necessary political step, a new period in class relations will have
arrived in the United States. The class-conscious development of the
American working class will then begin. The national and world
implications of such a development cannot be overestimated. That can
well be the reason why the Taft-Hartley Bill will become an important
chapter in American labor history.
 

Glotzer: A Stalinist Defeat in Staunton (November 1929)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Glotzer
A Stalinist Defeat in Staunton
(November 1929)

From The Militant, Vol. II No. 18, 30 November 1929, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

On November 10, one week following the Belleville conference, the Staunton sub-district conference of the National Miners Union went into session to act on the decisions of the state meeting. The Staunton conference is of tremendous importance because it is the largest sub-district of bona-fide adherents to the N.M.U., and because the bulk of the delegates that walked out of the Belleville conference came from this section of the organized coal fields.
Resentment prevailed in the conference to the methods of internal policy promoted by the Party. The antagonism of a large section of the delegates to the decisions of Belleville on Watt, gave sufficient proof that you cannot transplant the methods of internal factional struggle of the Party when attempting to organize mass unions of the workers.
The conference meeting to act on the decisions of Belleville, had just finished with a reading of the report of the organizational committee, and voted acceptance of the Report on Program and Demands, when Kamenovich proposed that the conference instead of proceeding with the remainder of the Belleville decisions should halt and take up the reports of the locals and act on those. The purpose of this proposal was to draw out the proceedings, until it was too late to take up the matter of Watt. The proposal was accepted but it did not prevent discussion of the remainder of the decisions.
The attitude of the delegates was, that they did not object to the Party participating in the Miners’ union and aiding in the struggles. What they did protest against was the new miners union becoming a forum for the internal machinations of the Communist Party. They foresaw in the present situation in Illinois the possibility of building the N.M.U., but recognized that it could not be done by a narrowing down of the forces that go to make up the union and the forcing of a narrow policy upon the new union by the introduction of artificial dissension and strife. It was recognized that the main fight at the present time must be made against the operators. Lewis, Fishwick, and that unless this was the line of the N.M.U. it would be doomed to failure at the outset.
 
Protest Daily Worker Lies
When the resolution on the Press was introduced, the secretary of the conference Morgan, protested against the series of deliberately false stories that have appeared in the Daily Worker for the past few weeks concerning the situation in the National Miners Union. The stories contained in the Daily Worker, that Watt was refused the floor in the Livingston local, were refuted by delegates present from that section. The charge that Watt was setting up a new district office in Staunton was likewise rejected by the Staunton delegation. The conference instructed to send a statement of protest to the Daily Worker demanding that these charges be publicly retracted and the correct situation be published, namely that the Livingston local did not refuse Watt permission to speak, but on the contrary that Watt did speak there, and that Watt’s activity in Staunton was that of a loyal member of the Union whose activities were commended by the miners of Staunton. The delegates in addition protested the charge that Watt engineered the walkout at Belleville and added that it was thru the efforts of Angelo and Watt that a split situation was prevented and that the miners went back to their respective localities to intensify their activities in behalf of the union.
Toward the close of the conference the resolution of the Belleville conference on. Watt was read. The contents of the resolution stated among other things, that Watt was a renegade, opportunist, enemy of the workers and an agent of Lewis! It concluded by demanding that Watt cease his activities in the union pending the action of the National Board on these charges. It was on this particular section that the delegates expressed their dissatisfaction with the state of affairs in the union. Watt, who had been sitting at the conference all day without once taking part in the proceedings rose at this point to give his position to the miners. His speech gave the lie to all the charges against him. What he said in the main consisted of the following:
 
Watt Declares Position
“Brothers, the issue of Watt has been raised in this conference. It has been stated that Watt is a traitor, an enemy of the miners, an opportunist seeking only something for himself. I have been told to keep my hands out of the affairs of the union. That is the decision of the Belleville conference. I am not going to go against those decisions. I am not going to allow the issue of Watt to stand in the way of the building of the Union. If the miners think that Watt should not be the president of the union and that he should not interfere in the activity of the union then Watt will abide by these decisions. But I want to tell you this, men: you must build the union. It is your only solution. There is no other hope except the building of the National Miners Union, and you must do this. It has been said that we must adhere to the Red International of Labor Unions. Lewis has said that the Red Union is unfit for us. He says that we must join the Amsterdam International, that is the place for us. I want to tell you men, that if Lewis says the Red International is unfit for us and that we must join the yellow Amsterdam international then we must tell him our place is with the Red International and against the Yellow International. What is good for Lewis and what he advises us to do, cannot be good for us, or advisable for us to do. In closing, brothers, let me ask you again, not to allow the issue of Watt to divide you. You must go forward united, build the National Miners Union. The charges against me I do not agree with; they are false, but that is the decision of Belleville, and since that is so, I must carry it out. Your hope is your union and you must build it or you are lost.”
This speech of Watt is an answer to all the false charges made against him in recent weeks. The position of the Party is one that will not build a miners union, on the contrary it will split it asunder When Party organizers approach non-party leaders in the union and demand: “You must either join us or we will crush you”, then it exhibits a fundamental misconception of the role that Communists must play in the organization of new unions and in the mass organizations. The attempt to create a “pure” leadership of Communists in the new unions spells defeat since it can only be done at the expense of the widest variety of elements that will participate in the building of the new unions. This is particularly evident in the miners union. Communists must strive to give leadership to these workers, to formulate policy for them, but it cannot force the Party down their throats, it cannot prevent them from taking a leading part in the creation of these unions or else it reduces the idea of new unions to a caricature. Unless the Party makes a complete reversal of internal policy, the result will be the destruction of the union.
 

 Glotzer et al.: A Statement of the Expelled Communist Youth (April 1929)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Glotzer et al.
To the Y.W.L. Convention
A Statement of the Expelled Communist Youth
(April 1929)

From The Militant, Vol. II No. 8, 15 April 1929, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Our expulsion from the Young Workers League, perpetrated by the Party bureaucracy and its counterpart in the League, took place because we announced our solidarity with the International Leninist Opposition and our intention, to struggle for the line represented by it.
We view the campaign against the Leninist Opposition as the sharpest clanger confronting the Comintern since such a struggle has had the effect – it could have no other – of strengthening the Right wing everywhere. The united attack “against the Left” (Stalin) by the Right and Center groups has only served to reinforce the Right-Centrist policies of the Comintern, and make more severe the difficulties of the Soviet Union. The Stalin faction, unable to solve these difficulties of the Soviet Union, on the basis of correct Bolshevik policy, has resorted to expulsions, imprisonments, exile and deportation as its “solution.” The policy of the Opposition has been to maintain the foundations of Marxism-Leninism against all attacks. It has fought against all odds to uphold the revolutionary character of the Soviet Union and the Comintern. The crisis in which these find themselves today can only be solved on the basis of the correct political line of the Leninist Opposition.
 
The Struggle of the Opposition
The Opposition has conducted an energetic struggle against:


the revisionist theory of “building a complete socialist society in one country” (Stalin);
against the opportunist position of the Comintern in the Anglo-Russian Committee and their failure to break with the British trade union fakers following their open betrayal of the General Strike;
against the menshevik line of the E.C.C.I. in the Chinese Revolution, where an alliance was made with the national bourgeoisie in which the interests of the workers and peasants were sacrificed;
for a clear and determined struggle against the constantly increasing Kulak and Nepman danger;
for the establishment of Party Democracy on the basis of Lenin’s resolution at the 10th Russian Party Congress, and against the bureaucratic regime, the means through which alien classes are exerting pressure on the Party and the Soviet apparatus.


These wrong policies of the Comintern leadership are reflected in the Young Communist International. Instead of being in the foreground in the struggle against opportunism, the Y.C.I, has been transferred into a rubber stamp which endorses the position of the Stalin faction on every occasion. The sharp decline in League membership throughout the world, and particularly in Germany, China and the United States, plus a noticeable weakening of the recruiting power of the Leagues, is testimony to the false line followed by the Y.C.I. in recent years. A woeful passivity, indifference and stagnation characterizes some of the largest sections of the Communist Youth.
The Situation in the American League The situation in the American League merits the deepest attention of the entire movement. The League, reorganized legally in 1922, grew steadily until 1925 under the leadership which has now been expelled because of their adherence to the Opposition (Shachtman, Abern, Carlson, Edwards, Mass, etc.) In that period, free from faction struggle until the latter part of it when it was introduced by the Lovestone group. League units were organized in every part of the country. The third convention found a League with a member[ship] of more than 3,000. The Young Worker had been changed from a monthly magazine to a militant weekly newspaper, issued regularly. The influence, activity and ideological level of the League was on the increase.
The mechanical reorganization of the League’s leadership, during which the leadership selected by the overwhelming majority of the membership was removed by the representatives of the C.I., and agents of the Lovestone faction put in their place, marked the beginning of the decline of the organization. The League was thrown into a factional crisis from which the leadership has been unable to extract it to. this very day. Incompetent and bureaucratic, divorced from the proletarian youth and regarding them with the superciliousness of petty-bourgeois intellectuals, the Zam-Herberg-Darcy (Lovestone) leadership of the League led the organization along the downward curve of development at a steady and hardly interrupted pace. This leadership, transferring the opportunism of their Party faction directly into the League, has been guilty of numerous crimes against the revolutionary youth movement.
 
The “Accomplishments” of the Present Leadership
Instead of unifying the split ranks of the League, the present leadership has led it from one factional crisis into another. Instead of increasing the membership of the League, it has driven away workers so that the League membership today is considerably below 2,000. Instead of proletarianizing the League, the percentage of intellectuals and students is today higher than previously, as even the Y.C.I. must admit. Instead of strengthening the press, it has been forced to retreat to a monthly paper – that is, back to where the League was in 1922–23. Despite all the boasting and self-praise, the League is today as organizationally chaotic as it was in its worst days, and the nucleus reorganization remains on paper. Shop campaigns are non-existent and trade union work is a formality in which a handful of functionaries participate. The anti-militarist work swings from bourgeois pacifism to the wild “leftism” of military training, uniforms, and demands – in the present situation! – for a workers’ militia. The parliamentary activity of the League can probably best be characterized by the fact that the 1928 Election Number of the Young Worker did not appear until some time after Hoover’s election! The level of understanding of the membership is at low ebb, and the political education of the young Communists is confined chiefly to cramming the falsifications of Stalinist revisionism down the throats of the membership.
The outstanding and incontrovertible fact is that, in spite of the far more favorable objective conditions, the struggles, and the experiences the League has enjoyed in the last four years over the previous four, the League today is weak, uninfluential, stagnant and torn by factionalism. That is the balance sheet of the leadership of the League which has been instrumental in expelling many of the best and most capable comrades from the organization for their support to the revolutionary line of the Opposition.
The opportunities for growth have been many and frequent. The effects of rationalization and generally increased exploitation of the youth, the growing militarization of the country with its threat of imperialist war to the workers, the growing resistance of the workers expressed in the struggles in the coal, clothing, textile and other industries – all of these show that a fertile field for agitation and recruiting was open to the League. These can still be taken advantage of if a turn is made by the League members.
 
The Capitulators in the Minority
The struggle of the League Opposition was hampered in the past by the confusion and capitulationist ideology of a section of its leaders (Williamson, Harvey, and for a time, Kaplan). Attempting to make a mechanical separation of the struggle within the Party from that in the League, they weakly surrendered the principle struggle on one occasion after another. Done in “the interests of unity” it actually resulted in the further intrenchment of the Lovestone group in the League and the intensification of the factional situation. The futility of their “struggle” and their hopeless confusion and political cowardice has been frequently demonstrated. The revolutionary youth must reject both the corrupt, dilettante Lovestone group in the League and the capitulation ist minority. The latter, standing as it does on the platform of the Stalin faction, is waging a fight that is devoid of principal content. Its accession to leadership in the League would signify a victory for Stalinism, but not a victory for the proletarian revolutionary current in the Communist movement.
The differences existing in the League cannot be separated from those in the Party; those in the Party are vitally connected with the struggle in the whole International. The difficulties in the International cannot be solved on the basis of a bloc between the Right (Bucharin-Tomsky-Rykov) and the Center (Stalin) but only by the victory of the Leninist Opposition led by comrade Trotsky. To this victory we have devoted our efforts.
The comrades of the expelled Opposition have been active members of the League for many years, engaged in work in many spheres of League activity. The expelled comrades are proletarians who have in many cases played a leading part in the work of building the movement. The first condition for the unification of the League and Party is the immediate reinstatement of all the expelled Communists with full rights of discussion and clarification.
 
For the Opposition Platform!
The Platform of the Opposition, sent to the Sixth Convention of the Party, correctly says:
“The main task of the League members is to fight relentlessly for the line of revolutionary principles now being defended by the Leninist Opposition. An additional prerequisite is the eradication of all corrupt petty-bourgeois tendencies in the League, of opportunist following in the path of the Party faction regime, of ‘smart-Aleckism’, cynicism, and playing with the working class movement.”
We stand on the line of the International Opposition and the Platform of the Communist Opposition in the United States, as the expression of the correct revolutionary course to be followed on an international and American scale. The League as a whole must adopt this line. We are determined to carry on the struggle for its victory.



 


SIGNED: Albert Glotzer, Mike Zalisko (Chicago); Joe Angelo (Springfield, Ill.); Gerry Allard (Christopher, Ill.); Martha Burns (Gary); Sam Curtis, Martin Payer, Charles Mahler, E. Carlson (St. Louis); Ruth Reynolds (Detroit); Carl Cowl, Sarah Avrin (Minneapolis); B. Morgenstern, Sol Lankin, Leon Goodman, Nathan Shanker, Joe Lesack (Philadelphia); Mac Kudler, Irving Spreiregen, Joseph Fox, Harold Robins, Joseph Friedman, George Clark, John Justin, Sam Watts, Leon Dennenberg, Harry Stone, Louis Stone, Paul Green, Jean Tishman, Ben Gross, Kari Hall (New York); Bob Green (Wilmington)



 



A Study of Bolshevism
by Nathan Leites
Published by the Free Press, Glencoe, Ill.
This book is an attempt to explain what the author calls the “operational code” of Bolshevism so that the Western world may know what to expect in the behavior of Russia and thus prepare to meet its challenge. In shrill exaggeration and pleading tone Sidney Hook has written of the book that “our future partly depends on how seriously the conclusions of this analysis are taken by statesmen of the Western world.”
It would seem from such a description that the book should have had some impact upon diplomacy in the West. That it hasn’t is caused not so much by the unwillingness of statesmen to receive a broad intelligence on a vexing problem, but by the fact that, despite its innumerable quotations of Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, Gogol, Chekhov, etc., nothing really certain can be learned from the book.
Understanding Russia is a great pastime today. Leites plays the game by quoting endlessly, beginning with 1930 and running to the Malenkov period. He sees a consistent pattern of Bolshevik behavior throughout. The analysis of the phenomenon of Bolshevism is unrewarding because the author has treated the movement of Lenin and the movement of Stalin as identical in all fundamental respects. The periods of 1903, 1917, 1926–7, 1934–36 and 1953 are all regarded as a continuous evolutionary stream of Bolshevism. Despite the near-ending internal struggle the main aspects of Bolshevism are assumed to carry through from Lenin to Stalin. A good historian would know that this is nonsense.
Actually, Leites deals only with matters of narrow party or practical state politics. Nothing is related to objective history, to the great changes in the party, to the alteration of its traditions and mores to the fact that the party and regime of 1917 are altogether different from the party and regime of Stalin.
Quoting Stalin or the other Stalinist leaders to show that there is a continuity between the two organizations or the two states has as much value as comparing the Republican Party of this century with the party of Lincoln and the Civil War.
The work is influenced by the political feud Social Democracy has carried on against the Russian Revolution. But Social Democracy has no consistent thoroughgoing view of the nature of Russian society, though it has much to say about the political regime. Its own lack of clarity on what kind of society Stalinism has created, assists the disorientation of the West.
The root source of the difficulty in accurately characterizing the Russian state is the failure to understand what kind of a society prevails in that country. If the bourgeoisie of the West considers the Stalinist world to be socialist, this is in accord with the propaganda of Stalinism and works in its behalf. Social Democracy merely muddies up the waters of its own puddle because, like the bourgeoisie, the Stalinists and Stalinoids, it is itself confused on the nature of the post-Lenin phenomenon.
The key to penetrating the Stalinist world lies not in lumping hundreds of quotations of the leaders of Russian socialism on the one hand and of the Stalinists on the other, in order to show similarities, but in establishing the historical background of the social orders.
The similarities of speech are in this case of little importance. The dissimilarities are decisive. The dissimilarities are profound, and spring from the fact that Stalinism is a new type of state power in which collective property is owned by a new type of ruling class: bureaucratic collectivists. It is a modern slave state, anti-socialist in its doctrine and practices, as it is anti-capitalist.
Leites seemingly understands nothing of this. Neither does the West. They think in terms of worn-out cliches about Bolshevism, the Revolution and socialism. That is one of the reasons why Stalinism bewilders them with strategies and tactics which are not understood, much less predicted.
Leites does not even pretend to write about Russia in terms of the class nature of its state. He deals with the politics of Stalinism as an independent phenomenon without any roots except a long tradition. Worst of all, he seems to have ignored some of the more important works of the critics of the Russian Revolution who have least understood that neither the Stalinist State nor the Stalinist Party can be spoken of in the same way as their predecessors.
Thus Hook, who never quite seems to know just exactly what his views are from year to year writes, in reviewing the book, that if the Stalinists gave up their dogma of fear of an attack from the West, they would “lose the chief justification for (their) internal dictatorship.” This ignores the internal driving forces of the Stalinist social order, wherein the totalitarian regime emerges from the peculiar class relations of the bureaucratic collectivist phenomenon. The regime evolved and hardened precisely in a period when foreign intervention was at its lowest ebb.
The Russian State and its counterparts in the satellite nations grow out of the constellation of class forces based on new property forms. These regimes strengthen their state power not merely against the foreign danger (in a sense that is secondary), but as much against the working class and peasantry they exploit. A slackening of the totalitarian regimes would result in their overthrow. If only few understand this, the Stalinists are constantly aware of the danger. The “fear of intervention” conveniently serves the national class interests of these regimes.
These are the reasons why the Leites book is a failure. If the West has not made much progress in the cold war against Stalinism, it is not because it has not adopted the lessons of A Study of Bolshevism, but because bourgeois obtuseness and class interest leave it the prey of Stalinist demagogy.
 



Although a world war destroyed the totalitarian states of Germany and Italy, an even stronger totalitarian power remains with us. Stalinist Russia, the most complete totalitarian state known to history came out of the war as the world’s second power; it has exported its totalitarianism into the satellite nations as a result of its victory in the war and by means that were often analogous to those employed within the borders of Russia. The totalitarian threat to the world remains a terrifyingly real one precisely because of the presence of Stalinist totalitarian imperialism, and because of the existence of deeply rooted totalitarian tendencies in Western capitalist society. An active and vital concern with this phenomenon, therefore, is imposed upon our generation, for unless the social causes for totalitarianism are eliminated, we shall never cease to be threatened.
Totalitarianism, a system of political rule, is a modern phenomenon, that is to say, it is the product of modern social conditions. It was unknown in previous history, even though it is possible to find precedents for several major aspects of the phenomenon in the variety of dictatorial and Bonapartist regimes which have existed from time to time. There is, however, a qualitative difference between those regimes and the totalitarian. This difference lies not in the degree or intensity of the police regimes, the distinction is rather in the conceptions and practices of state power. The totalitarian state has a scope which no other regime ever had in organizing and controlling society and its people.
The totalitarian state encompasses all previous dictatorial experiences and experiments but improves on them and improvises new forms of suppression. It destroys any and all forms of democracy, parliamentarism and independent organizations of the working class or the petty bourgeoisie as well as the bourgeoisie, if any.
The totalitarian regime is Bonapartist in the most extreme sense, for the personal dictatorship of the totalitarian leader transcends all previous experience. It is complete. Thus the three imposing examples of such dictatorships are personified and synonymously known by the names of Stalin, Hitler and Mussolini.
It is not only the concentration camp [1] which sets off the totalitarian state from other forms of dictatorship, but rather the whole superstructure of this form of rule which is based upon terror and total police regulation of society.
Concentration camps, which have been known before in history, assume an entirely new and indispensable place in the totalitarian scheme of things. Whereas once they were at most an auxiliary expression of war and imperialism, or the product of military and political forays, under totalitarianism, the mass concentration camp has new and decisive functions: it serves as a permanent disciplinary threat against an atomized people, it secures the alienation of large segments of the population, it can and is utilized as a system of forced and cheap labor, and particularly in the case of Russia, provides a source of primitive state accumulation on the basis of the most intense system of exploitation ever witnessed by man.
Despite the common features which characterize all the totalitarian states, their development is always quite uneven since the regimes reflect the economic, political and cultural development of the countries involved. This is a point of quintessential importance in trying to understand the nature of the phenomenon as we shall try to point out as we proceed in this discussion.
The above manifestations, and many more, of the totalitarian state are by now quite familiar. A mere listing of them may sound commonplace to minds dulled by repetitious descriptions of what is no longer a horrifying “new” experience. Up to now, we have had a fair production of writings on this modern phenomenon, some of them quite instructive and fundamental. This literature has been enriched by the many personal accounts which tell of life in all three of the important totalitarian states. There are now also abundant and detailed descriptions of the concentration camps which have been written by former inmates. The diaries of former Nazi leaders, German state officials and military men provide still other appreciations of the German experience. These latter books bear a far more important place in this examination than would appear at first because they emphasize not what is common to all totalitarian states, but even more important and indispensable for an intelligent understanding of totalitarianism, the important differences among its national expressions.
The simplest thing to say about the Russia of Stalin, the Germany of Hitler and the Italy of Mussolini (and also the Spain of Franco), is that they are or were all totalitarian states. But it is certainly the most superficial thing to say. Since the cold war, writings on totalitarianism are so influenced by daily political pressures that they obscure analysis and prevent understanding. The analysis of earlier years about Russia, Germany and Italy were far more successful in trying to establish the fundamental characteristics of these states, but they have long since been forgotten. This especially is true of Marxist studies on fascism and most particularly of Trotsky’s trenchant writings on all four experiences, most instructively, to be sure, on Germany. The publication of a new book called The Origins of Totalitarianism [2] by Hannah Arendt, bring this point home with considerable force.
The book, which appeared some months ago, was hailed as the first truly great and definitive work on totalitarianism. One reviewer at least, Dwight Macdonald, called it the greatest political work of our time, comparing it with the writing of Marx, while at the same time emphasizing what he believed to be its superior merit, the fact that it is an ethical and psychological analysis instead of a scientific-materialist one outmoded by the Marx-Dewey school!
Although the title of the book and the heavy, German thesis-style of writing may lead the superficial and impressionable reader to believe that this is the fundamental and definitive work on the origins of totalitarianism, a careful examination reveals that it is really less formidable than it appears to be. In any case, it falls far short of its mark. Macdonald unwittingly has given us a clue to the reasons for this, while at the same time stating what the main value of the work is. The book is an ethical and psychological analysis for the most part, but it also attempts to deal with the politics of totalitarianism by avoiding the “scientific-materialist” method of a Marx. This was a conscious aim, since Arendt holds the “scientific and materialist systems,” in which Marxism is included, as being jointly responsible for the ethical and moral decay of society! We will soon see how this approach unfolds itself in a strange book.
The Origins of Totalitarianism has no anchor. What is presented is an immense compilation of highly interesting and descriptive detail, chaotic and discursive in its organization. The book itself is divided into three distinct essays, each of which could have appeared separately: Anti-Semitism; Imperialism; Totalitarianism. Macdonald thought the section on Totalitarianism might well have been published alone, but he overlooks the fact that in the mind of the author “so small a phenomenon as the Jewish question and anti-Semitism [became] the catalytic agent for first, the Nazi movement, then a world war, and finally the establishment of death factories.” This succession of events is a curious construction of history. Even worse, however, is that a portion of the history of totalitarianism (Germany) becomes the premise for a theory about its entire history, particularly the Russian phase, on which the above quotation has no bearing whatever. Yet such is Arendt’s belief and thus she feels entirely justified in the way in which the book is divided. A study of the origins of totalitarianism primarily on the basis of ethical and psychological preconceptions which are in conflict with a scientific and materialist method can and does produce just such a notion of history. This is not to say that an ethical or psychological analysis is of no importance – it is obviously important, for the German experience alone contains elements of aberration which need to be considered in understanding it – but such an analysis is bound to be faulty if it has no scientific or materialist basis, or rejects this basis.
Avoiding an examination of the basic social factors which have produced totalitarianism by the simple declaration that society has failed to solve the problems of the people and letting it go at that, Arendt cannot successfully deal with the important fact that these social factors produced not one totalitarian state, but several, whose roots are different and whose social orders are in conflict. That’s why, in a sense, she had to discover the origins of totalitarianism in subsidiary factors such as anti-Semitism, and the “decline of religious faith.”
On account of this contention, and despite the very interesting study of anti-Semitism, the first section of the book does not provide the necessary and indispensable prologue to a discussion of the origins of totalitarianism. The same is true of the second section on Imperialism. Given its faulty methodology, the book could not help but fall into idealism, to be animated by a mystical conception of society and mankind, their development and their future.
Why then has this book been hailed so uncritically by many reviewers? Why the acclaim? Why the assertions that now, for the first time (!) we can understand what totalitarianism is? These at least were the first reactions to the book. After reading many reviews of the book, this writer believes that most critics did not carefully read, but merely book-reviewed it and found it in harmony with their political feelings. There could be little other explanation for the way in which false theory, contradictory assertions on prognostication, and illogical conclusions are drawn, with practically not a single reviewer drawing attention to them.
We know that these comments are harsh ones. But we propose to justify them in an elaborate examination of the book which will follow in the succeeding pages and which will serve as the introduction to future articles on the meaning of German and Russian totalitarianism as two distinct, not identical, varieties of the same phenomenon.
The common garden variety of book critics are not alone guilty of an irresponsible adulation of this work. Any number of liberals, radicals and ex-socialists are similarly impressed by this weighty tome. There is a reason, or several reasons, why such people so willingly and energetically grasp for any work which turns its back on a whole body of historical works which have served so well toward an understanding of the problems of our society, especially the writings of the Marxists.
The social disintegration of our times and the failure of the socialist movement to win power and begin the transformation of society from its present chaotic and destructive existence to the democratic, collective and creative era of socialism, has brought with it an intellectual disintegration and despair. This despair of the intellectuals, above all, gives way to a wild, disorganized and thoughtless race for something “new” that can substitute for the failures of socialism and can promise some kind of new panacea.
Valid Marxist or semi-Marxist examinations, unassailable analyses and incontestable conclusions are rejected, not because they are wrong, or do not answer current social and political questions, but because no matter how correct these may be, they cannot overcome the existing disillusionment and despair. What good is a perfectly accurate and instructive Marxist analysis when it does not guarantee a victory over social evil, and when in fact it did not prevent defeats all over the world? It does not matter why a defeat occurred, what forces brought it about, or how it could have been and can still be prevented in ensuing social and political developments. The fact is that we are living in a severe social crisis which Marxism has thus far been unable to resolve, therefore ... therefore, these people, for the most part, gravitate to a support of one of the evil forces of our society, the capitalist social order. But they do it as independent souls!
Not for old reasons, but for newly rationalized systems of old ideas to justify an action which they know to be in truth perfidious.
The degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the rise of Stalinism helped to produce this vogue. It often takes the form of a disdain for old ideas, old descriptions, old language, in favor of something new – the more obscure the meaning of a new phrase, the new word, the new conception, the more these obfuscate rather than clarify, the more acceptable they become. Politically precise evaluations are rejected for semantic fuzziness. We see the rise of a cult of confusion.
The search for new ideas, new theories, new evaluations is not so much the healthy desire to learn from new events produced by our social chaos, but to run from them and to hide behind obscurantism. This obscurantism becomes the theoretical justification for support to the powerful forces in society which contain the germs of totalitarianism.
Proof of this? Observe well, where all the panacea-seekers find themselves. What have they produced that is really new? What startling political and sociological ideas have they discovered that have helped to advance the free society by a single inch?
We cannot think of a more pertinent example of their failures to provide an answer than on the Russian question. It is the most important question of our era, for no correct political orientation is possible without a proper estimate of Stalinism. Where and by whom was any genuine investigation attempted in order to understand the phenomenon of Stalinism and the Stalinist states, not in the “old groove” or by the restatement of old and stale ideas, but on the basis of what is new about it? No one has done this except the Independent Socialist League with its theory of bureaucratic collectivism. No other theory of Russian society so well explains its nature and its contradictions, nor is able to produce as accurate political policy vis-à-vis Stalinism as this theory.
So, when we say that we do not object to new ideas, or new language, or new searches into truth, we are not being facetious at all. All that we ask is that what is produced as new should be really new and verifiable by experience. All else is pure muttering which often springs from an exasperating ignorance of Marxism which yet remains, despite the many rites held over it, the one comprehensive and valid theoretical system which provides any hope for saving mankind and society. And this writer hopes, in employing the method of Marxism, to discuss what is vitally new and important about the phenomenon of modern totalitarianism.
The initial failure of Arendt’s book is that it proceeds from a premise that the theory of class nature of modern society has no valid place in the Twentieth Century. Class forces and class interests no longer dominate and influence social events and totalitarianism is a phenomenon which cannot stand a social or class analysis. Totalitarianism is beyond, or above, the existing societies and their classes. For Arendt, psychological and ethical factor are the dominant forces at work.
On page 303, for example, she writes:
“The totalitarian movements aim at and succeed in organizing masses – not classes, like the old interest parties of the Continental nation states; not citizens with opinions about, interests in, the handling of public affairs, like the parties of Anglo-Saxon countries.”
This occurs because there has been a “breakdown of the class system [which] meant automatically the breakdown of the party system, chiefly because these parties being interest parties, could no longer represent class interests.” (Page 308) [3]
The logic of these statements fail one. It is difficult to understand just exactly what she means, since on the face of it these are fantastically unreal views of the nature of the German and Italian society, to say nothing of the Russian. The most charitable thing to say about these observations of the author is that she does not understand the effect of “a stalemate of the classes in the class struggle (Trotsky)” during the rise of fascism. This is exactly what happened in Germany. It did not mean that the existing parties reflected the “breakdown of the class system” but that the crisis of German capitalism had reached its apex with no class able to assert its hegemony. The result was not that these parties “could no longer represent class interests” but that, given a number of political conditions which existed then, no single one of them could prevail. It was in this objective social setting that the fascist totalitarian movement of Hitler was able to make its first stupendous strides, and in collusion with a section of the bourgeois-military ruling class, come to power through a legal and peaceful coup.
When Arendt speaks of the totalitarian movements “organizing masses – not classes,” this becomes a binding thread of her analysis and is one of the “new” ideas of the book. But we think it is an unhappy one, because it does exactly what should have been avoided by the author, for it makes her social analysis less precise, or to put it accurately, more confusing than it might otherwise have been.
At the danger of forestating our case, we will say that Arendt does not have in mind any mysterious social forces that composed the fascist movements. She is referring to petty-bourgeois, the lumpen proletariat, and all the de-classed elements spawned by a disintegrating bourgeois society. These forces that made up the fascist movements were known and long before the author concocted her semantic innovation. The term “masses” has always meant primarily the proletariat and those sections of the petty bourgeoisie and peasantry which followed it. It was never a term of fundamental significance, but merely a descriptive term used as a synonym for the proletariat.
The innovation, however, is not entirely the result of an effort to be different and to avoid clichés, although it is that in part, too. Insofar as it is only that, the term adds nothing to our understanding or clarification. But insofar as it bears upon her fundamental understanding of our society it is a measure of her sad failure to grasp basic social, economic and political ideas, and above all, the reality of modern capitalism and the Russian social order, which are constantly mixed up in her sweeping generalizations stemming from analyses of German experiences.
If she were writing of the Hitler regime itself there might be some reason for such misreading of the realities of history. Confusion about Germany was quite common. Ten years ago, she would not have been alone, for there were many others who advanced new theories about the nature of German society under the Nazis. But she is speaking of the dissolution of class society and the classes in the pre-Hitler era of Germany, and of this factor as the basic social reason for the rise of fascist totalitarianism. The truth is exactly the opposite. If that were not wholly clear prior to and during the war, it should be abundantly clear in post-war economic and political reorganizations of Germany and Italy.
The above-quoted conceptions are integral, however, to Arendt’s general views of the origin, development and nature of totalitarianism. Once society is classless and “masses” predominate, it is easy to see why all totalitarian states are alike to her and that the nature of their social orders, or the property relations of these states, are of little or no significance. For example, she refers to the war “between Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia, [as] a war between two essentially identical systems which were clearly growing constantly more alike in exterior forms ...” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
After long pages describing the anti-bourgeois and revolutionary nature of the totalitarians and their movements, she says that the new totalitarian is nothing but the “dull, stolid, bourgeois family man ...”
But the unperceptive Macdonald nods his head and writes:
Stalin, Molotov and the other Soviet leaders fit that description perfectly.
The reader can at once see that we are touching upon a crucial aspect of the problem of the origins and nature of the totalitarian phenomenon. Is there a single, all-embracing type of totalitarianism? Or are there types of totalitarian states which, despite their “exterior” similarities, differ in their basic social organization? Can a totalitarian regime exist only in a capitalist society or may it occur in any society? In any society, or only in a society divided by classes in which the exploitation of labor is its predominant characteristic? We do not know whether all of these questions can be completely answered at this time, but we do know that Arendt answers them not at all for the simple reason that she is not concerned with this question, but with an a-historical approach, based on a timeless “moral” imperative.
A whole series of questions arise from the above quotations. In what sense were the Nazi and Stalinist systems identical, and “growing constantly alike in exterior forms”? What were the interior differences, since they were identical systems? Are Stalin, Molotov and the other Russian leaders dull, stolid, bourgeois family men? And if Hitler and Himmler are, and we agree that they are, what happens to much of Arendt’s theory about Nazism being beyond the pale of bourgeois society?
These are not idle questions, for Arendt has herself answered them in advance in one form. In establishing that the concept of human welfare is utterly alien to totalitarianism, which presumably contrasts it with capitalist society, she quotes in a footnote from William Ebenstein’s The Nazi State, and regards him approvingly as the only critic
who has realized that ‘the endless discussion ... as to the socialist or capitalist nature of the German economy under the Nazi regime is largely artificial ... (because it) tends to overlook the vital fact that capitalism and socialism are categories which relate to Western welfare economies.’
To which economic order then does the Nazi “economy” relate? We learn that it is “anti-utilitarian” and is completely indifferent to “mass interest.” And that “totalitarian movements use socialism and racism by emptying them of their utilitarian content, the interests of a class or nation.” While the foregoing is a doubtful, no, a wrong estimate, it still does not answer the question of the nature of the economy of the totalitarian state. If the German, Russian or Italian totalitarian regimes did not rule in a capitalist economy, or socialist, or if you please, bureaucratic collectivist, what type of economic order did prevail? None?
We go a step further. What was or is the nature of property and ownership in totalitarian society? How is production carried on? Who are the producers? What remuneration is paid to laborers? Is it a profit economy? What economic laws govern? We are not now talking about war economies which create abnormal conditions and rules for all states, totalitarian and democratic, capitalist and bureaucratic collectivist, but of the normal peacetime economies. To all of these questions you will search in vain for answers, for none of these questions concern Miss Arendt.
We say, therefore, that to understand the phenomenon of totalitarianism one has to establish first not its political characteristics which are common to one degree or another to all such states, but more important, the social characteristics, i.e., whether a totalitarian state exists in a capitalist economic setting, or some other kind. The latter will establish the differences in the origin, development and policies of these separate experiences. One example will suffice to prove why the above is so important.
Germany and Russia had totalitarian regimes during the war. Were these regimes actually identical in the policies and methods which they employed during war? Was Hitler’s totalitarian regime as rigid and tight as the Stalinist model? Did classes, or, to ride along with Arendt for the moment, groupings, assert contradictory and conflicting interests during the war in Germany and Russia, or in one of these countries, or in neither? In Italy? Were the ruling regimes firmly united in these totalitarian states, in one as in the others? Did they exhibit common weaknesses? Did the bourgeoisie continue to exist as a class in Germany and Italy? Was there one in Russia? Did private property in the means of production exist in Germany and Italy and was it resurrected in Russia? Or, did it disappear in all three countries? All of these questions and hundreds more intrude upon this discussion, for they have a fundamental bearing on the problem.
We believe the answers are instantly answered by an examination of the nature of the economic societies rather than by a concentration on the political superstructure.
Leon Trotsky said more in a phrase about the Russian and German phenomena than is contained in pages of Arendt’s lucubrations. He said of Fascist Germany and Totalitarian Russia that they were “symmetrical phenomena,” i.e., while they were parallel political phenomena, they never really met at any point because their social orders were different. Twenty years ago, when he was occupied with the task of trying to point a way out of that danger to the German working class in his pamphlets on the struggle against Hitler, What Next and the Only Road, he wrote more illuminatingly on the subject of the origin and role of fascism than anything that has appeared since. His pamphlet, What Hitler Wants, published by John Day in 1934, reads today like a blueprint of the inescapable causes for the whole aggressive course of the Nazi regime in foreign affairs, which led up to the Second World War. There is hardly a paragraph in that pamphlet which has not been verified by the course of our recent history. For even though he precludes the Hitler-Stalin pact, he adds that it is possible. In other writings he was more positive about a Russo-German rapprochement.
Yet Arendt is able to write, after the years of preparation for war and the war itself that:
The aggressiveness of totalitarianism springs not from the lust for power, but if it feverishly seeks to expand, it does so neither for expansion’s sake, nor for profit, but only for ideological reasons; to make the world consistent, to prove that its respective supersense has been right. (Page 432)
With what abandon do writers speak in the name of the economically dominant classes without authority, to be sure – and dismiss their interest in profit! But they speak without right and they speak nonsense. In this case, the nonsense is produced by idealistic reasoning, to wit: aggressive expansionism of the totalitarians is carried on for ideological reasons. Good. Which ideological reasons? Whence do these ideological reasons spring? Have they any relation to the social order, are they in consonance with its needs, or do they contradict them? Or are they the product of pure imagination! When Hitler said, “we export or we die,” was this too an expression of an ideological urge conjured up in Hitler’s ideological arsenal, or did it sum up the needs of German capitalism and the foreign program of Nazi German imperialism? “We export or we die,” makes real sense; Hannah Arendt’s “supersense” is mystical nonsense.
Let us now turn briefly to Trotsky’s writings on German fascism to see whether more instructive lessons can be learned. I should like first, however, to make one observation. Arendt’s book contains a wealth of footnotes with innumerable references to other books. Obscure and unimportant reference works are given, as well as important and well-known sources. Not a single reference, however, is made to any one of Trotsky’s writings, particularly on Germany. (Germany: The Key to the International Situation, What Next, The Only Road, Whither France, What Hitler Wants). Not a single reference is made to any of Trotsky’s voluminous and fundamental writings on Russia and Stalinism! Though she quotes repeatedly from the biographies of Stalin by Boris Souvarine and Isaac Deutscher and these are given as references, Trotsky’s Stalin is not listed, even though Deutscher himself used it as a main source for his Stalin, a Political Biography. There is no compulsion for any author to use Trotsky’s writings or to give his books as source material. But Trotsky’s writings are anything but commonplace and they deal precisely with the problems which Arendt attempted to understand. One has a right to assume, given the volume, and type of references that she is certainly familiar with his work. It cannot be that her disagreements with his theories of fascism and Stalinist totalitarianism would preclude such references, for then she would have been able to take issue with him directly since his views do contradict hers in all major respect. We therefore find it strange indeed that this rather all-inclusive book which gives various works of Marx, Lenin, Stalin, Ciliga, Bertram D. Wolfe, and others, as references, contains not a single published writing by Trotsky.
(To be continued)
* * *
Footnotes
1. This feature of totalitarianism has become more widely known in the Western world than any other feature, because of its striking, systematized brutality. The average person tends to view totalitarianism as a “concentrationary universe.”
The emphasis on this aspect of totalitarianism produces an emotional response. However important this response may be in evoking a desire to struggle against the senselessness and brutality of the order, the constant attention devoted to the concentration camp system in analysis tends to obscure the fundamental features of totalitarianism and equally as important, the basic social differences among totalitarian states.
2. The Origins of Totalitarianism, by Hannah Arendt, Harcourt Brace and Co., 477 pp., $6.75.
3. The theory that society had become classless is not a new one. Emil Lederer, in his State of the Masses, The Threat of the Classless Society, advanced that thesis in great detail more than ten years ago. I found it strange that his book is not even listed in Arendt’s bibliography.
 



The Theory and Practice of Communism
by R.N. Carew Hunt
The Macmillan Co. $2.75.
The great concern of bourgeois ideologues about “communism,” its theory and practice, is quite understandable in a world so sharply divided between capitalism and Stalinism and permanently threatened by war. So patent is the irreconcilability of these two forces that to elaborate upon them in this review would be to impose upon the readers of the NI.
There is no doubt, however, that one of the difficulties the bourgeois world encounters in its struggle against Stalinism is the failure to understand properly the post-revolutionary phenomenon in Russia. If Russia had remained truly socialist and internationalist, that is to say, had the present regime faithfully carried out the principles upon which the Russian Revolution was based, it is difficult to see how world capitalism could exist today. The degeneration of the latter, epitomized by two world wars and an almost endless world economic crisis, could not have withstood the force of genuine socialist economic and political progress. Moreover, a socialist and internationalist Russia would have stood before the world as the great hope for human progress, lighting the way toward social, economic and political freedom.
But the force of Stalinist Russia has produced something quite new in the world today. While capitalism continues to decay, socialism has not advanced (quite the contrary) and Stalinism has experienced an expansion that has surprised not only the bourgeoisie, but the anti-Stalinist adherents of the idea that Russia is a “degenerated workers’ state” or some form, however distorted and mutilated, of the “invading socialist society.” The bourgeoisie holds this latter theory, too. There is no doubt that while some of the leading bourgeois thinkers recognize in Stalinism a non-socialist monster, they for the most part affirm their antagonist as Marxian, socialist and internationalist.
The theoretical and intellectual spokesmen of capitalism try repeatedly to prove that Russia is socialist and Stalin its Marxist leader. They find confirmation for their views in the many writings of ex-Stalinists, social democrats, backsliders from socialism, and a host of former “friends of the Soviet Union” who have gone to great pains to “prove” that Stalinism is bolshevism, and that Stalin is the Lenin of our times. The New International has had to deal with these experts in confusion, ignorance and willful distortion on more than one occasion.
The difficulty in the struggle against Stalinism is that the world at large and almost the entire anti-Stalinist labor movement has accepted the Kremlin’s description of itself. Stalin proclaims that Russia has completed its socialist development; it is now preparing for the complete communist stage of social development! His opponents say: yes, this is socialism! Given the decay of the world, ideological stalemate must result, for outside of the United States capitalism offers nothing to the people.
Mr. Carew’s book is a strange contribution to the theory and nature of Stalinism. It provides no enlightenment; rather, it contributes to existing confusion. The author begins with a formula: the theory and practice of communism was originally produced by Marx and Engels; this theory and practice was elaborated and extended by Lenin, and finally reached fruition in the life and deeds of Stalin. Thus the theory and practice of communism involves an examination of their application under changing circumstances from Marx to Stalin.
The book cannot but produce strange contradictions and paradoxes which the reader will readily see. The author sees them too, but their significance is somewhat obscure to him. There is no point in dealing with his outline of Marxist theory or his refutation of Marxism. The refutation consists in the main of threadbare critiques; it is more than a little wearying to read, in 1950 this kind of criticism of Marx and his theories from a person who presumably has a considerable acquaintance with the literature of socialist theory but who obviously misses its central ideas and development. It is precisely this failure which produces in turn the tortured analysis and understanding of Stalinism and the inability to place it in a historic setting or to understand its perspectives.
A few references, I think, will suffice to bear out what I have already said about the book. Following what the author undoubtedly believes is an annihilating criticism of Marxist philosophy, economics and politics, since he asserts repeatedly that one foundation stone after another is destroyed by this criticism, he adds, however, “any return to pre-Marxist social theory is inconceivable.” Why? Because all pre-Marxist social theory was of no value, and it remained for Marx to direct the attention of the world to what is real, vital and instructive in the understanding of our society. And yet ... yet, all of it is wrong in the main!
This isn’t the worst by any means. Carew is trying to establish the logical thread that leads from Marx to Lenin to Stalin. It would have sufficed had he written what is abundantly clear: Stalin came out of the bolshevik movement; he was the product of a degenerated revolution; he distorted, violated and vitiated its doctrines, perspectives and hopes, and transformed these into their opposite; he represents a new force, anti-capitalist, anti-socialist. It would then have been possible for Mr. Carew to deal intelligently with the phenomenon. But he did something else.
He asserts the fundamental continuity of theory and practice between the scientific socialism of Marx and Engels and the totalitarian bureaucratic collectivism of Stalin. That is the pattern of the book. At the same time, Mr. Carew falls into some insoluble contradictions which we will set forth below. Thus, on page 170:
Stalin seldom wastes his words. But he is a most dishonest thinker, who invariably tries to prove that whatever he is saying is just what he has always said. And although he has all the Marxist- Leninist texts by heart, there is always an element of distortion in his use of them. He uses, indeed, all the old slogans. Yet in fact he has so transformed Marxist theory that its founder would scarcely recognize it. A new turn has been given to the theory of revolution; the character of the party has been changed, and it has been converted into a centralized and all-powerful bureaucracy; the classical theory of the State has been virtually abandoned, although lip-service continues to be paid to it; an agrarian policy has been adopted which is contrary to Lenin’s teaching; equalitarianism has been utterly condemned; and finally, the growth of national sentiment has been encouraged.
Not a bad indictment by one who has never been in the Marxist movement and never felt the inherent humanity and internationalism of socialist theory and practice. Further on, the author illustrates how these alterations in the theory of Marxism produced an utterly new type of practice which had nothing in common with the conceptions and practices of Marx and Lenin. But still he fails to grasp the significance of all this for one good reason: he does not appreciate the meaning of the struggle between Stalin and Trotsky over the theory of “socialism in one country,” nor does he understand that the abandonment of socialist internationalism – which can be equated to Marxism – was the inevitable product of that theory.
Many things have been said to be the heart of Marxism. It depends on what you are discussing: philosophy, economics, the class struggle, etc. But if one were to summarize its world view, it could be said without contradiction that Marxism is characterized by its internationalist, socialist, and therefore democratic, perspectives which by their very nature preclude the adherence to and practice of nationalism, bureaucracy, totalitarianism, exploitation, class division, exaltation of state power, and so on. The theory of “socialism in one country” marks a rupture with all that Marxism stands for.
Thus, when Carew writes: “In a sense, indeed, it [socialism in one country] contained nothing controversial, as everyone agreed that socialism must be built up in Russia” and that “its importance lay in its implications and particularly the effect that its application would have upon the world revolution,” he misses the crucial point.
This point was central to the dispute with Trotsky, but Carew, like myriad predecessors, doubts that Trotsky could or would have acted differently from Stalin. Why? They have the same origin and essentially the same doctrines. One of the reasons Carew does not understand the crucial nature of the dispute over this question is that he accepts, at least in its theoretical aspect, the Stalinist version that the dispute was not over whether “it was possible to build socialism in a particular country, but as to whether it was possible to complete it ...”
But what is one to say today when Stalin and his satraps announce that socialism was completed in Russia more than ten years ago! Irrevocably completed, that is.
The author then proceeds to show the effects of the theory on the world movement of Stalinism, and without quite understanding his initial contradiction cites the destruction of socialist internationalism and the subordination of the world Stalinist parties to Russian interests. Then Mr. Carew shows in rapid succession what has happened to the Marxist theory of the state, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the role of the party, the agrarian question, equalitarianism and nationalism. He concludes that there is obviously nothing in common between Stalinism and Marxism, except some of the language, tradition and trappings which have assumed a ritualistic character and act as a force to retain the support of great masses who mistakenly believe the former represents socialism and that Stalin continues the work of Marx, Engels and Lenin.
But Mr. Carew does little better than Stalinism. In the introductory chapter of his book, which is contradicted by the third part, he writes:
We have seen that the four apostles of Communism are Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, whose works alone possess authority, no others having ever been added to the canon of scripture. Chronologically they pair off, Marx and Engels being concerned with laying down the basis of communist theory and practice in the last century, and Lenin and Stalin with the application of their doctrines to the new conditions which arose at the beginning of the present century [it would be interesting indeed to learn what contributions Stalin made to Marxist theory during the first quarter of this century. – A.G.] Lenin developed Marxism in more than one direction, but broadly speaking it is true to say that his most important contribution was in the field of party organization and tactics; and that Stalin’s contribution has been his theory of “socialism in one country,” with all that this implies. We shall therefore first deal with Marx and Engels, and then with Lenin and Stalin. [Emphasis mine. – A.G.]
So you see, Stalin’s application of Marxism to this century is a theory which undermined the whole structure of Marxism! That is how a bourgeois thinker understands the profound struggle which Trotsky carried on in defense of Marx’s internationalist and socialist thought against Stalin.
Well, then, did Stalin prove he was right? Did he succeed where Trotsky and Lenin would have failed? Did he not demonstrate that much of Marxism and Leninism was utopian? Did he prove that the dispute was really whether you could complete, not merely build, socialism in one country? This is something for Mr. Carew to square and he does it by asserting that: “What the Russians have, in fact, introduced is not socialism, but state capitalism.”
This idea is neither a true nor an original invention.
 



(Concluded from last issue)
We come now to the testimony of Vladimor Romm, the journalist, who testified that he received instructions from Trotsky personally in the Bois de Boulogne in the latter half of July 1933, or perhaps at anytime between July 24 and October 31, 1933. Trotsky produced evidence that he was not in Paris at all during this period. He arrived in France on July 24, 1933, disembarked from the ship Bulgaria which brought him from Turkey, and went by motorboat to Cassis, from which he proceeded direct to St. Palais, spending one night en route and remaining at St. Palais without interruption until October 9, 1933. Neither could Romm have seen Sedov in Paris during the second half of July 1933 as he claimed because Sedov was not in that city during this period, having gone on to see his father and mother and he did not return to Paris until the last day of July or the early part of August. Romm’s testimony was false and so was everything else that followed in the trial based on this testimony. In addition, neither Sedov nor Trotsky ever knew Romm!
How did it happen that the GPU slipped up on this one, too? It evidently deduced from the fact that Trotsky’s baggage was addressed to Paris and several members of the entourage had gone on to the nation’s capital – a diversion deliberately decided upon by Trotsky and his party – that Trotsky must have actually gone to Paris. They did not check to see whether this was so. As a result Trotsky was able to present a complete file of letters, depositions, articles, and other material evidence to show that Romm was a liar, rather, that the GPU had invented the whole business of a meeting with Romm.
The testimony of Valentin Olberg that he was sent to Russia by Sedov and Trotsky to organize the underground and terrorist activity, was even more interesting. It appeared credible because he did in fact have contact with Sedov, exchanged letters with Trotsky and was known by other members of Trotsky’s organization in Germany. But everything else in his testimony was false according to letter files of that period.
Olberg pretended to be a Left Oppositionist and as such volunteered, because of his knowledge of Russian, to act as secretary to Trotsky in Turkey. Trotsky inquired of his friends in Berlin about the worthiness of this person. He received a letter from Franz Pfemfert and Alexandra Ramm, close friends, though not Trotskyists, on April 1, 1930, stating:
... Olberg made the most unfavorable impression it is possible to conceive ... I had already taken a seat in my workroom ... when he asked a few such tactlessly formulated questions that I had to answer with a few counter-questions: When did you come to Germany? (Answer: I have been living here for a long time.) What is your occupation? (Answer: I worked until January with the editorial staff of the Imprecor.) I really already had enough. I was painfully impressed by the fact that a man who had just left the service (whole discharges for the purpose of rationalization) and therefore until now had been at least passively ... a Stalinist, was changing so quickly, and trying with all signs of a sensation-hungry journalist to explore confidential matters about T. and the Opposition in general ... O. has no business there (in Turkey) because within twenty-four hours he would prove himself an unbearable burden to you; certainly later too. Because he would work up his visit into “volumes,” if indeed he didn’t work it up into reports to the GPU.
This was enough for Trotsky, who thereafter shunned the suspicious Olberg. Sedov, on his part, would not permit Olberg to know where he lived. The latter had already lied to people about his associations with the Trotskyist movement and was completely untrusted by Trotsky’s Berlin friends. It is therefore not strange that Olberg should show up as a star witness in the trials, for he had all the qualifications for being a GPU spy.
Olberg did in fact make trips to Russia. How did he manage to get past the borders of this closely guarded country? He had a Honduran passport which he used to travel to Russia in order to kill Stalin on Trotsky’s orders! Where did he get the passport? Through a Tukalevski, director of the Slavonic Library of the Prague Foreign Office, and through the aid of his brother Paul Olberg. Valentin asserted that his brother Paul was “an agent of the Fascist secret police.” Why wasn’t Paul called as a witness? He was in Moscow, and from the indictment it was clear that he was in jail, “still being investigated.” It would seem that if the GPU had a real case and not a trumped-up one, Paul Olberg would have been put on the stand to give testimony on how he got this Honduran passport for his brother Valentin, what connections he had with Trotsky, if any, and so on. Even so, it is still left unexplained how the GPU, perhaps the world’s most skillful forger of passports, did not detect that Valentin had a faked passport upon entering Russia not once, but twice. The conclusion is inescapable that Olberg was an agent of the GPU and everything surrounding his testimony a rank swindle.
In the light of the above citations, it is no wonder that the Summary of Findings of the Commission of Inquiry was a stinging rebuke to the Moscow Trials. We trust that our readers will bear with us as we reproduce this Summary which in simple declarative terms asserts Trotsky’s and Sedov’s innocence of at least twenty- one of the basic charges of the Kremlin prosecutors. In finding Trotsky and Sedov innocent, the Commission established the innocence of those defendants who were Lenin’s lifelong friends and political associates. Here then is the summary referring to the main accusers and the charges against Trotsky and Sedov:
Independent of extrinsic evidence, the Commission finds:
Conduct of the Trials

That the conduct of the Moscow Trials was such as to convince any unprejudiced person that no effort was made to ascertain the truth.
 
While confessions are necessarily entitled to the most serious consideration, the confessions themselves contain such inherent improbabilities as to convince the Commission that they do not represent the truth, irrespective of any means used to obtain them.

The Charges

On the basis of all the evidence, we find that Trotsky never gave Smirnov any terrorist instructions through Sedov or anybody else.
 
On the basis of all the evidence, we find that Trotsky never gave Dreitzer terrorist instructions through Sedov or anybody else.
 
On the basis of all the evidence, we find that Holtzman never acted as go-between for Smirnov on the one hand and Sedov on the other for the purpose of any terrorist conspiracy.
 
We find that Holtzman never met Sedov in Copenhagen; that he never went with Sedov to see Trotsky; that Sedov was not in Copenhagen during Trotsky’s sojourn in that city; that Holtzman never saw Trotsky in Copenhagen.
 
We find that Olberg never went to Russia with terrorist instructions from Trotsky or Sedov.
 
We find that Berman Yurin never received terrorist instructions from Trotsky in Copenhagen, and that Berman-Yurin never saw Trotsky in Copenhagen.
 
We find that David never received terrorist instructions from Trotsky in Copenhagen, and that David never saw Trotsky in Copenhagen.
 
We find no basis whatever for the attempt to link Moissei Lurye and Nathan Lurye with an alleged Trotskyist conspiracy.
 
We find that Trotsky never met Vladimir Romm in the Bois de Boulogne; that he transmitted no messages through Romm to Radek. We find that Trotsky and Sedov never had any connection with Vladimir Romm.
 
We find that Piatakov did not fly to Oslo in December, 1935; he did not as charged, see Trotsky; he did not receive from Trotsky any instructions of any kind. We find that the disproof of Piatakov’s testimony on this crucial point renders his whole confession worthless.
 
We find that the disproof of the testimony of the defendant Piatakov completely invalidates the testimony of the witness Bukhartsev.
 
We find that the disproof of Vladimir Romm’s testimony and that of Piatakov completely invalidates the testimony of the defendant Radek.
 
We find that the disproof of the confessions of Smirnov, Piatakov and Radek completely invalidates the confessions of Shestov and Muralov.
 
We are convinced that the alleged letters in which Trotsky conveyed alleged conspiratorial instructions to the various defendants in the Moscow Trials never existed; and that the testimony concerning them is sheer fabrication.
 
We find that Trotsky throughout his whole career has always been a consistent opponent of individual terror. The Commission further finds that Trotsky never instructed any of the defendants or witnesses in the Moscow Trials to assassinate any political opponent.
 
We find that Trotsky never instructed the defendants or witnesses in the Moscow Trials to engage in sabotage, wrecking and diversion. On the contrary, he has always been a consistent advocate of the building up of socialist industry and agriculture in the Soviet Union and has criticized the present regime on the basis that its activities were harmful to the building up of socialist economy in Russia. He is not in favor of sabotage as a method of opposition to any political regime.
 
We find that Trotsky never instructed any of the accused or witnesses in the Moscow Trials to enter into agreements with foreign powers against the Soviet Union. On the contrary, he has always uncompromisingly advocated the defense of the U.S.S.R. He has also been a most forthright ideological opponent of the fascism represented by the foreign powers with which he is accused of having conspired.
 
On the basis of all the evidence we find that Trotsky never recommended, plotted, or attempted the restoration of capitalism in the U.S.S.R. On the contrary, he has always uncompromisingly opposed the restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union and its existence anywhere else.
 
We find that the prosecutor fantastically falsified Trotsky’s role before, during and after the October Revolution.

Conclusions:

We therefore find the Moscow Trials to be frame-ups.
 
We therefore find Trotsky and Sedov not guilty.




 

John Dewey, Chairman
John R. Chamberlain
Alfred Rosmer
E.A. Ross
Otto Ruehle
Benjamin Stolberg
Wendelin Thomas
Carlo Tresca
E. Zamora
Suzanne LaFollette, Secretary
John J. Finerty, Counsel, Concurring



Against these memorable findings of the Commission of Inquiry, the Stalinists except for some vulgar rantings, have never been able to offer the slightest refutation. They are the verdict on the Moscow Trials!
 
V
As we have said above, the trials determined the way in which the Mexican hearings would develop. In the very nature of the charges invented by Stalin, the testimony of Trotsky could not but encompass political history and theoretical ideas and disputes surrounding them, his personal biography, relations with the opposition and answers to questions which did not bear directly upon the issues of the trial. In this way, The Case of Leon Trotsky is even more fascinating for the way in which a series of new pictures are taken of him. The questions and answers cover a broad field of politics and history, and often draw out of Trotsky expressions of his personality not otherwise obtainable in the ordinary course of political relations with him. It is this which is so striking as one reads the developing testimony. And we shall present these pictures in the manner of successive slides which emphasize the above remarks.
Could Trotsky have been an agent of a foreign power for the purpose of accepting their aid in assuming leadership of the Russian state? In the bourgeois conceptions of power this would be reasonable. History is full of such examples – the ruling regime of one nation assisting a specific group of the bourgeoisie to power in another country. Is this consistent, however, with a socialist policy? Beals, the Commissioner who resigned during the hearings and under dubious circumstances, tried to insinuate this with a question relating to the Brest-Litovsk treaty. If Lenin’s government was ready to cede territory to Germany in order to retain power “would not your attitude be the same,” asked Beals, “that you would sacrifice Soviet territory if it enhances the return of your group to power to implant the socialism which you believe more correct?” To which Trotsky replied:
I believe that the only way possible to materialize the ideas of socialism is to win the masses and educate the masses, win them to the vanguard and to create a new regime by their will, their conscience, their devotion to their ideals. That is the only possibility. I have no others. The other means, which contradicts this education of the masses, is doomed beforehand. If I enter into relations with fascists and the Mikado, I am not a socialist, not a revolutionary, but a miserable adventurist. And if this accusation is proved to be true and correct, then I lose all. What can I have, except the power of my ideals for socialism? I compromise my aim, my ideal, myself. It is so contrary to all my Marxist education, to all my past – forty years’ work in the masses and through the masses – if I can conceive of the possibility of such an indictment. When I read this book (The Verbatim Report of the Moscow Trial – AG) for the hundredth and first time, I have the impression of reading Dostoyevsky.
One of the questions which repeatedly arose in the hearings was that of democracy and bureaucracy. The Commissioners were not Trotskyists, and with the exception of Otto Ruehle, a biographer of Karl Marx, and Alfred Rosmer, were not socialists. They were, however, deeply concerned with what happened to the Russian Revolution, the post-revolutionary regime and the growth of bureaucratism. To this problem Trotsky gave several answers. They are not complete answers, of course. The very subject remains today in a state of investigation, study and analysis. But Trotsky provided some evidence of the direction of his thought in the matter, answers which came spontaneously to his lips. In reply to a question on whether the bureaucratic degeneration had its roots in the early years of the revolution, Trotsky stated:
During Lenin’s time? Yes, I can only repeat what I said. I believe we did what we could to avoid the degeneration. During the Civil War the militarization of the Soviets and the Party was almost inevitable. But even during the Civil War I myself tried in the army – even in the army on the field – to give full possibility to the Communists to discuss all the military measures. I discussed these measures even with the soldiers and, as I explained in my autobiography, even with the deserters. After the Civil War was finished, we hoped that the possibility for democracy would be greater. But two factors, two different but connected factors, hindered the development of Soviet democracy. The first general factor was the backwardness and misery of the country. From that basis emanated the bureaucracy, and the bureaucracy did not wish to be abolished, to be annihilated. The bureaucracy became an independent factor. Then the fight became to a certain degree a struggle of classes. That was the beginning of the Opposition. For a certain time the question was an internal question in the Central Committee. We discussed by what means we should begin the fight on the degeneration and the bureaucratization of the state. Then it became not a question of discussions in the Central Committee, but a question of the fight, the struggle between the Opposition and the bureaucracy. That was the second stage ...
Later on in the hearings, a repetition of this discussion became inevitable. The following exchange took place between Mr. Finerty and Trotsky.
Finerty: In the Socialist State, Mr. Trotsky, the state controls the forms of production, does it not?
Trotsky: Yes.
Finerty: The sources of production and the methods of production?
Trotsky: Yes.
Finerty: And in order to have an effective control, the state itself must employ technicians. Isn’t it then inevitable in a Socialist state that the bureaucracy will grow up automatically?
Trotsky: What do you name a Socialist state? The Socialist state is a transitory form which is necessary to prepare to build up the future Socialist society. The Socialist society will not have any state.
Finerty: I understand that. But in the intermediate form of the Socialist state, you have an inevitable bureaucracy.
Trotsky: It depends on two factors which are in connection with one another. The productive forces and the power of the country. It is the function of the new regime to satisfy the material and moral needs of the population. Secondly, and what is connected with it, the cultural level of the population. The more the population is educated, the easier it is that everyone can realize the simple functions of an intermediary regulation of distribution. The bureaucrat in a cultivated, civilized country has not the possibility of becoming a half-god.
Finerty: Demi-god.
Trotsky: Demi-god, yes.
Finerty: What I mean is this: It is obviously impossible in a Socialist state, as an intermediary organization, to have a democratic control of industry. I mean, a truly democratic control. It must be a bureaucratic control.
Trotsky: I repeat, the relationship between the bureaucracy and the democracy depends – the elements of bureaucracy are inevitable at the beginning, especially because we inherited all the past, the oppression and misery of the people, and so on. We cannot transform it in twenty-four hours, this relationship. Here the quality is transformed into quality. The relationship between them depends upon the material prosperity and the cultural level of the population ... I cannot accept that formula as a Marxist. The first period of the Socialist state is the victory over the bourgeois state. That is the formula of the Marxists – until the time we have reached a state to satisfy freely, as with a table d’hote. The rich people have a table d’hote, wines and jewels. It is not necessary to have a dictatorship when you have a table d’hote. On the contrary, everybody gets the same things, especially the ladies. When the table is poor, everybody forgets whether it is a lady or a man. He will take all he can. Then it is necessary to have a dictatorship. The reason for the existence of gendarmes is the misery of the people. In other words, the economic condition has a basic influence on this question ...
A few moments later, the examination takes on a somewhat different and extended form:
Ruehle: I would like Trotsky to express himself on the basic differences between administration and democracy.
Trotsky: In two words: It is the difference between
Ruehle (through interpreter): Rather, bureaucracy.
Trotsky: servant and collectivity. A cooperative, a workers’ cooperative organization has also administrators, but they are not demi-gods, simply functionaries. The chief of the GPU is not a simple functionary. He is somewhat of a demi-god, or three-quarters god. (laughter) It depends upon the quality of the members and upon their general cultural level.
Finerty: Then, Mr. Trotsky, whether or not it is an inevitable incident of a Socialist state, or a variant of a Socialist state that there be a bureaucracy, there is a tendency, unless it is controlled that the bureaucracy will grow up.
Trotsky: The growth of bureaucracy in the Soviet Union is the reason of the backwardness of the Soviet Union and its isolation.
Goldman: The result.
Trotsky: Result, yes. If the workers of Germany had won power in 1918 during their revolution, the economic combination of Soviet Germany and Soviet Russia would have given formidable results on the economic and cultural basis of these two countries. This terrible bureaucracy could not have a place in the Soviet Union. It is not a Soviet Union of an abstract principle. The material factors and the ideological factors are determinant. I am sure that the proletarian dictatorship in a more cultivated and civilized country would have an absolutely different appearance; and the notion of the dictatorship would have a different sound to our ears, in a more cultivated country.
Dewey: And Russia, the Soviet Union, was a backward and undeveloped country, historically?
Trotsky: Yes.
Dewey: Then, in the Soviet Union, it was necessary that the bureaucracy grow up.
Trotsky: Yes, insofar as the Soviet Union remained isolated. With the help of more advanced peoples it could have – or could shorten the period of bureaucracy and attenuate it.
One can see from the above discussion, that the highly important question of the single party or multiple parties under a workers’ state would arise as well as other general questions of democracy. Trotsky had informed the Commission of the early fight of the Left Opposition against the bureaucracy, its first demand for the secret vote inside the Party, in the Soviets, the trade unions and different enterprises. Mr. Finerty then asked: “You advocated the secret vote beginning with, I believe, 1926–27?”
Trotsky: Then, freedom of speech, discussion and criticism against the bureaucracy. Then, the abolition of the civil paragraph in the penal code, by which the bureaucracy tries to stifle the workers, the more critical workers. That is the gradation of the measures which we proposed in our platform.
What about the question of parties? Dr. Dewey drew attention to The Revolution Betrayed where Trotsky had stated that classes are heterogeneous, are torn by inner antagonisms and arrive at “the solution of common problems not otherwise than through an inner struggle of tendencies, groups and parties.” And Dewey asked: “Now, when you wrote that, then you had become convinced of the necessity of different parties?”
Trotsky: The development of the Russian proletariat consisted in the struggle among three parties, the Menshevik, the Social Revolutionary and the Bolshevik. The Bolsheviks won the overwhelming majority during the Civil War, and in spite of that we permitted the existence of other parties. Only when the Civil War began, when the most decisive elements of the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionary took part in the Civil War on the other side of the barricades, we prohibited them. It was a military measure, not as a permanent step.
After some important digressions to which we shall return, Mr. Finerty took up the above question once more in order to help the Commission understand more fully the views of its witness.
Finerty: Restating what you said earlier this morning, in reply to Dr. Dewey, would you think that the two- party system in Russia or the Soviet Union, would have a tendency to restrain bureaucracy?
Trotsky: The two-party system?
Finerty: Yes; make democratic control more possible?
Trotsky: I believe it is a bit of an abstract question in the sense that we cannot introduce two parties under the dictatorship of the Stalin oligarchy. It is necessary to prepare the arena for two parties – I don’t know, maybe three or four. It is necessary to smash away the dictatorship of Stalin. It can only be done by an upheaval of the people. If this upheaval – if this new political upheaval is successful, the masses, with these experiences, will never permit the dictatorship of one party, of one bureaucracy.
It is tempting, indeed, to continue these exchanges, for they contain important ideas relating to quintessential problems of the present-day socialist movement, especially in view of the development of Titoism and the hasty rush of support which has come to him from the self-styled “orthodox Trotskyists” of the Fourth International. But space requires us to hasten on. The question of the nature of the Russian regime, whether it was a new class or merely a caste as Trotsky maintained, arose almost spontaneously in the hearings. The point is of extreme importance in view of the development of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism by the Workers Party and later the Independent Socialist League, which assigns to the Stalinist regime the attributes of a new class and the alternative theories of state capitalism, characterizing the regime as a capitalist class, and finally, the theory of a degenerated workers’ state, giving the regime the cognomen of caste. It is at least interesting to observe Trotsky’s modified and provisional views. As will be seen from his expressions they did not preclude the theory of bureaucratic collectivism at all. Up to that point and even at the opening of the last war, Trotsky still adhered to the old theory, but did not close the door to a possible third alternative development.
Finerty: Well, the dictatorship, whether for better or worse, is a dictatorship?
Trotsky: Formally, yes. But my opinion is that in Norway, where the Government is Socialist, we have a genuine dictatorship of the shipowners. The state is governed exclusively by the shipowners. The Socialist government is a decorative ornament in this instance.
Finerty: Now, I understand that your belief is that even such a democratic organization of the Communist Party and of the Soviet government as was possible “within the limits of the theory of dictatorship (Dictatorship of the Proletariat – AG) has been set aside by Stalin through the means of the bureaucracy.
Trotsky: Transformed into its contrary; not only changed, but transformed into its contrary.
Finerty: Into its contrary?
Trotsky: Yes.
Finerty: In other words, it has become a purely bureaucratic government?
Trotsky: Defending the privileges of the new caste, not the interests of the masses. Because, for me the most important criterion is the material and moral interests of the masses, and not only constitutional amendments. It is important, but it is subordinated in my conceptions to the real material and moral interests of the masses.
Dewey: Might I ask one question? Just on what you said, did I understand that you hold that these privileges have reached a point where there are class divisions in the Soviet Union.
Trotsky: It is difficult to get a strict social formula for this stage of development, because we have it for the first time in history, such a social structure. We must develop our own terminology, new social terms. But I am inclined to affirm that it is not a genuine class division.
We again ask that our readers note carefully the language used by Trotsky: “difficult to get a strict social formula ... we have it for the first time in history, such a social structure ... we must develop our own terminology ... I am inclined ...” Later on, Commissioner Stolberg asked:
Stolberg: In your book, The Revolution Betrayed, you insist that a new class is developing in Russia. You called it a caste. You do not speak of the class struggle – you speak of social antagonism, and so on. Is that because you accept the Marxian concept of the division into classes only in the sense in which they differ functionally, in reference to the means of production? Or do you believe that under Socialism there can be no valid practical basis for classes in the sense that no group can exploit another group? Because you say a caste might become a class if capitalist measures are really introduced. My question, is, can a caste become a class simply because through every means of political and cultural administration it exploits a great many people?
Trotsky: I answered a simple question in this manner, that the social organism of the Soviet Union is unique. We don’t have other examples. That is why it is very difficult to apply our notions, our sociological notions based on the past, to new formations. But I tried to do it with the necessary correctness. My idea is, that the ruling caste in the Soviet Union is an intermediary body between the small bureaucracy and the new ruling caste. It depends upon the events on a national as well as an international scale, whether this intermediary body will desire also to smash away the present basis and will be transformed into a new ruling class. The tendencies exist.
Stolberg: Yes, but your conceptions of a ruling class
Trotsky: It is the forms of property. When they introduce an inheritance of their privileges, it will be a new ruling class.
Here again you observe Trotsky’s extremely careful approach to the problem precisely because it was a new one and previous historical experience could not provide answers to the question of what this unforeseen phenomenon was. This was the year 1937. Much has happened since that time to enforce the conceptions developed by the ISL on the character of the Russian regime and its approach follows closely the pattern expressed by Trotsky with considerable more certainty than he did. The intention of these remarks is not to declare that Trotsky would have adopted the ISL position of Russian society as a bureaucratic collectivist order, but they do reaffirm that the phenomenon is new and that old criteria could not provide a consistently accurate answer to the question: what is this social order?
Other questions of a more general nature brought interesting answers by Trotsky.
Stolberg: Do you believe Socialism is inevitable?
Trotsky: In so far as human progress in general is inevitable. By a cosmic catastrophe our basis for Socialism can be destroyed. In that general sense of world determinism, it is not inevitable. But in the sense of human progress, it is inevitable.
Stolberg: I would like to ask one more theoretical question – or do you have other questions to ask, Doctor?
Dewey: Go ahead.
Stolberg: The class struggle, in the Marxian sense, is generated by the dialectic. The thesis today is capitalism; that it creates the working class – that is, the antithesis – and finally the Socialist revolution which is the synthesis. That is the Hegelian conception. Now, how will this dialectic work in the classless society in which there will be only the thesis and no antithesis?
Trotsky: I hope, and my every hope is, that this perspective, that the course of thesis and antithesis will arise in our new socialist society, but not on a material ground – on the appetites, the human appetites – but on the ground of our ideological interests, of the arts, the sciences, philosophy, and so on. It will be an interestless —
Finerty: You mean ‘disinterested’?
Trotsky: — permanent fight of human beings on this new, very high level.
There is so much in The Case worthy of quotation that selection becomes difficult and somewhat arbitrary. But at least three additional references are of exceptional interest. On the nature of a revolutionary international organization, it was unavoidable that reference should be made to the bureaucratization of the Comintern.
Ruehle: Were you of the opinion that the specific methods of the Russian Revolution must be schematically and compulsorily carried by the Comintern into the rest of the world, and there become the ruling form of the class struggle?
Trotsky: No. It was not the opinion of Lenin and myself. You can find in Lenin’s speeches in the Congresses of the C.I. many severe and forceful characterizations of the idea that we Russians could impose our methods and our form of organization on other nations. In his last speech, in the Fourth Congress of the Communist International, Lenin devoted a certain part to this question. It was also my opinion that it is absolutely impossible to command the workers’ movement from Moscow by telegraphic orders to sixty nations. This impossibility became more and more evident and the method of command was supplemented by the method of corruption and of bribery. One of the important differences – it was one of the important questions – of the fight since 1924 between Stalin and myself was where we protested against the bribery of the leaders of the workers’ movement in the foreign country.
Finerty asked Trotsky a direct question on the subject of sabotage, whether it would not have been a practical political measure for discrediting and overthrowing the Stalin bureaucracy. Trotsky made the unequivocal reply:
No. From my Marxian point of view every progress is based upon the development of the productive forces of mankind, and of the nation in that case. Now, the overthrow of the bureaucracy by the people is possible only on a higher political cultural level of the people. It is necessary to raise the people, and not push them into the depths. By the disorganization of economy, we could create only the basis for social reaction. How can we hope then to vanquish the bureaucracy?
One final reference. It was certain that the Commission would make reference to the Menshevik trial of 1931 and Trotsky’s attitude toward it. Stolberg asked the question and Trotsky made an honest admission of error. He replied:
I must recognize that I took the trials seriously. It was a great error. I was in Prinkipo – it was in 1931 – absolutely isolated from any political milieu. I had no illusions about the justice of the Soviet Union at that time, but on the other hand I knew that the Right Wing Mensheviks, such as Maisky, the present ambassador in London, such as Vyshinsky, the prosecutor, such as Troyanovsky, the ambassador in the United States – they genuinely took part in the struggle in the Civil War against us. I admitted that it was possible to know about a plot of such a kind as was discovered. I didn’t study the trial at that time. I was very busy with my history of the October Revolution, and I admitted that the trial was more or less correct. It was a great error on my part.
 
VII
The final session was the high point of the hearings. It was devoted to Trotsky’s closing speech, and lasted for five hours. The speech, 115 pages long in the book, is one of Trotsky’s greatest orations. With a skillful employment of the dialectic and logic, he examines the evolution of the Stalinist terror, the evolution of the system of frame-up trials, the stupid amalgams of the GPU, the brutality of the regime, the contradictions of the evidence, the factual blunders, the coarseness and rudeness of the prosecutors, in the first instance the vulgar Vyshinsky, and finally ends with the charge that Stalin had murdered the old guard of the Bolshevik Party, Lenin’s companions and comrades. A reading of the speech makes a powerful and lasting impression upon the reader. But it was even more exciting to hear this speech at the hearings. This was the dramatic moment.
None of the audience had ever heard Trotsky make a speech. They knew by his reputation that he was one of the greatest orators in the history of the world labor and socialist movement. Now they had the opportunity to hear him and to observe, even if in a modified way, his tremendous power. Trotsky read his speech in English while sitting at his table. One could feel his great nervous tension and sense his desire to rise and walk and gesture, as he developed theme after theme to refute the verdict of the trials. Listening to Trotsky speak, one could hear the rising inflections, sharp emphases, brilliant timing and great irony as he made one telling point after another.
When he finished, the hushed audience suddenly broke out into cheers and applause. They knew they had witnessed a rare event, a moment of historical greatness.
If the Russian trials and those of its satellites are received by the world today with the scorn they deserve, a great deal of the responsibility for this new enlightenment on Stalinism is due to Trotsky and his fight against the Moscow Trials.
Trotsky once said that Stalin could not let him live. The knowledge that Trotsky was writing his biography, the fear of Trotsky’s living during the period of the war and of the Hitler- Stalin pact would impel the latter to seek his life. We find it necessary to add an even more important reason which, in our opinion, supersedes the others. The Moscow Trials, organized for the purpose of wiping out the generation of Lenin, fell short of its aim. The trials had boomeranged! Trotsky was still alive and it was he who created the grave world doubts on their authenticity; it was he who finally established that they were stupid and bungled frame-ups. Trotsky was not handed over to his Kremlin executioners as they had hoped. Trotsky alive was a permanent danger to Stalin. He had to die and for that purpose the entire machinery of the vast Russian state and its GPU was mobilized. Then the devil’s deed was accomplished. If it robbed the international working class of the outstanding figure since the time of Lenin, it established also that Stalin was the mortal enemy of the working class.
What shall we say to the new generation of proletarians and students in this dreadful period of human history when the world and its people are face to face with a new world atomic war, when civilization itself is threatened with chaos and barbarism? We can think of nothing better on this commemorative occasion of Trotsky’s death than to say with him as he did in his New York Hippodrome speech on February 9, 1937, which was read to a large audience:
If our generation happens to be too weak to establish socialism over the earth, we will hand the spotless banner down to our children. The struggle which is in the offing transcends by far the importance of individuals, factions, and parties. It will be severe. It will be lengthy. Whoever seeks physical comfort and spiritual calm, let him step aside. In time of reaction it is more convenient to lean on the bureaucracy than on the truth. But all those for whom socialism is not a hollow sound but the content of their moral life – forward! Neither threats, nor persecutions, nor violations can stop us. Be it even over our bleaching bones, the truth will triumph. We will blaze the trail for it. It will conquer! Under all the severe blows of fate, I shall be happy, as in the best days of my youth, if together with you I can contribute to its victory. Because, my friends, the highest human happiness is not the exploitation of the present but the cooperation of the future.
 



“... what is our theory, but merely the tools of our action. These tools are our Marxist theory because up to today we have not found better tools. A worker is not fantastic about tools – if they are the best tools he can get he is careful with them; he does not abandon them or demand fantastic non-existent tools.” – Leon Trotsky.
In August 1949 The New International published an article by Henry Judd entitled The Relevance of Trotskyism, the essence of which is that the ideas of Trotsky have no relevance to the problems and needs of the world socialist movement of today. Proceeding from the undeniable premise that there is a crisis in the socialist movement, Judd attributes to the theoretical conceptions of Marxism the principal cause for that crisis and asserts that the “traditional conceptions of Marxism” are today invalid. He then sets himself “the modest [!] task of introducing the subject and indicating some of the broad problems that must be considered.” But what follows is an illogical, contradictory and thoughtless essay.
The crisis of Marxism, caused principally by the nationalist degeneration of international social democracy, the Russian Revolution and the Communist International, is far advanced. The process has been a long one, and the downward trend has not yet been turned in the opposite direction. Consider for the moment that for the first time since the formation of the Second International in 1884, no powerful influential and significant world socialist organization exists. At most one finds only scattered groups throughout the world, each of them trying in its own way to reconstruct the Marxist movement. This is the truth! To deny this, or to affirm the contrary, would be sheer self-deception calculated to produce only confusion and harm in the workers’ movement.
The objective conditions for socialism have been long over-ripe; the subjective prerequisites for a decisive social change are, however, absent. As a consequence, the social crisis assumes forms of the degeneration about which Marx and Engels warned repeatedly. In the absence of a powerful socialist movement, the degeneration of society, both in its capitalist and Stalinist forms, creates new political problems whose solution demands a continuous application of intelligence, armed with a revolutionary theory. This is, in effect, a task imposed upon all revolutionary socialist organizations, those that are fully conscious of the problems and those that remain conservatively hardened against any changes.
Since the human mentality is the most conservative element in society (a factor often noted abstractly by Marxists but seldom remembered in the elaboration of their programs), the adaptation of movements and individuals to changing objective conditions is always difficult. Where the need for change and re-adaptation is understood and accepted (for example, the ISL), this need is met thoughtfully and carefully. Even those who remain most rooted in old ideas or out-lived conceptions change their views and programs. But in the latter case, this is accomplished not consciously but rather blindly and incompletely under the persistent pressure of objective events and not always honestly. The tendency to adhere to old ideas, good or bad, is far stronger than the will to change.
 
The Need for a Sweeping Change
In the article by Judd we are told that a sweeping change is needed in the theoretical basis for the socialist movement and a new program designed that will coincide with the real problem of our epoch. The world has changed so fundamentally in the past 25 years and produced so many new problems for the socialist movement that the old program of Trotskyism and Marxism must be replaced. But Judd offers no alternatives yet. He has merely set himself “the modest task of introducing the subject and indicating some of the broad problems that must be considered,” because of his “belief that it is high time to begin such a reconsideration, and partly by the fact that certain efforts in this direction have already been made with unfortunately disastrous results.” This should have been a warning to Judd. But alas, he did not heed it.
Unfortunately, the modest task which Judd sets for himself of “introducing the subject and indicating some of the broad problems” is not enough by far, because it has already been introduced and indicated many times before and more concretely by other critics of Marxism. Judd’s contribution, however, the product of a belated “awakening,” has also been made with disastrous results. Moreover, the manner in which Judd has opened this discussion is a highly questionable one. He has proposed that the socialist movement abandon its theoretical program in order that a new program may be elaborated without the inhibiting influence of old theories and practices. In this way he avoids a responsibility that is unquestionably his: to offer in place of the old, either a new program, indications of a new program, or concrete alternative propositions. Judd offers nothing at all! He merely says:
There must be a conscious sense of crisis and open recognition that the past, in terms of program, approach and attitude, has failed and collapsed. There must be a collective will among the leaders of progressive Marxism to grapple with new problems, and to experiment freely, even in an empiric sense.
Now, then, since the process of rejection of ideas is accompanied by a simultaneous emergence of substitute or alternate conceptions, it is obvious that such rejections do not take place in a vacuum. Judd suspects that this is true for in the very beginning of his article he demands of other critics, whom he unjustifiably places in a category different from himself, a sense of responsibility.
If politics is the struggle of “alternative programs” [he writes] it is easy to see how hopelessly afield are these people [the critics of Trotsky, Lenin and Bolshevism] who search the past and strain after flaws and mistakes. Explicitly or by indirection, after they have pounced upon the historical fault of Marxism, or the Russian Revolution, they suggest what the correct way should have been. Be it classical Social Democracy, or Menshevism – its Russian expression – or even the road of liberalism – it is clear that these critics cannot evade the responsibility of an “alternative program.”
“If these critics who ‘pounce upon the historical fault of Marxism’ ... cannot evade the responsibility of an ‘alternative program’,” neither can Judd. But that is precisely what he has done. Oblivious to what he has just written, Judd proceeds to justify his own evasion of responsibility. In the discursive paragraph following his annihilating attack on other critics, Judd becomes both the defender and attacker of revolutionary socialists and “progressive Marxists.” He adds:
In so far as revolutionary socialists [we assume he means the Independent Socialist League, since no others are indicated] have concerned themselves with new problems of theory and practice since 1939 (and it must be admitted that this concern is at its lowest ebb since the beginning of Marxism), their efforts have been directed toward the creation of a new program, within the broad framework of Marxist and socialist principles. [We are not sure yet whether this is good or bad, since the author has it both ways in his article.]
Not too much progress has been made, it must be admitted, but those who raise the demand that the critics of orthodox Marxism must produce their program [Judd is evidently talking about himself], both in broad outline and detail, fail to understand the actual process by which alternative programs are worked out at crucial moments in the history of Marxism.
Here, then, is a key to Judd’s position, and there are several questions involved which supply an answer to what it is he wants. It is obvious that in an effort to excuse himself from the responsibility he demands of others, he points to the experience of the ISL. But he is not on safe ground there.
 
How the World Has Changed
In the first place, the ISL never rejected the theories of Marxism and never set itself the task of writing a new generalized or basic program that should serve for a new movement of socialism. It considers the basic theories of Marxism, extended and revised by the successive generations of Marxian theoreticians, to be correct. What it did was to apply the critical and revolutionary methods of Marxist theory to some of the basic problems of our time, most strikingly, too, in relation to the character of the Russian state and the meaning of Stalinism, and during the war to the national question and the struggle for democracy. When, during the great struggle with the Cannonite SWP and Trotsky over the “Russian question” and the war, comrades of the ISL, in rejecting the theory of the “workers’ state” and the “unconditional defense of the Soviet Union,” did not yet have an alternative theory, they at least indicated their thoughts and the direction in which they were moving. This dispute, while it concerned fundamental conceptions of Marxian theory, was within the orbit of generalized socialist doctrine, not out of it, nor against such doctrine. So far as the national question is concerned, there too, what was involved was the resurrection and modernization of a series of theoretical conceptions which had receded into the background of the socialist struggle following the first World War.
Is this what Judd is trying to do? Let us see. Most critics of Marxism, Leninism, Bolshevism, or Trotskyism, state not only what they reject in them, but what it is they are for. Thus it is relatively easy to debate with them, to reject or accept their criticisms. One cannot do the same with Judd. To grasp his ideas is like trying to hold on to loose jello in a hot sun. He writes:
... within the past 25 years our whole world has so changed, from every conceivable point of view, social, cultural, psychologic, etc., that the relevance of the past, its criteria, examples, and illustrations, has dropped catastrophically. Is this not a bald fact? The marking-off point has been, of course, the Second World War and its aftermath, during which the most traditional conceptions of Marxism, expressed at that moment in the theories and program of Trotskyism, were found to be lacking.
We repeat: “... the most traditional conceptions of Marxism ... were found lacking.” We see that it is not really a question of the “relevance of Trotskyism” at all, it is a question of relevance of Marxism! Why then did not Judd proceed with the source of our inadequacies, namely Marx himself? No matter. Let us get on.
Has our world changed drastically within the past 25 years? Undoubtedly. Has it changed socially? No doubt. Culturally? That also. And psychologically? Granted. It would follow that all of this is a bald fact! Now, then, what does it all mean? Concretely, in what ways has the world changed socially, culturally and psychologically to invalidate the program of Marxism? But since politics is always concrete, our friend swiftly leaves us at this point with a parting remark: “... the relevance of the past, its criteria, examples, and illustrations, has dropped catastrophically.”
Nothing at all remains for us even as a starting point: no theory, no practice, no criteria, no examples, no illustrations. This, mind you, is the empiric sense of reality! This is scientific! This is objective! We have blackened out a part (what part?) of history and now we can begin anew. But where shall we begin? You must have patience. You must understand that these things require time. You must understand “the actual process by which alternative programs are worked out at crucial moments in the history of Marxism. ... There must be a conscious sense of crisis ... There must be a collective will ... grapple with new problems ... experiment freely ... even in an empiric sense.” And if you insist upon asking Judd, what is different socially, culturally, psychologically in the world today (and we think we know at least some of the things that are different) you will get the following answer: “[the] creation of a new program is a painful, tedious and difficult process ... One has to make one’s way past those who repeat the past and are smugly content with this ...
 
What Marxists Have Done
It is a fact that every epoch in capitalist development has ushered in new problems, demanding new criteria, reducing, though not obliterating, the significance, the examples and illustrations of the past. For revolutionary Marxists, each challenge of the changing epochs, brought with it a corresponding effort to test their theories and to attune them to the changing times. Marx and Engels did not leave a dogma. They furnished the working class with a scientifically grounded theory of capitalist development, a program for the struggle for socialism and a weapon of criticism. Their starting point was a penetrating and annihilating criticism of capitalism and an analysis of the inevitable collapse of its economy which would in turn produce the endless crisis of the social order. Socialism was an objective necessity to save mankind. And they provided a general program to meet the requirements of a class struggle produced by capitalist class society. Theirs, then, was the first program of scientific socialism which helped more than anything else to create the modern working-class movement.
Obviously, much of what Marx and Engels wrote for the struggles of the latter half of the 19th century could hardly apply to the 20th, but the essential theories which they developed have been proved correct again and again during the struggles of this century. It would be impertinent to our readers to belabor a point so obvious. But we have to ask Judd: what traditional conceptions of Marxism are found lacking today? Is it its analysis of capitalism and its critique? Its theory of the state? The nature of the class struggle and the character of the fight for socialism? No answers! So we really do not know what Judd has reference to on that score and we do not know what to argue against specifically.
The many generations of Marxists have experienced their own struggles over theory and program. In rejecting revisionism they verified the Marxian view of the development of capitalism from its national to its imperialist stage. When the Second International, which contributed so much to the popularization of the Marxian program and organized the modern proletariat for the first time, succumbed to the pressures of the greatest crisis then known to capitalism, World War I, the Marxian movement was revived once more by re-evaluation, alteration and extension of its main ideas. The same process was inevitably induced by the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the emergence of Stalinism. Trotsky alone initiated the struggle in defense of Marxism and revolutionary internationalism. His contributions to the theory of socialist construction and the nature of Stalinism, despite the final failure of the latter, provided the key for a further development of Marxian doctrine and are of enormous and lasting importance.
The enrichment of Marxian theory has been unavoidable, consistent and continuous. The successive generations made their contribution, not by rejecting the basic Marxian conceptions, but by utilizing their rich content. Therefore all the numerous additions and modifications of the Marxian theory and program, find a connecting thread, indicating the continuity and relatedness of its revolutionary ideas. 1905 did not repeat identically the experiences of the Paris Commune; 1917 did not repeat identically the experience of 1905. Nor will the future repeat identically the experiences of yesterday. Each new period will bring with it a new series of factors, new problems to solve and will require new ideas to meet them. But just as each new event contains similarities to and is connected with events preceding, and in turn influences the events to follow, so too, the ideas related to these events have a similarity and a continuity, and this being the case, old ideas and programs have a relative validity. What the revolutionary Marxist must do is to test the validity of his theory in general, to sift from it what is outlived and wrong, and to relate it to the concrete problems which confront him.
We adhere to the basic conceptions of Marxism because they have proved again and again to be the most efficacious tool in our theoretical structure and because their essential elements have proved to be true. No better set of ideas has been shown to be superior to Marxism – and not because no attempts have been made to think of better ones. On the contrary, the attempts have been countless. But all of them have failed dismally. Judd’s failure will be even more ignominious because he has not done as much as the anti-Marxist critics; he offers no alternative to what he proposes to discard completely. He stands in a gap.
 
The Failures of Trotsky
After devoting a good third of his article to explain the reasons for his ambiguity and to justify his particular evasion of responsibility in failing to present an alternative program to Marxism and Trotskyism, Judd finally gets down to a specific criticism of the latter. In about three pages of The New International he examines the relevance of all the theoretical and political contributions of forty years of revolutionary activity of the outstanding Marxist of our time. So Judd arbitrarily reduces Trotsky’s contributions to five: the evaluation of our epoch, the transitional program, the revolutionary socialist party, the permanent revolution, and tactics and strategy. The introduction to the “concretization” of his “modest task” consists of an indictment of the self-styled “orthodox Trotskyists” of the practically defunct 4th International and the Cannonite SWP. This is his first point, and we shall see how our friend fares.
Trotsky did not leave a great movement behind him. His heirs are epigones (again, the reference is to the self-styled “orthodox Trotskyists”). They are “bankrupt cliques” with a “bureaucratic ideology.” Why did Trotsky, “such a magnificent leader of such heroic and bold proportions, leave behind him such a short-lived movement which stumbled from one disaster to another and has now definitively collapsed?” One could ask the same of Marx and Engels. Why did they leave a Second International, and such heirs as Bernstein, Kautsky, MacDonald, Bauer and Wels? And why did Lenin leave what subsequently became the Stalintern, and such heirs as Stalin, Molotov, Manuilsky and Vyshinsky? Our scientist, who is fully aware of the importance of the psychological, as well as the unknowable quality and quantity of the subjective factor in politics, answers: “A large part of the answer, of course, lies in the false perspectives which his movement inherited from Trotsky.”
It would seem that Trotsky is mainly responsible for the ills outlined above. But with the method characteristic of the article, Judd also writes: “How fortunate for this great socialist and revolutionist that he cannot be estimated in the terms of his ‘heirs’!” If Judd’s thesis is correct, why not? If his theoretical conceptions are so false and produced the shambles Judd describes, why shouldn’t “his organization” and “the political leaders and spokesmen Trotsky left behind” be worthy of his name? The logic of his thinking and the subtleties of his conclusions escape us for the moment.
Exactly what in Trotsky’s program produced this complete bankruptcy, assuming that it is he alone that produced it and that the objective situation had nothing to do with it? Judd continues:
“Trotsky had a rounded, internally clear and consistent view of things. Proletarian revolution was at the heart of it, just as belief in the simplistic ‘dialectics’ of Engels was at the heart of his approach to science.”
The last sentence is indeed a wonder to behold. The relationship of its two parts may be obscure to ordinary minds. But perhaps Judd sees some deep connection between Trotsky’s belief in the proletarian revolution and his belief in the “simplistic ‘dialectics’” of Engels which determined his approach to science. Note well, too, that the word dialectics is put in quotes! That creates the proper suspicion that there must have been something mystical in Trotsky’s method of thinking in this age of the triumph of science. And if Engels’ dialectics was “simplistic” in the pre-Einstein era of science, Judd appears to convict the belief in proletarian revolution of “guilt by association” in a single sentence. We await with impatience Judd’s explanation of the meaning of this obscure and moderne statement.
Trotsky, it seems, believed in 1938, when the program of the 4th International was formulated, that the epoch in which we lived, choked with economic crisis and mass unemployment, threatened with a catastrophic world war, was profoundly revolutionary and that the “central need was for revolutionary leadership and a revolutionary party.” To make matters worse in the opinion of Judd, he “had a rounded, internally clear and consistent view of things.” Little could be worse than that, obviously, for therein lay Trotsky’s failure and retrospectively Judd has found the “flaw.” Bearing in mind his comment about Engels’ “simplistic ‘dialectics’” and how it affected Trotsky’s attitude toward science, we must conclude that if Trotsky were not so affected he would have presented us with a one-sided, unclear and inconsistent view of things. But, here again, we must admonish Judd in the same way that he chided his other critics, that he is “denying the dynamics of history” and “attempts to pass a sterile judgment on the past.”
Did Trotsky have a right to see the epoch as a profoundly revolutionary one in 1938? Were not all the preconditions, save one, present for a profound social change? Did he have a right to expect that another devastating war would or could usher in the revolutionary struggle for socialism? Even many bourgeois leaders looked for the same thing. And if he saw the prospects of a new social explosion, was he not correct also to see that the central need of the times was a revolutionary leadership and a revolutionary party, without which we cannot hope for a fundamental social change? The only thing that makes sense in Judd’s remarks is that he no longer believes in the “traditional Marxist” conception of the role of leadership and a proletarian revolutionary party.
Was it Trotsky’s overestimation of the revolutionary curve that caused his movement to collapse? Better yet, why should an overestimation of the revolutionary curve produce such utter and complete bankruptcy? There is really no scientific reason why this had to follow. It may have produced a defeat for his movement, but again, it did not follow that this overestimation should have crushed the movement, especially since this movement had little opportunity to participate in any great struggle.
Trotsky was fully aware that the revolutionary socialist movement was missing from the scene. He was just as aware that without this quintessential factor, no successful struggle for socialism was possible. But given the factors of capitalist decay and degeneration and the mood of enormous dissatisfaction among millions of workers and middle class elements, he felt that a great social explosion could produce swiftly the organization that would make the struggle for socialism possible. And this is what he sought to achieve, to find a bridge over which the masses could travel from their incurable dissatisfaction with society to the struggle for socialism. It was the search for such a bridge that produced the transitional program.
But the bankruptcy about which Judd writes was in this case, at least, not due to overestimation of the revolutionary potential. As a matter of fact, the 4th International never even got started. A more pertinent question to have posed was whether Trotsky did not prematurely attempt the construction of a new international, whether his failure to correctly evaluate Stalinism did not preclude a growth of the 4th international. That’s what is pertinent. However, in rejecting Trotsky’s “rounded, internally clear and consistent view of things,” what does Judd say about the period between 1938 and 1946? What kind of period was it that we lived through and what could Trotsky, with superhuman foresight, have elucidated as the program for the socialist movement?
We learn that because Trotsky had this “rounded, internally clear, and consistent view of things ... he fought so bitterly against those who tended to upset his well-worked-out theoretical program with either doubts or outright challenge on such matters, for example, as the ‘Russian Question.’” It was this failure which, in turn, led to Trotsky’s “failure to grasp the profound changes occurring not only in the structure of world society, but in the source of revolutionary activity itself, i.e., socialist mass and class consciousness. Any movement which clung to the Trotsky perspective was bound to end up in that state of political paranoia, marked by a phantasy-world existence, which we see in his followers today.”
There are several propositions involved in these remarks. First, if the Second World War “marks a definite transition between two epochs” then Trotsky could not possibly have forseen the new epoch since he was assassinated before this war was fully under way. If the transition occurred when he was no longer with us, therefore he could not possibly have dealt with the problems which it presumably raised. This task obviously falls upon the shoulders of those Marxists who live after him.
But Judd may reply that it was Trotsky’s false position on the Russian question which prevented him from foreseeing this new epoch. Then, how about those who had a correct position on Russia? Why didn’t they foresee it? Why didn’t Judd himself foresee it? No matter, he sees it now. In that case, let us find out what it is.
Judd returns to the theme that the concepts of classic Trotskyism cannot be “of much assistance based as they are upon the existence of a mass socialist consciousness, forever expanding under the lash of experience and the teachings of the vanguard party. Perhaps the outstanding difference between the past of Trotsky and our present is the absence of this mass of human beings in whom socialist consciousness, to one or another degree, existed.” We are beginning to get a hint at what he is driving at. The terms “socialist mass and class consciousness” begin to take on some meaning. The sense of Judd’s remarks are that these factors are no longer capable of emerging, therefore, the struggle for socialism, no less, must begin elsewhere. Let us recapitulate: There is no socialist consciousness. There are only “great masses of socially conscious people.” If there is no socialist consciousness and no prospect of its arising in this new “retrogressive-collectivist” epoch, how can there be a socialist party? Obviously a socialist party can exist only where there is socialist consciousness. It follows, does it not, that if there are only great masses of socially-conscious people and “they are probably more numerous than ever and offer us a clue to the kind of program required,” we must have a new type of party. If this is not what Judd means, pray then what does he mean? And if it is what he means, would not human progress be aided at least a little bit if he were to say so in plain English?
He goes on to say that those socially-conscious, as distinguished from the socialist-conscious people, “desire a new life, they are against war, they have hopes and aspirations often concrete in form.” Socialist consciousness “lies in self-consciousness and awareness; a state of understanding in which the worker himself realizes that his and his alone is the task, that he is the creator of the revolution and socialism.”
Good, more or less. How does this relate to the relevance of Trotskyism in our time? Presumably Trotsky believed that we were dealing with an international working class that had reached a high state of socialist consciousness and therefore the epoch was invested with revolutionary consequences, and therefore a transitional program was required as a bridge to these socialist masses.
But if we were dealing with a socialist working class then no bridge was required to raise it above the level of mere dissatisfaction. A socialist working class would not be merely dissatisfied with its conditions; it would be consciously organized for socialism, and a transitional program for such a working class would be superfluous.
Trotsky did not believe in spontaneity as the central feature of the socialist struggle and he did not believe the working class comes automatically by its socialist awareness. He knew as well as any that the older generation of European socialists was destroyed, but he counted on the disintegration of capitalism to produce the necessary conditions for the creation of a new socialist mass. In his mind the transitional program, among other considerations, was to act as a catalytic agent in the reestablishment of a socialist cadre and a socialist following.
Because Trotsky and his Marxist predecessors did not believe socialist consciousness arises automatically, he understood the necessity for a party and leadership. All Marxists recognized the class struggle as a vast school of socialist education, in which the working class, by its own experiences and the intervention of the conscious socialist vanguard, reached the level of socialist consciousness. So long as capitalism exists, so long as an exploitive society resting on industrial production exists, so long as a working class remains indispensable to modern production, the necessity of socialism will remain. And if that is true, then there are no other means by which the working class can emancipate itself except through its own organizations, economic and political, and its socialist formations, constituted as a vanguard and leadership of the class at large.
If Judd is saying anything by this reference to the socialist mass, class consciousness and social consciousness, he is saying that under the new conditions brought about by the recent war the proletariat is no longer the leader of the socialist struggle, that other classes are equally as important, and the emancipation of society will proceed through some new means. This is so because neither the masses who follow the Labor Party in its alteration of British society nor the millions of workers who follow Stalinism are socialist (they are corrupted or primitive ideologically).
The new socially-conscious people (is it an accident that Judd uses this non-class and unscientific term?) offer us the clue to the kind of program we need: against war, for a new life and ... hopes and aspirations often concrete in form. If true, that at least would be more than Judd has in his mind – something concrete. But we have no reason to believe that Judd knows anything about it.
What hopes and aspirations do they have in concrete form? The need for social change, or just an improvement of their conditions under the existing social orders? It makes a difference, you know. And what are the hopes and aspirations of the British workers when they support a Labor Party that nationalizes so large a segment of capitalist economy? What are the hopes and aspirations of those hundreds of thousands of workers who follow Stalinism because they believe this plebian, anti-capitalist but enslaving movement will improve their lot? Here, too, you look in vain for an answer.
History, however, does provide you with some answers, even though Judd rejects the criteria, examples and illustrations of the past. The Russian Revolution is thus far our most outstanding revolutionary and socialist experience. It reached its zenith in the struggle of the masses around the very simple slogans of Land! Peace! Bread! Not very “socialist” slogans, were they? Yet they contained in essence the hopes and aspirations of the Russian proletariat at a specific point in the historical position of the country, and it was a vanguard party which understood these hopes and aspirations and translated them into slogans of action which were realized only by a revolutionary Marxist (“Trotskyist”) party and a socialist revolution.
How shall socialists now mobilize these socially-conscious people who desire a new life, who are against war and whose hopes and aspirations often are concrete in form? In an all-inclusive organization of the people? With a leadership, with a vanguard, or without them? What shall the program of this new movement be? What will be the nature of this organization? We are afraid you will wait in vain for an answer.
Now, as a matter of fact, it is true that the transitional program worked out by Trotsky in the middle of a world economic crisis, where a war threatened, assumed the revolutionary potential to be higher than it really was. He even thought that the class struggle in the United States was more highly developed than it really was, or is at this time. Not all American Trotskyists agreed with Trotsky. This, too, is a known fact.
The transitional program for the United States was in the nature of things a compromise of ideas. But if that program is examined today, not even Judd could assert that it was an unrealistic program. The most important element of that program was the adoption of the slogan of a labor party! How do we stand with this slogan? Is it good or bad? Is it not an indispensable requirement for the development of even a socially conscious American working class? And would not such a party signify a tremendous ideological growth of the American working class? How about the slogan of a sliding scale of wages and a sliding scale of hours? Cannot this slogan be utilized in many forms in various periods of development? What about the slogan of “open the books!”? Does not this slogan have a tremendous appeal to large segments of the working class? Was it not the outstanding feature of the General Motors strike of two years ago, and will it not again become an increasingly important issue in the struggle between the monopolists and the workers and their unions?
What is also wrong with Trotsky’s transitional program, says Judd, is that Trotsky, in his revolutionary perspective, hoped that it would become the “tactical and strategic means by which the Fourth International was to become the ‘World Party of the Socialist Revolution’,” No, Trotsky sought more than that, even though there would be nothing wrong in it. He sought to create a program that would raise the masses above the struggle for minimal demands. Any socialist organization, reformist or revolutionary, has a minimal and an end program (except the SLP). The transitional program was intended by Trotsky (it was not his invention, by the way) as the bridge to the end goal of the socialist revolution and workers’ power.
Since his revolutionary perspective was false, because it didn’t happen that way, Judd says we must have a new transitional program “but not one directed exclusively at proletarian and vanguard revolutionary elements, aiming to define the relations between class and vanguard party.” You see the problem today is vastly different. There is no vast proletarian consciousness. There is only a socially-conscious people. “The gap to be bridged is much wider and deeper,” says Judd, “than that between party and class. It is no longer a gap of inner class relationships, but rather a gap between the working class as a whole, together with its socialist consciousness [didn’t we read only a moment ago that it didn’t exist any more?], and the rest of society.”
First of all, the revolutionary socialists never believed that socialism was dependent upon the proletariat alone. Quite the contrary, they always knew that without the support of the lower middle class at least, a socialist transformation of society was not possible. The Marxist movement always sought to align the whole of society against the monopolistic bourgeoisie and its allies, and that is one of the reasons why the Marxian program in its concrete aspects incorporated an enormous breadth of ideas and propositions. So do the transitional programs as they are applied to country after country, even when they overestimate the revolutionary potential.
 
A Non-Class Party?
What Judd proposes is a non-class party to close the gap between the working class and the rest of society, because the working class is no longer the most powerful force for a socialist change. Which force is? The middle class? The intellectuals? The farmers? All of them together? Good; suppose it is all of them together. Who will lead the struggle? Who will play the most active, most decisive role in this coalition of forces? Or doesn’t that matter? Judd does not even treat with this question which poses itself automatically from the sweeping disposition he makes of the working class.
Judd is running around in circles, for no sooner has he finished with the above profound pronouncement, than he adds:
A new program must concern itself with the problem of resurrecting socialist consciousness and thereby beginning to regain for the working class its role – now lost – as leader and emancipator of society.
So he does want the proletariat to resume its role. Why he wants it to resume its role when the Second World War changed everything, introduced new factors, disposed of the old Marxist program which was based precisely on the theory of the leadership of society by the proletariat is difficult for us to understand.
We think we see a clue to Judd’s inability to say anything concretely and to give readers some point of contact with him. He has disposed of the “traditional conceptions of Marxism”; the Second World War disposed of all previous “criteria, examples and illustrations.” Given that, where does one begin to write a new program? Says Judd, the problems of a new program “go back to the origins of Marxian socialism itself, rather than resting upon the long Marxist tradition.” Back to the origins! Owen? Proudhon? Weitling? Moses Hess? Or Fourier and Saint-Simon? If Marx cannot help us, neither can Trotsky or Lenin, since their programs rested on traditional Marxism. Then the only sense the above remark has is that a new theory and program should be constructed on the historically rejected concepts of utopianism, or the vague socialism of Marx’s predecessors and contemporaries, whom history has already dealt with rather conclusively.
 
The Role of the Party
In his article Judd leaves for his last point the question of the “revolutionary vanguard party.” We prefer to reverse the order and consider it ahead of the question of the permanent revolution since the issue is already related to his discussion of the transitional program, where he supplied us with some of his conceptions of the problem. The question of the party – now, let us see. No, “it is not the case in any appreciation of Trotskyism. Trotsky accepted the Leninist party, to be sure, but he did not contribute much to what he took over. In fact, his main concern with the role of the party as such dealt largely with its inner degeneration (The New Course, etc.) and his struggle against its bureaucratism.” That’s all!
But what did Trotsky say about it in The New Course and in innumerable articles? Well, dear readers, Trotsky proposed to “continue in the Leninist tradition” and to discuss it “would take us far afield and must therefore be left aside except to remark that whatever Trotskyist ‘parties’ exist today are but bureaucratic caricatures of even the Leninist conception.” And again: “A true Trotsky-created party has never existed (and never will), which makes it still more difficult to talk concretely about Trotsky’s conception of the party.” And Judd is through. One might well ask: Why did you raise the question at all?
As a matter of history, Trotsky did embrace Lenin’s main conceptions of the vanguard party, but he accepted them with a considerable emphasis of his own. These views, expressed so vigorously and instructively in The New Course in 1923, were the ground-work for material which Trotsky wrote over the succeeding years on questions which Lenin could not possibly have dealt with.
The fact that the Fourth International never developed beyond its founding conference, or that Trotsky’s self-styled heirs are more nearly Zinovievists than anything else on the organization question, does not invalidate his conceptions of the party. Suppose these conceptions, and those of Lenin, are invalidated on their own ground? Then Judd should quit humming and say so, stating his reasons for his views. We are certain that many new things can be said about socialist organizational principles and practices – and they have been said seriously by others – but Judd’s criticisms are nihilistic. Nothing else is offered.
 
The Permanent Revolution
So we come now to the most absurd part of Judd’s article, the theory of the permanent revolution. In five short paragraphs he dismisses the theory to which Trotsky devoted a life-time, and which is undoubtedly his most brilliant contribution to Marxian theory and, we must add, perhaps the most brilliant elaboration of a revolutionary conception since Marx’s time. Trotsky did not lack, as Judd nimbly writes, “the opportunity to develop it in its fullest and most rounded form, [though] his life work was permeated with the tactics and strategy upon which his theory was based.”
Trotsky, as any serious student of socialism knows, wrote voluminously on the question of the permanent revolution, and perhaps more on that single question than on any other. A very thick volume could be compiled of these writings. The old Communist League of America issued a small book by Trotsky entitled The Permanent Revolution. This dealt with the theory in general but related it to the struggle against Stalinism and the meaning of the theory in relation to the Russian Revolution and the colonial question.
His pre-1905 conceptions of the theory were set down in his now famous and long essay, Toward a Labor Dictatorship, which appeared in the American book, Our Revolution. His History of the Russian Revolution, which is permeated with the conception, also contains an appendix on the historical references of the theory. Many of the writings on the fight against Stalinism deal with it, and the other writings on, revolutionary strategy and tactics, as Judd acknowledges, flow from the theory. What is more, he developed the theory more completely and with greater skill than on any other question.
 
What the Theory Contained
The theory of the permanent revolution was not, as Judd implies, directly or most importantly related to the colonial question, although Trotsky did apply it to that field and most perspicaciously, too. The theory originated with reference to the nature of the Russian Revolution and the character of the state power of the working class. It had three fundamental aspects and we quote from it at length to refresh the memory. The theory of the permanent revolution pointed out
... that the democratic tasks of the backward bourgeois nations in our epoch led to the dictatorship of the proletariat and the dictatorship of the proletariat puts the socialist tasks on the order of the day. In that lay the central idea of the theory. If the traditional view was that the road to the dictatorship led through a long period of democracy, the theory of the permanent revolution established the fact that for backward countries the road to democracy passed through the dictatorship of the proletariat. By that alone democracy does not become a regime anchored within itself for decades, but rather a direct introduction to the socialist revolution. Each is bound to the other by an unbroken chain. In this way, there arises between the democratic revolution and the socialist transformation of society a permanency of revolutionary development.
The second aspect of the “permanent” theory already characterizes the socialist revolution as such. For an indefinitely long time and in constant internal struggle, all social relations are transformed ... Revolutions in economy, technique, science, the family, morals and usages develop in complicated reciprocal action and do not allow society to reach equilibrium. Therein lies the permanent character of the socialist revolution as such.
The international character of the socialist revolution, which constitutes the third aspect of the theory of the permanent revolution, results from the present state of economy and the social structure of humanity. Internationalism is no abstract principle, but a theoretical and political reflection of the character of world economy, of the world development of productive forces, and the world scale of the class struggle. The socialist revolution begins on national grounds. But it cannot be completed on these grounds ... The international revolution presents a permanent process, in spite of all fleeting rises and falls.
The above is merely an indication of the ramifications of the theory. We wish that space permitted us to quote several pages from The Permanent Revolution which deal exclusively with the colonial question to illustrate whether or not Trotsky understood the problem of backward “imperialist wards.” Judd himself is forced to acknowledge that
In our epoch, he [Trotsky] maintained, those tasks formerly associated with the bourgeois-democratic revolution (national independence, unity of the country, ... agrarian solution, etc.) could only be solved by a proletariat in power. In the sense that a progressive, democratic and socialist solution of such tasks can be achieved only by the proletariat, Trotsky’s theory remains entirely true and valid. But we know now that, in the form he presented it, it is no longer adequate and its proposed tactics and strategy are largely obsolete abstractions.
So that while Trotsky’s theory remains entirely true and valid so far as the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution are concerned, his proposed tactics and strategy are “largely obsolete abstractions.” A pity that Judd did not explain himself concretely. In any case, let us ask the question: Why? The answer is that “imperialism is an abstract and absolute force in Trotsky’s theory.” An abstract ... and absolute ... force) Where?
What does Judd mean? Does he mean that Trotsky had an abstract conception of imperialism and believed it to be an absolute force because he did not believe that Stalinist Russia was an imperialist nation? That his conceptions of capitalist imperialism were abstract, or that he believed it to be an absolute force? Trotsky’s failure, or the failure of his theory of the permanent revolution, we are told, is the result of his inability to foresee Stalin’s triumph in China and to write about it, to provide us with a theory for the struggle against Stalinism in the colonial areas of the world. He also failed to foresee “the changes in imperialism itself.” The changes within imperialism, particularly since the war, “have been of such a significant nature that this alone has altered the whole problem of colonialism.”
 
The New Problems
Let us take the first of these problems, the Stalinist triumph in Asia. Unquestionably this has posed new problems to the Marxist movement. Trotsky, not being clairvoyant – even if he had had what we consider to be a correct position on the Russian state, he would not have been able or called upon to foresee this – could not possibly have dealt with the problems created by a Stalinist advance into China and the expulsion of the capitalist and imperialist regime. What then happens to his theory of the permanent revolution of China? If the kernel of its ideas presented above is fully understood, then it is obvious that the revolutionary process must continue in China under Mao, as it does in Russia and the satellite nations in Europe.
The imposition of a Stalinist regime may make the struggle more difficult because of the nature of Stalinism, but the necessity for socialism is not at all abolished by the existence of this new social force. It is the task of the Marxists in our time to apply the essential meaning of the theory of the permanent revolution to this problem and to provide the program for struggle against the new enslaving state. In achieving this, you will find that Trotsky’s theory will be found helpful in more ways than just the “spirit of approach, its audacity,” though these are by no means unimportant factors.
What about India and Indonesia? Was not Trotsky wrong when he denied that such colonial countries could achieve their independence without an insurrectionary struggle led by the colonial proletariat? They have actually achieved this without much of a struggle at all in the case of India, and in the case of Indonesia, with a halting, inconclusive battle. No, in Indonesia, they actually lost the battle or were stalemated.
Yet two great imperialists, Great Britain and the Netherlands, “voluntarily” surrendered their rule over India and Indonesia, and Britain “gave” Burma its independence. Why did they do that? Because of the changes in imperialism, as Judd suggests? What kind of changes? No answer. The answer, however, is an obvious one.
The Second World War crippled the power of the British and the Dutch, made it virtually impossible for them to engage in a protracted war with these large colonial nations, for continued hold on them would have meant permanent war. So the decline of two imperialist powers resulted in the release of political rule over two of their holdings.
These changes took place in the Second World War. How then could Trotsky concern himself with them in his “concentration upon immediate issues within the national-revolutionary movement itself (as for example, in his writings on China),” which were written five, ten and fifteen years before the outbreak of this war? So Judd adds: “In terms of a mechanical application of Trotsky’s theory, it is impossible to conceive of an independent India.” Precisely! In terms of a mechanical application – but even here Judd is not on strong ground. It is true that neither he nor any other Marxist believed before the war that colonial independence would be granted without a struggle. But that is not what the theory of the permanent revolution is predicated upon. In his book on the question, Trotsky does not speak of this at all!
In the fourteen-point summary of his book, Trotsky merely says:
2. With regard to the countries with a belated bourgeois development, especially the colonial and semi-colonial countries, the theory of the permanent revolution signifies that the complete and genuine solution of their tasks, democratic and national emancipation, is conceivable only through the dictatorship of the proletariat as the leader of the subjugated nation, above all of its peasant masses.
3. Not only the agrarian, but also the national question, assigns to the peasantry, the overwhelming majority of the population of the backward countries, an important place in the democratic revolution. Without an alliance of the proletariat with the peasantry, the tasks of the democratic revolution cannot be solved, nor even seriously posed. But the alliance of these two classes can be realized in no other way than through an intransigent struggle against the influence of the national bourgeoisie.
Let us consider for a moment the question of India. Has there been a “complete and genuine solution of their tasks, democratic and national emancipation”? One could hardly say that and still realize that an extreme danger of war exists between India and Pakistan. Is there genuine democracy in India for the masses? Has the agrarian revolution, the most fundamental aspect of the democratic revolution in a backward or colonial country, been achieved? Why, it has not really even started! Does Judd know this to be the fact? He should and does. He is a close student of the problem, and we haven’t the slightest doubt that he could write voluminously about the failures of the Nehru government, the “socialist” regime, and its record of dismal failures in carrying out the democratic revolution because it is a bourgeois regime and nothing else. Will Nehru carry out the democratic revolution? We are sure that not even Judd will affirm this.
India is not the living negation of the theory of the permanent revolution; it is the living affirmation of the theory. The solution of the colonial question under the “new conditions” created by the war, will follow more generally Trotsky’s conceptions than any other we know of. This much is true: the theory has to be amended and extended to answer the problems that are really new. But that is something altogether different from what Judd has done.
What about Trotsky’s other contributions? Were there any other except those which Judd chose to pick? We think so. His contributions to the Russian Revolution, in theory and practice, remain a lasting monument to revolutionary thought and action. Moreover, he set these down in so many of his writings that they serve as a permanent guide to the future socialist cadres.
In the degeneration of the revolution, Trotsky provided us with the first lessons of that development, and in the struggle against Stalinism his writings and the fight he made, likewise are lasting contributions to the theories of socialism, socialist construction and the nature of the state power of the working class and its tasks.
The appearance of the phenomenon of German fascism and the problems it created in relation to the national question, the united front, the general struggle of the proletariat against totalitarianism, are likewise an imperishable part of the contributions made by Trotsky.
The greatest failure of Trotsky was his inability to evaluate Stalinism correctly – although toward his last days here, too, we know that he was considering the possibility of a radical revision of Marxism on the Stalinist state and Stalinism in general. What would have been the result of such a new study, we cannot tell. But it is important to see that he was at work on it, and we would like to think, by what he did write and print, especially his penetrating, even if conditional, appraisal of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism, that we would have found common ground with him.
It goes without saying that in forty years of revolutionary activity, many things that Trotsky wrote turned out to be wrong. To expect otherwise would be silly; it would require a belief in Trotsky as a superhuman force. Like all great leaders and like the genius of the proletarian revolution that he was, he made many mistakes. But even though a total evaluation of such a leader must consider his mistakes as well as his positive contribution, in the case of Trotsky there is, in our opinion, no room for argument about his enormous and lasting contributions, theoretically and practically, to the socialist movement. It is upon the tremendous theoretical contributions of Marx and Engels, and their finest representatives, Lenin and Trotsky, that the new movement for socialist emancipation will arise.
Our friend Judd accomplished this much at least. By his amorphous, illogical and thoughtless essay, he directed attention once more to the fundamental correctness of the Marxian program. Does this mean that there are no new problems for us to solve? Does this mean that the world is the same today as it was in Marx’s time, or Lenin’s or even Trotsky’s? Not at all. Who has said so? And on whose authority? We are well aware that many new problems remain to be solved. We grant too that the problems of today are exceedingly complex, and more difficult of solution than any that ever confronted the working-class movement in all its history.
We have never denied their existence or regarded these problems lightly. They are indeed tremendous. But, after saying all of this, what should we do about them? Judd has supplied one answer: abandon everything we have ever stood for, begin anew without regard to the past and its experiences and lessons, begin at the very origin of Marxism, begin, begin – with what ... no one knows. Not a very enticing proposal, nor one calculated to produce anything worth while.
But wait, we are not yet through. After all that he has written, our friend, logical and scientific, burdened by no obsolete views or dogmas or even by a belief in the simplistic dialectics of Engels, and who is certain that all the traditional conceptions of Marxism have been uprooted and cast aside by the developments in modern society, is nevertheless fully confident of the future. Splendid! But why? Because he’s a born and incorrigible optimist? No; at least not only because of that. Then why? Well, because ... “The general framework of Marxist and socialist thought still exists, but in a changed world.” Thank God, everything is crystal clear at last.
How does one characterize such an article? It is not a very fruitful attempt to provide an alternative, to grapple with what is real. It is political jabberwocky. It is a “mood piece,” And its mood is indigo.
 
Note by ETOL
1. Albert Gates was a pseudonym of Albert Glotzer and Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Stanley Plastrik.
 



In recent decades Europe has given to the United States a great deal more than a synthesis of its varied culture. Ever since the first World War liquidated the strong foreign capital holdings of the bigger European powers in this country and lifted the United States from the position of a debtor nation to the world’s creditor, Europe has been paying dearly to the bourgeoisie of this country for the privilege of being exploited by it. The degree of this exploitation has scarcely been noted by the American bourgeois ideologues, and not at all by their isolationist colleagues, for the notion current in this country is that Uncle Sam is freely handing out dollars almost for the mere joy of giving. Nor have the Marxists always fully understood the real significance of America s new role as world economic dictator and exploiter, or the manner in which Europe has paid for American economic development.
The Report of the Commerce Commission of the ECA, issued in October, 1949, is therefore an illuminating document since it details the extensive exploitation of the European market by the United States over the past thirty years. This it spells out in such concrete terms that it supplies the necessary empirical evidence to bear out Trotsky’s old thesis that the United States was putting Europe on economic rations.
* * *
From July, 1914, through the year 1948, the United States exported goods and services to the value of $270 billion. In the same period, it imported a total of $169 billion, leaving a favorable trade balance of $101 billion. A considerable part of this was for war goods and services. Yet the production of war goods and services has become an increasingly permanent and normal feature of modern capitalism. However, even if we omitted the war years, the following ratio would still remain: For the years indicated below (exclusive of war years), exports reached the high figure of $170 billion as against imports of $118 billion, leaving an export surplus in favor of the United States of $52 billion, which accrued to private American capitalism. Divided into distinct periods, the Report shows the profits of this favorable trade balance to be:



1919–22


    


$11.5 billion




1923–29


     7.5 billion




1930–40


     7.5 billion




1946–48


   25.5 billion



Note carefully that, while the war years are eliminated, the figures for the years 1946–48 indicate that a qualitative change has taken place in U.S.-European relationships expressed in the overwhelming American economic domination over a part of Europe with a declining and dislocated economy. It is true that this tremendous favorable balance was assisted by the Marshall Plan, but it is likewise true that this relates to trade only with Western Europe and not the whole continent as was true in all the years prior to 1946.
So far as the total period of 1914 to 1948 is concerned, the favorable trade balance averaged nearly $3 billion yearly. Fully aware of the real trend of European capitalism, the Report cites the higher averages of the current postwar period: “In 1946, however, our export surplus was $7.8 billion; in 1947 it ran to $11.3; in 1946 it was $6.3 billion.”
If the above figures reflect American profits sucked out of Europe, the following figures, if only for the present post-war period, indicate the converse position of western Europe in this one-sided relationship. The Western European deficit in trade with the United States appears in this way:



1946

    

$4.2 billion




1947


   5.4 billion




1948


   3.5 billion



“If their overseas dependencies – formerly dollar earners – are included,” says the Report, “the corresponding deficits were actually somewhat larger ($4.5 billion in 1946, $5.7 billion in 1947 and slightly more than $3.5 billion in 1948).”
Compared to war expenditures or American production during and after this war, $101 billion, including the war years, does not seem to be a large total sum, but one has to bear in mind first of all European living standards and productivity, and not modern warfare or modem war production. Compared to American production of less than $100 billion during the 20’s, or the $32 to $72 billion in the 30’s, one can really see that for Europe, the loss of $52–$101 billions to the United States contributed not a little to a lowered standard of living for the people of the Continent and Great Britain.
 
Accentuated but Not Caused by Wars
How did Europe pay for this overall trade deficit of $101 billion? While the figures of the report seem not quite to coincide, they nevertheless show the avenues traveled to meet the heavy demands of American exporters, behind whom stands the mighty government in Washington.
Private remittances accounted “in a perfectly normal way for about $10.5 billion or one-tenth of the total excess of $101 billion. The flow of long- and short-term private capital abroad, heavily concentrated in the 1920’s, accounted for another $10.5 billion more or less. In addition, foreigners had to send us gold and liquidate their holdings of dollar assets to an aggregate amount exceeding $15.5.” (All the italics are mine – A.G.) The International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development contributed more than a billion. Finally, almost $68 billion was contributed by the government of the United States. This was divided into $49 billion in grants and $19 billion in loans. Of the loans, the greater part was made between 1912–22, rather than 1941–48.
No wonder, then, that the Report opens with a staccato first sentence: “World trade is fundamentally out of balance.”
The Report continues:
“The trade of the United States with Western Europe, and with the world as a whole, is so badly unbalanced that in our own interest we must seek a fundamental solution of this recurring problem.”
The authors of this amazing document are correct in observing that “the wars have accentuated but not caused the trend” toward American economic supremacy over the world. This observation, as it is developed in the report, becomes an annihilating indictment of capitalist society itself, for in seeking solutions to this economic obstacle to world progress, the report shies away from a “fundamental solution” and come up with contradictory and half-way measures, which in themselves point to the need for a socialist reorganization of society.
If it is true, as it undoubtedly is, that the wars merely accentuated the trend referred to, it is likewise true that the wars did not in themselves cause the present plight of European capitalism. In a social-historical sense, the very occurrence of the two world wars evidences the beginning of the decline of world capitalism, no matter if in this decline, the United States, coming late upon the world economic scene, prospers in the midst of a decaying capitalism. Great Britain, the oldest of the great powers, for example, exhibited many signs of economic senility even before the First World War broke out and she showed them most importantly in an outmoded industrial plant and in static productivity. While in the case of Great Britain we had the leading power in the world beginning its descent, in the case of Germany, the first rival of the United States, we had a rising economic power unable to break through an already divided world which barred her access to the sources of imperialist enrichment.
The two wars sealed the fate of world capitalism. If we are unable yet fully to grasp this historical fact, those who follow us will see it all too clearly. Certainly, the wars wrote an end to the economic, and therefore the political and military, power of Great Britain and Germany, and to Japan and Italy as well. France, too, has been reduced to a second-rate, or even a third-rate country economically. Joined to these facts, is the rise of Stalinism as a world power, and the expansion of the non-capitalist areas of the world, which have narrowed even more the possibilities of economic expansion and prosperity for Western Europe and the capitalist world as a whole. It is precisely this constriction of the areas of the capitalist world which stimulates the completely conscious drive by the United States for world economic domination and renders the proposals of the ECA impotent to solve the present crisis on the world market.
* * *
The imbalance in world trade is another way of saying that capitalism is today dominated by one nation, the United States. If that is true (it happens to be the fact) how shall some semblance of balance be attained? As the Report poses the problem, how can Europe, or any other part of the world, pay for American exports to reduce the present imbalance and create a greater equality between the nations in this interconnected and interdependent world in which the market plays so decisive a role in balancing the national economies?
Since the United States is the one rich and solvent nation, how, as the Report accurately states it from a capitalist point of view, can “we” buy more from Europe to enable the Europeans to pay for their present trade, or better yet, even increase our exports to and imports from Europe? Here is where the officials of the ECA meet rather insurmountable difficulties.
In writing of this problem, Paul G. Hoffman, ECA Director says:
Britain and several other European countries lost permanently their overseas investments during the war. Moreover, they lost, though perhaps temporarily, most of the dollar revenues from shipping, insurance and brokerage.
... sharp losses of dollar income to Europe result from the physical disruption and loosening of political ties in the Far East, accompanied by the development of synthetic materials in the United States. American purchases of rubber, silk, tin, jute and other raw materials from the Far East have only partially recovered since the war, and the flow of dollars available to Europe through triangular trade has been correspondingly reduced.
Within Europe itself, East-West trade has shrunk to an extremely low point and there are no prospects of its revival in the immediate future, at least. The Marshall Plan, put in motion for the purpose of reviving the Western European economy and thus achieving a combined economic-political advantage over the Stalinist bloc of nations, has not wholly accomplished either task. While assisting in the unquestioned revival of the economies in the member-nations, it has not closed the dollar gap or made it easier for Europe to pay for this revival. This is due in large measure to the rapacious way in which American capitalism has made Europe pay for the Plan. Only those who saw and continue to see in the Marshall Plan a purely altruistic attempt of the United States to save the European people, are unable to understand the economic effects of a scheme calculated to increase America’s share of the Western European economy. The Plan itself guaranteed in advance the conditions complained of by ECA because, as the Report says, it widened the dollar gap, reduced Europe’s ability to pay and contributed heavily to a disruption of the trade balance.
This is indeed a strange society, is it not?, that finds its separate nations improving their economies, modernizing their plants, increasing their productivity and yet remaining unable to achieve a genuinely prosperous life. The subordination of West Europe to the United States is so secure that its revival has resulted in an improvement of the profit position of the American bourgeoisie, and indirectly the wage position of the working class here. So, we ought to remember at least this much: American prosperity in the last thirty years has rested to a significant degree upon a declining economy in Europe, upon the latter’s subordination to the United States and worsening of the position of the European masses.
* * *
It was not on the basis of the celebrated “American ingenuity and inventiveness” alone that U.S. industrial power grew. Always present was a very co-operative national government which helped directly and indirectly in the growth of industry by grants of land, capital and resources. There was and remains the iniquitous protective tariff which enabled American capitalism to freeze out foreign competitors and to soak the citizens for its products. The same protective tariff, accompanied by wartime and post-war inflationary prices, has actually been a powerful barrier to European trade with the United States, and given the stipulations of the Marshall Plan, has forced Europe into this unfavorable trade relationship.
Again, who has paid for this enrichment of American enterprise engaged in foreign trade? The report says that the “government’s grants and loans to foreign countries have in effect been unconscious subsidies to American export industries.” Obviously this was not only to export industries, for given the integrated nature of the economy and the high tariff, this “unconscious subsidy” was passed along to a wider group of industrial and financial enterprises. In an economic sense, then, what has actually occurred is that the European and American people have paid for this prosperity of an American capitalism which at all times was underwritten by the government itself.
To bring about a change in this one-sided relationship, the ECA and its directors have presented a program to relieve Europe of some of its economic burdens, and to seek a new equilibrium in foreign trade which has today become the life-blood of capitalist well-being. In a paraphrase of the famous remark attributed to Hitler, “We export or we die,” the ECA declares, “We must buy in order to sell. If we do not import we will soon be unable to export.” The proposed program can be summarized as follows:

Achievement of an international trade balance at a high level, rather than a low one. (The Report makes the point that the dollar gap could have been closed without UNRRA and ECA, since the plans accentuated it, but it would have been closed at a low level of trade, with these countries unable to purchase goods in great quantities. The reverberations on the American economy, under these circumstances, could have been catastrophic.)
 
Loosening state controls over trade throughout the world, and as an afterthought, it is added, “maximizing private initiative.”
 
Raising the living standard in Western Europe to provide a greater market for American goods, since a shrinkage of that market “will have a depressing effect on living standards in the United States.”
 
Maintenance of ample markets for the United States.

sHere, then, is the dilemma which confronts the U.S. To maintain its present rate of production at least the present level of exports must continue. That would not suffice, however. For the expansion of production, an even higher level of exports is required. But it is already obvious that a saturation point has been reached in the ability of America’s debtors to continue the present unfavorable relationship. To resolve this dilemma, the ECA proposes an “integration” of the West European economy, an abolition of its trade barriers, the opening of its markets for free trade, and a rise in productivity and the mass market on the basis of “free enterprise.”
In turn, it also proposes that the United States remove its trade barriers by reducing or eliminating the high protective tariffs to enable a greater influx of European goods so that these countries may pay for the enormous American export, or any increasing export. Also, means must be found for permitting these European nations to participate in other areas of world trade.
If the United States does not permit a greater influx of European goods, trade with the Continent will drop precipitately, producing an immediate negative reaction in American production. To make possible this increase in imports, it therefore insists on a removal of existing trade barriers, and it insists on it all the more since it has already made the same kind of demands on Europe.
Already American capitalist interests have balked at this demand of the ECA. At a meeting of the National Retail Dry Goods Association, Mr. Hoffman found it necessary to condemn public appeals to “buy American” as economic nonsense “indulged in only to cloak an underlying demand for protection of industries,” as the New York Times reported it. To placate American industrialists, Hoffman added that the U.S. dollars spent abroad today would be back in the United States in sixty days. And if that is true, then whatreal meaning is there to ECA recommendations? On the one hand, ECA demands that more goods be bought from Europe so that it may conserve dollars, close the dollar gap, and thus purchase more goods, while on the other hand, its director promises businessmen that if they send dollars to Europe, these would return to the U.S. within sixty days!
So while ECA believes that in the total interest of American capitalism some of its components will have to take small losses, this will not come easy. ECA wants (1) an increase of U.S. exports, (2) an increase of West European exports, (3) a greater participation of all West European nations in the world markets at large, and (4) an increase of U.S. exports and foreign investments, in all areas of the world, – and all of this in a declining capitalist society and a shrinking capitalist market. These measures are required, says ECA, in order to end the Marshall Plan and ECA, which in any case is under severe attack at home and abroad, and cannot continue indefinitely.
 
Premises of an “Integration” Program
“The job can be done,” says ECA. Of this, we have our grave doubts. Hoffman’s pressure for “integration” of the West European economies meets with the stiff resistance of those nations. Like ECA and Hoffman, these nations proceed from the point of view of “national sovereignty” and in accordance with the Report’s plea for a revival of “free enterprise” and a revival of “competition” with each other. But these premises produced the present situation in the world economy. To insist upon these premises today, in view of the complete triumph of monopoly capitalism and the tendencies toward statification, is in contradiction to the inherent tendencies themselves, and more concretely to the demand for “integration,” if one takes the ECA Report seriously. It doesn’t help Hoffman’s case in Europe when he points out that the difficulties conjured up by the government officials there are not serious if the will is there, since the United States was unable after great difficulty to achieve uniform traffic laws for the several states!
As a matter of fact, integration of Western Europe on the premises demanded by ECA, would merely simplify American economic penetration of these countries, and create an even more unfavorable trade balance so long as the prosperity of the United States rests precisely upon such an imbalance. There is hardly a European who does not know this.
Any serious improvement in the economic existence of West Europe and Great Britain will have to come from other directions and through a fundamental departure from capitalist production and competition. The real hope for West Europe lies in genuine Western union, in a real unification of their economies so that these peoples may be in a position seriously to resist American economic exploitation, which can only guarantee a Europe on a static or low economic level, and Stalinist bureaucratic collectivism which would only enslave the masses.
This, we believe, is what is indicated by the ECA report. It is at present a record of American capitalist accumulation at the expense of the well-being of the European masses.
 



I
If the series of infamous Moscow Trials organized by Stalin and his secret police, which took the lives of the outstanding leaders of the Russian Revolution, has receded from the thoughts of men, it is understandable. The pages of modern history turn swiftly. Social upheaval follows upon social upheaval with such unusual rapidity that historical occurrences of tremendous political import are seemingly buried under the weight of the new. This is especially true when the events of the day are a world war, an armed peace and the opening phase of an impending atomic war.
Yet the events of the present have their deep roots in the decade of the Thirties. It was not the triumph of Hitler alone (for which Stalin bore heavy responsibility) that influenced so drastically the course of recent history. The Moscow Trials, beginning with the Kirov assassination and ending with the legalized murder of Bukharin and his comrades in 1938 exercised similar influence on this history.
The Trials sealed the victory of the Stalinist counter-revolution, enhanced the power of the new ruling class, helped to defeat the Spanish Revolution, laid the groundwork for the Hitler-Stalin pact as the prelude to the Second World War and guaranteed the subsequent rise of the new Russian imperialism. Moreover, they set a precedent, which is repeated in all the Stalinized lands; frame-up trials are part of the system of Stalinism.
The Stalinist counter-revolution which began with the defeat of the Left Opposition in Russia in 1927 required ten years for its completion. Organizational and political victory over the various opposition groups, through a reign of terror in the party and the state institutions, was not enough for this modern Genghis Khan. He had to destroy the living representatives of the Russian Revolution, that great host of Lenin’s collaborators whose very existence, even as broken men, he could not abide. With cruel cunning and diabolic purpose Stalin organized a series of frame-up trials to vanquish these men morally and physically.
A reign of terror accompanying the Kirov assassination in 1934 preceded the trial of sixteen in August of 1936 in which Zinoviev, Kamenev and Smirnov were the leading defendants. In January 1937 Piatakov and Radek were the leading defendants in another trial involving seventeen. Between these two trials Stalin beheaded the leading staff of the army, executing the brilliant Tukachevsky, Gamarkin and other generals and officers as agents of the Gestapo! The big trials closed in March 1938 with the conviction and execution of Bukharin, Rykov and nineteen other defendants.
These trials were only the public manifestations of the terror imposed from above which gripped the country. Actually, tens of thousands of worker-militants who were dissatisfied with the regime, and genuine Trotskyists who would not and did not confess lost their lives as “enemies of the state.”
 
Although not named as a defendant and never indicted by the state, the real defendant in all the trials was Leon Trotsky. He was charged with being the spiritual and practical organizer of the various plots and fanciful incidents cited by the GPU prosecutors and narrated in the bizarre confessions of the defendants. It was Trotsky, exiled to Turkey in 1929, living in France in 1933–34, in Norway in 1936 and in Mexico in 1937, whom Stalin wanted most of all to destroy.
How could he do this, if Trotsky was abroad? The cunning Stalin, his horizon limited by his insularity, possibly believed that the world would so revile Trotsky for the inhuman crimes for which he was charged that he would be turned over voluntarily to his Russian executioners.
His very cunning was Stalin’s undoing. The principal defendant became the relentless accuser. From the moment the first Moscow Trial began, Trotsky challenged its authenticity, declared the endless confessions false and extorted, and insisted that the GPU had staged them for the purpose of murdering Lenin’s comrades and himself. He demanded his own extradition from Norway as a means of forcing a public trial of the charges. But this Stalin dared not accept.
Let us recall for a moment what the defendants were allegedly guilty of. They were accused of conspiring to assassinate Stalin and his aides, wrecking trains, poisoning children, sabotaging industry, plotting war against Russia, acting as the agents of Great Britain, France and the United States at one time, and then of Germany, Italy and Japan at another (depending on the diplomatic orientation of the Russian Foreign Office) and of working for the restoration of capitalism in Russia.
Trotsky met these accusations with an array of facts from the lives of the defendants and arguments from the long political history of Bolshevism, all of it documented to prove that the trials were political in origin and purpose and that the indictments were the product of clumsy preparations by the secret police. He called for the creation of a world commission of inquiry on the ground that the trial affected the international labor movement. And he alone, by vigorous and indefatigable activity, rallied honest, democratic world opinion to an organized effort to seek the truth.
Trotsky knew that it was not enough merely to ridicule the Moscow Trials; it was necessary to prove the charges false and thereby to clear the names of the accused and to safeguard the integrity of socialism. The bourgeoisie was making sport of the trials: this was the inevitable consequence of socialism, the “revolution devouring its own children.” To Trotsky, the mobilization of world opinion along concrete lines through a world commission of inquiry was the only avenue toward establishing the truth. He was prepared to testify freely, to give all the evidence he had, to open his archives and to demonstrate by all manner of documentary evidence that the trials were political in purpose, that the indictments were false, that the defendants could not be guilty and that he and his family were likewise innocent of the charges made.
 
II
The establishment of the Commission of Inquiry into the charges made against Leon Trotsky in the Moscow Trials was initiated in March, 1937, by the American Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky. The Commission received mandates from the French Comité pour l’Enquête sur le Procès de Moscou, the English Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky and the Czechoslovak Internationales Komitee fur Recht und Wahrheit.
The creation of these committees was not easily accomplished. Every forward step in this direction produced the fiercest counter-struggle from the Stalinists, directed by the experienced hand of the GPU and the Russian embassies. Committee members were promised unusual benefits if they broke with the commission or refused to serve its high purpose. They were threatened in a variety of ways if they persisted in their mission. Commissioners would be awakened at night by mysterious phone calls and others not so mysterious, demanding that they withdraw. The Stalinist press denounced the commission and its aims. In the United States, the Russian ambassador, the former Menshevik Troyanovsky, asserted that the aims of the commission and the planned hearing of Trotsky in Mexico were a farce.
Behind the Stalinist phalanx stood an assortment of confused liberals led by The Nation and The New Republic. With its characteristic ambivalence, The Nation would raise grave doubts about the justice of the Trials at the same time that it conjured up the enormous dangers to progress if one really believed the great “Soviet leaders” to be frame-up artists and common gangsters. Truth was a secondary consideration in the wisdom of its editors, who earnestly believed that the interest of “collective security” of the Allies against Hitler outweighed the rights, reputations and lives of the defendants in the trials. In their minds it was a danger to world peace to prove that the Moscow Trials were a frame-up, thereby discrediting the Russian leaders who were fighting so sincerely for peace.
The role of The New Republic was even more ignominious than that of The Nation. Its editors found it quite easy to swallow the trials, incredible though they seemed. For they, who fought for years against the power of the American state, who defended Sacco and Vanzetti, and Debs and Tom Mooney, could not believe that a man like Stalin would resort to gangsterism against political opponents.
The trials were genuine! That is what the King’s Counsellor, D.N. Pritt, had said. And the American Ambassador to Moscow, Joseph Davies, was there and he thought that the Stalin government had done only what any other government would have done under similar circumstances. He even wrote a book called Mission to Moscow to add weight to the charges of the Moscow Trials! And the facts? These were unimportant. What was important was the acquisition of an ally in a threatened war with Germany. Ah, the morality of Bolshevism, the dirtiness of politics! What a lesson these liberals taught us about morality and politics! No wonder that Dr. John Dewey, the eminent chairman of the Preliminary Commission of Inquiry which heard Trotsky in Mexico, was led to say of these liberals:
The Commission of Inquiry, I repeat, is not trying to discover who is right and who is wrong in their political ideas and policies, the “Trotskyites” or their opponents. It is engaged in trying to get at the truth as to the specific charges upon which he was convicted in the Moscow Trials. This work is one of evidence and objective fact, not of weighing theories against each other. Either Leon Trotsky is guilty of plotting wholesale assassination, systematic wreckage with destruction of life and property; of treason of the basest sort in conspiring with political and economic enemies of the U.S.S.R. in order to destroy Socialism; or he is innocent. If he is guilty, no condemnation can be too severe. If he is innocent, there is no way in which the existing regime in Soviet Russia can be acquitted of deliberate, systematic persecution and falsification. These are unpleasant alternatives for those to face who are sympathetic with the efforts to build a Socialist State in Russia. The easier and lazier course is to avoid facing the alternatives. But unwillingness to face the unpleasant is the standing weakness of liberals. They are only too likely to be brave when affairs are going smoothly and then to shirk when unpleasant conditions demand decision and action. I cannot believe that a single genuine liberal would, if he once faced the alternatives, hold that persecution and falsification are a sound basis upon which to build an enduring Socialist society.
Despite harassment and sabotage by the Stalinists, the Commission of Inquiry was set up. It was composed of such well known persons as John R. Chamberlain, Alfred Rosmer, E.A. Ross, Wendelin Thomas and Carlo Tresca. In addition to these, the Preliminary Commission, acting as a subcommittee of the above body which was to take the testimony of Trotsky, consisted of John Dewey, Chairman, Carleton Beals, Otto Ruehle, Benjamin Stolberg and Suzanne LaFollette, Secretary.
One can only imagine the atmosphere of the Kremlin in the knowledge that they had failed to stop the formation of the Commission or its determination to take Trotsky’s testimony. It tried another tack. The Mexican Stalinist movement, with Lombardo Toledano in the van, threatened strikes and demonstrations if the hearings were actually to occur. The campaign against Trotsky reached new levels of viciousness. The Stalinists demanded that Trotsky’s right of asylum be ended. They charged him with interfering with Mexican affairs (we will soon see how this charge was introduced into the hearings in another form). But the Mexican government under Cardenas, to its everlasting honor, refused to be stampeded by the Stalinists and made certain that the hearings would take place with no interference.
 
III
The Preliminary Commission gathered in Mexico City before the scheduled opening of the hearings to prepare for them. They rode out to the lovely suburb of Coyoacan to open the hearings on April 10th, 1937, which were held in a large room off the patio of Diego Rivera’s home at 127 Avenida Londres. Given the size of the home, not more than fifty people could be accommodated. These included Trotsky, his wife and comrade Natalia Sedova, his secretaries and guards; the Commission and its counsel, the prominent liberal lawyer, John F. Finerty; Trotsky’s attorney, Albert Goldman; the court stenographer, members of the press and observers and visitors. This small body, meeting in a private home but observed by the entire world, was to make history; for out of its session came the indictment of Stalin and his regime as political gangsters guilty of the murder of the founders of the Russian Revolution.
The Stalinists, having failed to stop the hearings, turned to ridicule as a means of discrediting the Dewey Commission. How was this tiny gathering to alter in any way the verdict of the Moscow Trials attended by great personages, accompanied by endless press releases, played up by drummers the world over, featuring one abject confession after another? But they did not reckon with the real defendant in the Moscow Trials, for when Trotsky finished his testimony, one could conclude that Stalin had concocted a stupid frame-up and, with all the power at his command, failed in his essential purpose. (For those who doubt this, bear in mind that if it was merely a matter of taking the lives of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Piatakov, Bucharin and Rykov, Stalin did not need the trials; he could have accomplished his purpose in the same way that he caused thousands of others to disappear.)
The Sub-Commission came neither as a prosecutor or judge. It did not regard Trotsky as a defendant, not merely because Trotsky did not regard himself as one, but because, as we have already written, he was never indicted in the trials. The sub-commission came to Mexico City as an investigating body, to take testimony, to examine and accept documents submitted as evidence, and to determine whether Trotsky “had a case warranting further investigation.” It was then to report its findings to the Commission of Inquiry.
The scope of the sub-commission’s work was already determined by Mr. Vyshinsky in the trials. The latter declared that there would be two types of testimony: “First there is the historical connection which confirms the theses of the indictment on the basis of the Trotskyites’ past activity. We have also in mind the testimony of the accused which in itself represents enormous importance as proof.” Moreover, Vyshinsky in his closing plea in the trials, falsified the whole history of the Russian Revolution and Trotsky’s part in it, and distorted and misquoted Trotsky’s writings. The sub-commission therefore divided its tasks into three parts:

The biography of Mr. Trotsky, with special reference to his relations with the defendants in the Moscow Trials.
 
Factual material relating to the decisive accusations against him.
 
His theoretical and historical writings as they bear upon the credibility of the accusations, the testimony, the confessions, and the summations in the two Moscow Trials.

The hearings lasted from April 10 to April 17, 1937 and took 41 hours, divided into twelve sessions of three hours each, and a final session of five hours.
Thus developed a “trial” unique in history. The prosecution was absent; it would not avail itself of the invitation of the Commission to be present and to examine Trotsky. An impartial investigating body sat in hearing to listen to a man who was convicted but never indicted in the bloodiest trials in all history, by the strongest totalitarian regime known to man. The Commission was under continuous attack and even sabotaged from within.
The opening statement of Dr. Dewey drew immediate attention to the uniqueness of the hearings being held in Mexico, so many thousands of miles away from Russia and other powerful nations of the world.
“The fact that hearings are being held in which a foreigner will defend himself before foreigners on Mexican soil,” said Dewey, “is an honor to Mexico, and a reproach to those countries whose political system or current policy bars the holding of our meetings on their soil. It is fitting, indeed, that representatives of several continents meet on this soil, which has granted asylum to many of the Old World who are prosecuted for political views. This Commission, like many millions of workers of city and country, of hand and brain, believes that no man should be condemned without a chance to defend himself. It desires at the outset, therefore, to congratulate the Mexican Government on its broad interpretation of the meaning of political democracy, which makes our meeting possible.”
There followed a preliminary statement by Trotsky made in English, the language of the hearings. For Trotsky, who begged the indulgence of Commission for his English, declaring it to be “the weakest point of my position,” this was indeed a difficulty. He was compelled to think and speak in a language which he had seldom used in any form and to answer questions swiftly. This made it impossible for the answers to be premeditated, for no one could foretell the ramifications that might be produced by any given question. The interrogation of Trotsky was undertaken by Albert Goldman in presenting Trotsky’s case. The Commission’s turn came after the presentation of Trotsky’s case, although throughout the hearings any commissioner could and did interject questions which in his mind were made necessary by Trotsky’s answers.
The first part of Trotsky’s testimony concerned his political biography and makes absorbing reading for anyone interested in the history of the Russian Social-Democratic movement (Menshevik and Bolshevik), the defendant’s participation in the international socialist movement and his relations with the defendants in the trials. Thereafter, Goldman led Trotsky through the maze of charges made by the Russian prosecutors which were refuted one by one. And finally came the portion of Trotsky’s testimony which dealt with his theoretical and political positions as they evolved over a period of forty years. The Commission on its part continued with a minute examination of the material produced by the confessors and the prosecution.
The hearings produced sufficient evidence, if not to refute the findings of the Moscow Trials, then to create a thousand and one doubts even to the most credulous persons. However, despite the fact that they had no official court status, we will find that their results in the court of public opinion did more than anything else to convict Stalin of being guilty of a frame-up.
How would Trotsky meet the “evidence” produced in the Moscow Trials which was based entirely upon confessions? There were no corroborating witnesses produced. There were no written documents introduced. There were few factual occurrences capable of being checked by cross examination. In fact there was no cross examination. The judges made no effort to check the confessions to determine whether they were true or false and thus to protect the defendants against themselves. After all, civilization has known more than one case of false confessions.
Everything was pre-arranged: the particular defendants, their confessions, the verdicts.
Professor Charles A. Beard, for example, after a “careful study of many documents in the case, including the official report of the last Moscow trial” decided not to participate in the work of the American Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky, because he felt from his knowledge of history that “confessions, even when voluntarily made, are not positive proof.” He took the position that the accused must be considered innocent if no objective proofs are produced to prove guilt. And he added:
“... it is almost, if not entirely, impossible to prove a negative in such a case; namely, that Mr. Trotsky did not enter into the relations of a conspiracy charged against him ... In my opinion it is not incumbent upon Mr. Trotsky to do the impossible – that is, prove a negative by positive evidence. It is incumbent upon his accusers to produce more than confessions, to produce corroborating evidence to specific and overt acts.”
Trotsky’s reply to Professor Beard was cogent.
“Indeed, public opinion,” he said, “seeks above all to resolve the enigma: is the charge proved or not? ... Professor Beard declares that he personally has already arrived at the conclusion that the charge has not been established, and that is why he does not join the Commission. It seems to me that a correct decision would be the following: ‘I enter the Commission in order to test the accuracy of my conclusion.’ ... Professor Beard’s conclusions, with all their importance, are incomplete, however, even in their material essence ... dozens of people have been shot ... dozens of others await execution ... the fundamental question, consequently should be formulated in this manner: Who organizes these inquisitorial trials, these crusades of calumny, why, and for what purpose? .. . However, I also have more direct and, moreover, quite positive proofs of the ‘negative’ fact! That is not very unusual in jurisprudence ...”
 
IV
After the assassination of Kirov, his assassin and friends were executed. Zinoviev and Kamenev were arrested and imprisoned following a long investigation by the G.P.U. on the grounds that as critics of the regime they were morally responsible for the murder. But immediately after the murder and the quick apprehension of Nikolayev (the assassin), the regime linked him not with the Opposition but with White Guards from Poland, Roumania and other border states. According to the government, 104 “White Guards” were shot. This White Guard version was abandoned only after the sixteenth day. Nikolayev and thirteen others were tried and executed, and yet they apparently had nothing to say about Zinoviev, Kamenev and Bakayev or any other “Trotskyite.” The trials were held in secret; the G.P.U. could have invented any story. Yet it did not occur to them, who knew beforehand of Nikolayev’s adventure and could have stopped it, to implicate any of Stalin’s political opponents. That was an afterthought.
In the trial of Zinoviev and Kamenev in 1936, they were charged with being the “Trotskyist Center” in charge of oppositional work in Russia. At that time, in their trial, no mention was made of Radek-Piatakov or the existence of a “parallel center.” Yet in the Radek-Piatakov trial a year later, the prosecutor, with great dramatic flair and cynical regard for the truth, obtained the confession from the chief defendants that they were the heads of the “parallel center,” which would begin operations in the event that anything happened to the center of Zinoviev-Kamenev, and these were organized at the instructions of Trotsky for the purpose of directing “criminal, anti-Soviet, espionage, diversive and terrorist activities ...” The men who figure in this drama are not the same in the two trials but are intermixed to the point where the whole affair begins to look like a Marx brothers’ picture. Not a single “fact” produced by the leading actor on the stage, Vyshinsky, could stand any light thrown upon it.
What facts, then, were produced? E.S. Holtzman, one of the accused, said he acted as a liaison man between Smirnov and Sedov. He testified that at Sedov’s suggestion he arranged to meet him in Copenhagen during Trotsky’s stay there in autumn of 1932. The testimony:
Sedov said to me: “As you are going to the U.S.S.R. it would be a good thing if you came with me to Copenhagen where my father is ...” I agreed but I told him that we could not go together for reasons of secrecy. I arranged with Sedov to be in Copenhagen within two or three days, to put up at the Hotel Bristol and meet him there. I went to the hotel straight from the station and in the lounge met Sedov. About 10 a.m. we went to see Trotsky.
Trotsky then gave him terrorist instructions and was to prepare a letter he was to give Smirnov, one of the defendants. But as Holtzman was leaving that day and no letter was written, “... I accepted it in verbal form and communicated the exact sense of it on my arrival in Moscow.” During his interview with Trotsky, “very often Trotsky’s son came in and out of the room.” Again, “at that moment Sedov came in and began hurrying us to finish the conversation ...” Now, then, much of the “evidence” in the trial rested upon this testimony by Holtzman. How much was it worth?
There was no Hotel Bristol in Copenhagen in 1932. A hotel by that name was destroyed in 1917. Sedov was not in Copenhagen in 1932. He had never in his life been to Copenhagen. You might ask, did the G.P.U. concoct such a foolish tale? First, it assumed that Sedov, who was then living in Berlin, would undoubtedly go to Copenhagen to meet his parents.
They never checked to ascertain it as a fact. The fact was, however, that Sedov could not get a visa to Denmark because there was no certainty that he could return to Germany. How could proof be established that he was not there? Did he get there by illegal means? Fortunately, documents did exist. Since Sedov could not get to Copenhagen, Natalia Sedova- Trotsky wired the French Premier Herriot, to grant him a visa to visit France for five days in order to see his parents. A reply telegram from the French Foreign Office giving authorization was received. These telegrams are now a matter of public record. And what about the Hotel Bristol business? Trotsky concluded that the G.P.U. must have used an old Baedeker!
A second “fact” produced in the Moscow Trials was that Piatakov went to see Trotsky while the latter resided in Norway. The testimony was that Piatakov took a plane from Berlin to Oslo in the middle of December 1935 and there received instructions from Trotsky. Trotsky addressed thirteen questions to the Moscow tribunal pertaining to the visit while Piatakov was still alive, for the purpose of obtaining from Piatakov details of the visit in order to establish the veracity of his testimony. Did Piatakov stay at Trotsky’s residence? What was the exact date of his arrival? What kind of passport did he have? Was Trotsky’s wife at home the day he met Trotsky? Was anyone else present? Was he served food? How was the house furnished? From what airdrome did he leave Berlin? What kind of plane? How long did it take him? These questions were not answered.
But Trotsky did not need to rely on the G.P.U. or Vyshinsky’s interest in the truth. Depositions by the people in the household where he stayed were introduced by him at the hearings, asserting that Trotsky had no visitors at this time; that no visitors could have come without their knowledge; that any visitor arriving then and desiring to return to Oslo would have to stay over night at a hotel.
Why didn’t Prosecutor Vyshinsky examine Piatakov about his trip along the lines demanded by Trotsky? Because he knew the whole story was a fabrication invented by the G.P.U.! The conservative Norwegian newspaper, Aftenposten, made an investigation of its own, the day after Piatakov’s testimony, on January 25, 1937 and declared that in December 1935 not a single foreign airplane landed in Oslo! Director Gulliksen of the Kjeller deposed that only one plane, Norwegian, without any passengers, landed during the month of December in this ice-and-snowbound airport. The last plane to land there prior to December 1935 was on September 19th, and the first one after that was on May 1, 1936.
Konrad Knutsen, at whose home Trotsky lived, and a member of the Norwegian parliament, sent the following telegram to Vyshinsky in the midst of the trial:
I inform you that today it was officially confirmed that in December 1935 no foreign or private airplane landed at the Oslo airdrome. As Leon Trotsky’s host, I also confirm that in December 1935 no conversation could have taken place in Norway between Trotsky and Piatakov.
– Konrad Knutsen, Member of Storting.
It may be said that Knutsen was a “friend” of Trotsky’s and self-interest dictated his telegram. But what about Arbeiderbladet, which printed an article on Piatakov’s alleged fight to to show that the whole incident could not possibly have taken place? Arbeiderbladet, organ of the government party, approved Trotsky’s internment by the Norwegian Government and continually published articles hostile to Trotsky.
Director of the Kjeller airport, Gulliksen, in response to a request from Trotsky’s Norwegian attorney, Andreas Stoeylen, wrote the following letter:
Sir: In reply to your letter of the 10th instant, I beg to inform you that my statement in Arbeiderbladet (to the effect that no plane landed there in December of 1935) was published accurately ...
Yours very truly
Gulliksen, Director,
Kjeller Airport
What can be deduced from this “fact” about Piatakov’s alleged visit to Trotsky? The whole thing was a fabrication.
(Concluded in next issue)
 



The discussion on the Marshall Plan as it appears in Labor Action has produced some curious views. Apparently Comrade Goldman has set the tone to this discussion and also its limits. He regards the Marshall Plan as a huge relief project which seeks to succor the European masses. In his rejoinder to the editorial which appeared in LA, he grants out of hand that the government has other motives, but that is secondary since the project is “a concrete plan for aid to Europe.” If that is its main feature, how can “a socialist oppose a concrete plan for aid to Europe because he does not approve of the motives of those who propose the plan?”
Having forced the discussion on this plane, Goldman compelled the authors of the Labor Action editorial to squeeze themselves dry to prove that we, socialists, are for relief and would tell the European workers not to reject such relief even if it came from U.S. imperialism.
Thereupon, Goldman creates a hypothetical situation in which a hypothetical socialist congressman is faced with a tie vote in Congress on the question of aid to Europe. Could such a congressman then vote against a plan, whose “motives” are bad, but which provides relief for the masses? The editorial’s answer is somewhat ambiguous since it states that we are opposed to the Plan and yet gives no clear-cut formulation for this opposition or how this hypothetical congressman would vote in this hypothetical situation (a really concrete, practical and realistic phase of the discussion!!).
In any case, the editorial at least tries to understand what the Marshall Plan is. Farrell understands it too, but he has made a choice and his choice is clear: in the struggle against Stalinism he is ready to support western imperialism against the Stalinist variety. He has some misgivings about it, to be sure since he wishes there was some way in which the problem of aid could be controlled by the working class. But, since that is out of question now, he is willing to settle for bourgeois control and bourgeois policy as the lesser evil in the world situation.
 
Not a Relief Project
But Goldman does not even have that kind of inverted logic in his favor. As a matter of fact, despite his protests that he does understand the nature of the Marshall Plan, that is exactly what has to be discussed with Goldman. For if he does understand the nature of the Marshall Plan and still persists in his views, he really shuts his eyes to what is important and opens them to what is not, and adopts an extremely dangerous position.
The Marshall Plan is not a huge relief project for the purpose of supplying food, shelter and clothing to the European masses. This aspect of its relief aims are secondary, subordinate and incidental to its main purpose of stabilizing the industrial potential of western Europe in preparation for the next. war. But that is not all.

The Marshall Plan is the concretization of the “Truman Doctrine.” Its main relief aims are concerned with the revival of the economies of America’s potential allies for war. The Plan is the latter-day method employed by the U.S. to put Europe oh economic rations, to subordinate its economy and to aid in strengthening this nation’s position in that part of the world.

All else is subsumed under this basic orientation. The economic and political policies of the current administration, and those of its successor, will travel a road determined in advance by the above aims. It is an extreme form of political myopia which thinks, first, that the Marshall Plan is important only for the relief it offers the European masses, and second, that there are “no strings attached” to the plan. Goldman’s discussion of “strings” is really facetious.
 
The aid contemplated by the Plan, which is directed primarily to industry, and through private capitalist channels, for the most part, is accompanied by political blackmail. Humanitarianism has nothing whatever to do with the “motives” (read: aims) of the plan. Otherwise, aid would be given freely and universally.

A plan which seeks the subordination of the economy of a large part of the industrial world to the United States has an endless number of strings emanating from it. Otherwise no one could explain much of the conflict in the ruling stratum of American society around such questions as the desirability of reconstructing potential industrial rivals, which industries to revive, how much capital to advance, what cartelization shall be permitted, or what nationalizations to countenance.
 
On the specific question of the control of the European currencies, Goldman’s answer is unserious and really a non sequitur. He writes:"Let me assure you that socialism can come into existence in spite of the fact that the European currencies might be tied to the American dollar.” Whether socialism can come “in spite of” this, has nothing whatever to do with the question. Socialism can come in spite of many things, including imperialism, crises, fascism and Stalinism. The point under discussion, however, is whether or not there are strings attached to the plan. In his first letter, Goldman wrote that he did not know of any strings attached. In that too, he was unique, since he is probably the only person in the country who did not know that. Again, American control of the European currencies is of inestimable importance. For behind this rather prosaic fact lies another prosaic fact: American control of the economy of the Plan nations. But behind these prosaic facts are the living ones: the U.S. must intervene in the everyday economic, political and social life of western Europe, and the class relations therein. It will thus affect the day to day life of every man, woman and child in those countries. Already, Paul G. Hoffman, gauleiter of the Plan, warns the British Labor Party government not to nationalize the steel industry or suffer the loss of assistance.
 
But the real “string attached” is that only those countries which agree to come into a western European-U.S. economic, political and military bloc will receive American assistance. Is that a condition, a string, or whatever other adjective you want to use, attached to the plan? The answer is obvious. And all of this has consequences, for imperialism and for socialism alike. Suppose a nation does not agree to come into this bloc? No aid! Suppose it does? Then it has to accept certain U.S. premises.
 
The planned policing of food and clothing relief is another aspect of political blackmail. Some congressman may be concerned that there be no waste and no black marketing in such goods. But primarily the policing is for the purpose of guaranteeing that these materials serve American aims and do not find their way into“communist hands.”

One can have doubts about “strings attached” only if one conceives of the Marshall Plan primarily as a relief project, or a humanitarian enterprise. One can have no doubts whatever about it if one views the Marshall Plan for what it really is, the expression of American post-war imperialist policy, the outgrowth of the failure of the U.S.-Russian alliance to survive the first days of peace.
 
Opposing Imperialism
Given these considerations, our policy is indicated. As socialist internationalists, as opponents of both imperialist camps, we cannot and must not give support in any form to either of the imperialist power blocs. More than ever it is required that we carry the independent banner of world socialism. The forces of confusion and disorientation are great indeed and they require no assistance from us. We remain alone against a world of savage opponents, a world sharply divided between active and passive supporters of capitalist imperialism and Stalinist imperialism. Even sections of the Fourth Internationalist movement, most notably the Cannonite Socialist Workers Party, play the role of left-handed supporters of Stalinist imperialism.
Under such world conditions our obligations are clear. If we had a congressman his task too would be clear. He would use that parliamentary tribunal to speak out the truth! Not only about Stalinist imperialism, but American imperialism as well. He would say what the Marshall Plan is, and not confuse the issue with some unclear statements about relief. A socialist congressman would present his own program and his own plan. For we are never against anything per se. We are against the Marshall Plan, but we are for this or that socialist plan.
But obviously, given Goldman’s hypothetical situation, our lone socialist congressman would get only his own vote for his plan. And assume that there was a tie vote, would our lone socialist in Congress sit by and permit no relief for the European people? Obviously not, if he could do anything about it. Without supporting the Marshall Plan and voting against it, he would move an amendment on relief alone. Would that solve anything? Maybe not. But in that way we would take no responsibility for the acts of an imperialist government.
Yes, we demand of a capitalist government that it grant relief. It has happened before, it may happen again. Capitalist governments have been known to send relief, and may perhaps do so again. But we can never subordinate our class politics, our socialist politics, our internationalist positions to such a question. We can never lost sight of our internationalist socialist program in fighting for such a partial demand. We can never conduct ourselves in such a manner that we become identified with the bourgeoisie and its political programs.
In this particular case, it is impossible for socialists to vote for or support the Marshall Plan because, attached to it, subordinated and incidental to it, a measure of relief is granted as a vehicle for enforcing and realizing the broader aims of American imperialist policy in Europe.
It is interesting to observe the great tumult about relief now, in the discussion of the Marshall Plan. Why were there no vigorous interventions by Goldman and Farrell and others during the many months of governmental debate on UNRRA, which was more nearly a pure relief proposition and when its abolition created an interim period of no relief whatever to Europe? Were not the European masses in want then? Yes, even more so than in some countries today, for in several of the countries, the industrial production indices indicate a higher level than before the war. Obviously, it is not the “relief” question which beats so strongly, but the Stalinist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia which has produced the present intense interest in the Marshall Plan. But the interests, consciously or not, have a political meaning, not a humanitarian one.
That is the plane on which the discussion should be held and not on whether socialists are, or should be, in favor of relief when given by a capitalist government. We never opposed it when the Roosevelt government gave it during the Thirties and now. We complained that it was insufficient. But that is not the same thing as voting for or endorsing imperialist policy under the guise of supporting relief measures.
 



Several noteworthy things are happening in Southern California. The population growth of the Los Angeles area is astounding; the city itself is expanding at a rate probably never experienced by any other city in the country. Industrialization of the area occurs at the same time and is one of the reasons for the present influx, but it undoubtedly takes second place to the climate and the manner of life it produces. This growth of population and industrialization will have a profound effect on the already exotic politics of California. And currently, the political situation in the state commands first attention.
California will go Republican; the “popularity” of the dull Warren administration is not the important reason for this prospect. Nor will it be due to the split-up of the Democratic Party and the sharp internal struggles that continue within it. The decisive reason is the Independent Progressive Party of California (read: Stalinist Party) whose candidate is Henry Wallace.
Why Stalinist Party? Because the IPP was conceived, organized and developed by the Communist Party of California for the purpose of splitting the Democratic Party, creating a pressure for a Wallace candidacy or some other such personality in thee vent Wallace had decided not to run, and carry out Stalinist political and foreign policy through the election campaign.
Some will recall that during the war years the Stalinists sought to penetrate the Democratic Party, but no place did it succeed so well as in Southern California. Stalinists and their followers actually reached high office in the Democratic Party organization, and the County Central Committee in Los Angeles contained more than one Stalinist fellow traveler. The struggle in the Democratic Party over Wallace began quite early in Los Angeles. At the same time, the CP went out and organized the Independent Progressive Party.
 
How IPP Was Born
In August of 1947, the CP organized a conference made up of the unions it dominated as well as non-union bodies and the innocents it could round up with its trade union front. It was not a difficult venture since the Stalinists controlled the State Council of the CIO and many local councils, the most important being Los Angeles and San Francisco. The officials and spokesmen of the newly organized IPP were either Stalinists or their supporters and followers.
Being uncertain of the future of the Democratic Party and the nature of the next presidential election, the Stalinist leaders of the IPP did not seek recognition of the party in the state by registering the minimum 27,000 voters required on a state basis, but rather by a mass petition. This would not bind the IPP as a party, which would have been the case had it registered 27,000 voters as IPPers. The freedom of action obtained by this method was obvious: if no candidate like a Wallace was available, the party could seek some other way of expressing Stalinist policy in the 1948 presidential campaign.
With the Stalinist Party as the organized base of the movement, the petition campaign was highly successful and the IPP qualified as a political party in California. Naturally,the name of Henry Wallace gave the party the zest it needed, for in a state which produced Sinclair’s epic movement, the Ham and Eggers, the Townsend Plan, and a dozen other quack movements, this should not be surprising. There is no need for misunderstanding: the Wallace support here is not basically a quack movement. With the powerful support of the CP and the unions under its control, its character is already established. The issues which Wallace has raised find a consistent echo among large layers of the population. (See previous articles in Labor Action.) But even the slightest knowledge of California politics and movements indicate that the messianism and mysticism of a Wallace is bound to find a responsive echo in the state, particularly, its southern portion.
 
Nature Clear from Start
The interesting thing about the IPP is that there was nothing mystical about it. Its organizers were known-known in the union movement as Stalinists or fellow-travelers, known outside the union movement as the same kind of people. The program of the party was likewise known: either it would become a third party if the proper candidate was found, or it would act as a blackmail on the Democratic Party and even on some sections of the Republican Party in low-er rank elections. Under no circumstances would it become a labor party; on the contrary, it would fight bitterly against one.
Its program declared that “the purpose of the new party is to guarantee that progressive voters will have someone to vote for. Under the two major parties’ practices rank and file voters are rarely consulted about party candidates. With the new party the rank and file voters will be the people who select candidates.” It was going to be the Roosevelt Party.
About the only group in California that seemed not to understand the nature of the IPP was the Socialist Workers Party. Everything it said about the party has turned out to be wrong. The completely Stalinist character of the movement was lost on these acute observers who judged the movement not on the fact that it was rejected by all non-Stalinist unions and movements, but by the few innocents pulled into it, including themselves. The SWP set itself the task of transforming the IPP into a labor party, a goal which they firmly believed was, given a break here and there, a real, a living possibility. They hoped to take the movement out of the hands of the Stalinists by calling upon voters to go and register as IPPers despite IPP policy, thus forcing the hands of the organizers and compelling it, by this coup, to become a party. There was something naive and machiavellian about the SWP policy, and not a little of the braggart involved.
Such a policy could have value if the movement had a genuine all-embracing labor base, conceived and organized by the union bureaucracy as a means of heading off a labor party. But given the character of the IPP, revolutionary socialists could have but one attitude toward it: exposing it as a Stalinist creature, warning the workers against it, and opposing its formation as an obstacle to the development of genuine independent political action of the workers. It seemed that only a handful of SWP members in this area understood the meaning of the IPP but their opposition was too weak to overcome the opportunism of their local leadership which was sustained by the national leadership.
 
Cleavage in CIO
In any case, the IPP is now on the ballot with Wallace as its candidate. This factor has resulted in a sharp cleavage in the CIO. As a result of a bureaucratic decision of the last CIO convention which makes it mandatory for all CIO councils, state or local, to carry out CIO policy, a decision carried out with Stalinist support, no council can legally pursue any policy other than that worked out by the Executive Board. In the present case, where the CIO executive has come out against a Third Party and the candidacy of Henry Wallace, all Stalinist dominated councils are in conflict with the CIO.
This situation has produced a virtual split in the CIO in California. The state and local councils are divided. Bridges has been removed as Northern. California CIO Director. Murray has written critical letters to all Stalinist dominated councils demanding that they get behind the CIO election policy and rejecting Stalinist demands for disciplinary actions against the “right-wing splitters.”
The PAC’s are also split. Stalinist-dominated PACs collect money to carry out their election policy; the“regular” PACs are collecting money to carry out CIO “wait and see” election policy, or what passes for an election policy in Murray’s mind.
 
Wretched Policy
The split will have a profound effect on the future of the CIO in California. For the first time in years, Stalinist domination of the CIO is seriously threatened. It is a pity that it has to come over such a wretched issue, since breaking the deathlike grip of the Stalinists in the CIO cannot but be for the good of the labor movement here as elsewhere. No, the issue is not wretched; the policy of Murray and the CIO bureaucracy is wretched. For never was the time better for the actual organization of an independent labor party. Yet the CIO leadership remains paralyzed; playing the game of reactionary boss politics it does not know what to do.
The capitalist-minded Murray, without a candidate in the Republican or Democratic parties, is lost. As a result we have his obscene pressure to get Eisenhower to run and thus pull him out of a hole. The scene is no better when we look to the AFL, and especially in California, where, for example, the Los Angeles AFL council just passed a resolution demanding that the government keep its hands off tidewater oil – a resolution that could have been written in the offices of the big oil monopolies.
The opportunity for a widespread agitation for a labor party is present. The split in the CIO offers, such an opportunity. Pity then, that in this situation, the best that SWP policy could develop was “critical support” to the Stalinist resolutions on the theory that somehow or other, directly or indirectly, the Stalinist resolution pointed a way to independent political action for the workers.
Yet, it is obvious that the ferment in the ranks of the workers runs deep and strong.
 



Dear Editor:
In Henry Judd’s column on the Italian elections, Labor Action, April 19, he wrote as follows:
“The Italian Stalinists seek to come to power legally and constitutionally. Above all, they would like to gain 51 per cent of the votes, form a government under the new Constitution – perhaps invite a few Nenni Stalino-Socialists and even some liberals to participate – and having peacefully gained control of the state apparatus, set about their job of building a totalitarian slate in Italy. This was their road in Czechoslovakia.”
Did Judd mean to say “this was NOT their road ...” It seems strange to learn now, following the articles in LA, that the road to Stalinist power there was the “legal apd constitutional” one. I am sure there must be some error.



 


Fraternally,
Albert Gates,
Los Angeles





Response by Henry Judd
 



Wobbly
by Ralph Chaplin
The University of Chicago Press, 1948, 427 pages.
Aside from P.F. Brissenden’s book, no one has attempted a thorough and serious study of that distinctly American rebel movement, the Industrial Workers of the World. The IWW, or the “Wobblies” as they were alternately called with hatred and affection, was a short-lived movement. But in its meteoric rise during the years of the First World War it set patterns of labor struggle which have left their mark on the subsequent development of the American labor movement.
When one thinks of the IWW, one first recalls its brave struggles, the persecution and lynching of so many of its leaders and the hopeless odds the new movement of revolutionary industrial unionism faced in their battle against the powerful, ruthless and murderous gang of monopolists and their government. But the Wobblies did succeed in organizing thousands of workers, lumberjacks, harvest hands, textile workers, miners and scores of migratory workers. The class-struggle preamble of the IWW reflected the socialist and Marxist influence on a movement that tried desperately to be non-political (its chief ideological weakness) the while it fought endless political battles. And – though it embraced a select and small section of the conscious proletariat of this country – the movement was indeed the most militant we had come to know in the United States.
When the announcement was made that Ralph Chaplin was writing Wobbly, one had a right to expect an invaluable contribution to the great history of this heroic movement. Chaplin, the poet of the IWW, the author of Solidarity Forever, was for many years a leader of the IWW. He played an important and intimate part in its development. Those who knew him well, and even those who were merely chance acquaintances were always favorably impressed by this poetic person of fine manners and consistent activity in behalf of victims of class warfare and class justice. And though one wondered in recent years what had become of this man, no one doubted that he remained a steadfast rebel to the end.
The book, therefore, comes as a shock to memories which go back some years and recall the old Chaplin. He has not written a history of the IWW; he has not written even a full and accomplished story of the movement. His book is his life story – from proletarian rebel and poet of the class struggle to American patriot, a man who has embraced Christ and Christianity in his waning years.
The story of the IWW thus becomes a lean portion of the book. Although there are some fine chapters on Joe Hill, on the early struggles of the American working class against what is possibly the most vicious and murderous capitalist class we have known in modern times, and some fine sketches of Bill Haywood, Frank Little, Gene Debs and Vincent St. John, the book is a terrible disappointment. Throughout the story Chaplin interweaves his own doubts, ideological procrastinations, and periodic revulsion to the struggle. He reveals that he is a typical victim of poisoning by the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the principles and practices of Stalinism.
Chaplin explains his slowly paced travel away from socialism on grounds that are quite familiar these days. Equating socialism and Stalinism he regards the abolition of capitalism fearfully because a working class triumph would produce “a new ruling class, just as arrogant, just as merciless, and just as predatory as its predecessor.” Lacking pertinent theoretical of, rather, ideological conceptions, he is exceedingly and unfavorably impressed by the fact that Stalinists sing his song Solidarity Forever, a song which he no longer looks upon fondly.
He has discovered the “new” factor of life. Thus, he writes:
“Freeing my faculties of the Socialist notion of materialistic monism had given me an awareness of the moral factor.”
You can almost guess at what is coming next. It appears in interrogatory form:
“Who else but Christ had ever linked humankind with the purpose of universal law? Who else had by his own message and example, ever proved himself worthy of world leadership? Who else had ever stated the mechanics of unlearning hatred and learning love? Who else had called the attention of all men to the terrible responsibilities and immeasurable reward of freedom.”
And so? Ralph Chaplin joined the First Congregational Church of Tacoma. The man who went to jail for his opposition to the First World War, worked for the Red Cross, the USO and the War Chest during the slaughter just past. And he ends the book with his message:
“... I do not wish to finish my story by appending any glib panacea for the ills of the world. Someone smarter than I will have to come up with the ultimate answers. About all I have been able to salvage from many and varied contacts with the realities of American life is a certain awareness of growth and becoming based on the general principles of collaboration with God’s universal law instead of collaboration with Chaos. But with this as chart and compass, I am no longer wandering in strange fields.”
Some are only just starting out on the multiple roads that lead from socialism, the one hope of humanity. Others are far along these same, according to their lights. Ralph Chaplin is one who has already arrived at the inglorious impasse that is the reward of such travel.
 



We owe a debt of sorts to the official organ of the “Cominform,” entitled For a Lasting Peace, For a People’s Democracy. In its January1 issue, it reported the results of local elections in Russia, citing figures which are both amazing and tantalizing.
The elections, it wrote, took place on December 21, 1947, “Soviets of working people’s deputies in the territories, regions, areas, districts, cities and rural localities of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic.” Listen to the report:
“99.90 per cent of the electors voted in the elections to the Soviets of territories; 99.92 per cent – to the Soviets of regions; 99.81 per cent – to the Soviets of areas; 99.93 per cent – to the district Soviets; 99.89 per cent – to the city Soviets; 99.89 to the city district Soviets; 99.87 per cent – to the Soviets of rural localities.”
To make the point all the clearer,since it is not quite apparent from the figures cited, For a Lasting, etc., etc., says:
“Practically all voters, with very few exceptions, went to the polls.”
Is this not truly amazing? We are not told how many voters these figures represent, but it must be in the tens of millions, since they elected no less than 766,563 deputies! This is certainly a commentary on the high level of political interest of the masses in Russia. Compare these figures with those of any other country in the world. Not even the most sharply contested presidential election in the United States brings more than 60 to 70 per cent of the voters out; usually it is less than 50 per cent. No, not even Great Britain, with an even longer and more powerful parliamentary tradition, can get 99.90per cent turnout to elections.
*
What does this prove? Well, it can prove that the bourgeois democracies are decadent and that the “new democracy” of Stalin is such an overwhelming phenomenon that no one can resist voting, not even the lame, the halt, the blind, the sick, the insane, etc. Yes, nothing stops a voter in Stalin’s land. Neither Russian winter, snow, rain, lack of roads, nor – perish the thought – lack of desire to vote. Everybody votes!
It is really a staggering achievement, overcoming all obstacles, including customary mathematical forecasts on probable percentages of voting based on long years of empirical evidence.
 
“Non-Party” Candidates
But that is only half the story. Wait until you get the rest. For a Lasting, etc., etc. gives the figures on how the votes were cast, in percentages, of course. For the candidates of the “bloc of Communists and non-party members” (can any of the editors enlighten me as to the meaning of a “non-party member”?) the results were as follows:
“In the elections to the Soviets of territories – 99.50 per cent; to the Soviets of regions – 99.29 per cent; to the Soviets of areas – 99.59 per cent; to the district Soviets – 99.20 per cent; to the city Soviets – 98.67 per cent; to the city district Soviets – 98.68 percent; to the Soviets of rural localities – 98.68 per cent ... Thus the results demonstrated the full support for the bloc of Communists and non-party members” (at this point, editors, I think I begin to know what a non-party member is. He is a person who is not a member of the Russian Communist Party at one point; but once he becomes a successful candidate, an official of the state, he achieves the status of a member, though not actually in the party. Or, to put it another way: party member or not, it is one and the same thing. – A.G.) –
To prove that there is no one-party dictatorship in Russia, we have only to look to these elections in which 403,036 “non-party members” were elected to the several Soviets. This is 53.2 per cent of the total, and anyone can see that they outnumber the party member deputies!
*
There are some people who obviously have a misconception of socialism. Basing themselves on the antiquated doctrines of the 19th century Marx and Engels, they think socialism means a society in which people may “freely” develop their social activity, thinking and culture under conditions of economic equality and security. Such misconceptions reflect outmoded ideas which were the product of laissez-faire capitalism. But they are wrong.
In bringing the doctrines of socialism up to date, nay, in revising and filling them with a new content, Comrade Stalin has proved that such conceptions of equality and freedom are in truth anarchist; they are outlived and outworn doctrines. They were developed before the law of the uneven development of capitalism was known. That law was discovered by Comrade Stalin from a hint by Lenin in one of his obscure articles which no one else has bothered to read. Showing how this law was a reflection of monopoly capitalism and imperialism, Stalin pointed out and proved by the Russian experiment that the “new democracy” has a leveling quality, that “differences of opinion” are a petty bourgeois desire.
 
No Differences
You can have real unity of thought and action only where there are no differences of opinion in society, in politics, science and culture. That is the road of social progress. In Russia we see the real triumph of modern man, the “new” man, as is reflected in the elections. Uniformity and regimentation, as our great leader pointed out, are the pillars of the “new socialism,” that which gives it strength. The objections to the new socialism, made by renegades are, as Stalin is fond of saying, “enough to make a cat laugh.”.
Russian Federative Socialist Republic! What a grand old name! It is not a complete RFSR yet. This is evidenced by the fact that the voting averaged ONLY 99.90 per cent; in three elections it went down as LOW as 98.68 per cent. This only means that the RFSR is in its FIRST stage of development and that the process of re-education away from the outlived ideas of the 1917 revolution has not been completed. Nevertheless, the achievement is literally world-shaking.
Yet there are some malicious grumblers who call this a “degenerated Russian Federative Socialist Republic.” Is it not clear that they are nothing but quibblers?
 



A split in the California and Los Angeles CIO Councils was completed with the resignations of the chief officers of both bodies at their recent meetings to consider the position of the CIO on the forthcoming political campaign.
The state board met over the weekend of February 14 and 15 and voted on a Stalinist-sponsored resolution which duplicated the action of the Los Angeles Council as reported in Labor Action of February 16. Avoiding a direct collision with the action of the national Executive Board, which had condemned the candidacy of Wallace, the third party and endorsed the Marshall Plan, the Stalinist majority in the state council proposed unity of the California CIO in support of “progressive and pro-labor congressmen and legislators.”
With the passage of this resolution, Morris Zusman resigned as president of the stale council, declaring that he could not serve as head of a body which refused to carry out CIO national policy. He was accompanied in his walkout by the representatives of the Steel Workers, UAW, Newspaper Guild, Oil, Amalgamated, Rubber, Retail and Wood Workers, whose support made the division in the state body very close. The Stalinist-sponsored resolution carried by a vote of 63,367⅔ to 40,122.
 
Los Angeles Council Splits
The split in the Los Angeles Council took a somewhat different form. It had already voted in favor of the Stalinist resolution one week before the state council met. The anti-Stalinist bloc, made up of a curious conglomeration of reactionaries and progressives, merely bided its time awaiting some response from the national office of the CIO, knowing that, in view of the action of the council, intervention of the national office was certain.
This intervention came in the form of a letter from John Brophy, national CIO director of union councils, calling on the Los Angeles body to rescind its action of February 6 and that it oppose Wallace, the third party and endorse the Marshall Plan.
A motion by Phillip Lerman, delegate of the UAW, to endorse the letter and rescind the previous action precipitated a sharp dispute at the meeting. But the Stalinist majority prevailed. President Lunceford of the rubber workers and Vice-President Clark of the steel workers resigned and together with their supporters walked out of the council. The Stalinists and their supporters remained in control of the Los Angeles Council, which they proceeded to reorganize.
The tactic of the anti-Stalinist bloc is to force the appointment of administrators, or receivers, for both the state and Los Angeles bodies. Already it has stepped up its campaign for the removal of Harry Bridges as director of Northern California on the ground that while he has a right to support Wallace as head of the Longshoremen’s Union, he has no right to do so as a national appointed official.
 
Where To Now?
What will emerge from this situation? It is difficult to foretell at this moment. One thing is certain: there will be in effect two state and two Los Angeles Councils. The anti-Stalinist bloc is meeting in a rank and file caucus on March 1 to decide its course of action. In any case, the long honeymoon between the Stalinists and their fellow travelers and the CIO top bureaucracy is ended. The unity which prevailed between them during the long years of the war made possible the stranglehold acquired by the Kremlin’s agents in the West Coast labor movement.
For the first time in the long history of the CIO a fight has opened up against the Stalinists which contains many progressive features despite the ugly and reactionary nature of the present dispute. The fight in California, as everywhere else in the CIO is over whether this great trade union body shall support the mystic Henry Wallace or the Missouri mule Harry Truman, for president, and to endorse either the Stalin Plan or the Marshall Plan! What real interests can the workers have in such a struggle?
The saddest thing in this situation is the absence of a powerful, organized and determined voice in behalf of independent labor political action, for a Labor Party, against all the capitalist candidates, and their parties, including the latest Stalinist stooge, Wallace; of an independent political voice against the war plans of the two imperialist rivals in the world today. Within this situation, however, there are signs of a real awakening.
But if the struggle revolves solely around the appointment of receivers and administrators, around the bureaucratic manipulations of both sides, it can only disgust the rank and file in the labor movement and forestall the healthy development of the working class politically.
 






The following discussion article refers to the resolution On the Czechoslovakian Coup – Theses on the Nature of the Stalinist Revolution, by Ernest Erber, Emanuel Garrett and Henry Judd, published last month. – Ed.



*
The resolution On the Czech Coup signed by Comrades Erber, Garrett and Judd is an oddity. It is, indeed, not a resolution at all if by that term we understand a document which endeavors to summarize a clear point of view as a guide for action.
Not only are its formulations unclear, imprecise, self-contradictory and one-sided, but (1) the authors have not even decided for themselves what are the questions they are trying to answer, and (2) insofar as they attempt to give answers to the unformulated questions in their minds, they patently present the picture of people who have lost any firm grip on their accustomed ideological mooring posts and have not yet found any other in the course of their groping.
What is odd is that they have written their gropings down in resolution form.
The kind of resolution that results is not unfamiliar to us from past experience: using rough figures, 50 per cent of the sentences they have written down we can agree with; another 35 per cent are such that one cannot quite disagree with them but would somehow never have written them down in just that way; and perhaps only 15 per cent are dead wrong. It is the second category which gives the resolution its tone, and the third which gives it whatever political tendency it bears.
*
At the outset (in Point 1) the resolution raises a key question:
“The evidence presented by the Czech events strengthens the view that under favorable international conditions, the Stalinists are capable of overthrowing a capitalist state (as Italy or France) and establishing their party dictatorship by means of an insurrection that bases itself upon the proletarian masses, in the same manner as fascism bases itself upon the petty-bourgeois masses.”
We do not exclude the possibility that Stalinism may employ that method in given conditions. But why did the February events in Czechoslovakia especially “strengthen” that view? Because, presumably, an “insurrection” based upon “the proletarian masses” took place only in Czechoslovakia according to “the evidence,” and not in Yugoslavia, Poland, Bulgaria, etc.
Yet, in Point 3, the same resolution tells us that, far from there having been an insurrection, there was not even a revolution in February: “In the February events in Czechoslovakia, the state power was not overthrown and replaced by a new one since the essentials of state power were already in the hands of the Stalinists.” And in the next point, the very same resolution adds:
“The real Stalinist revolution took place during the liberation of Czechoslovakia by the advancing Russian army and the uprising of the resistance in Prague. These events placed the Stalinists in control of the police and the army – the essence of state power.”
It is only in this last passage that any mention at all is made of the relation between the Czech coup and Russia. For the rest of the resolution this fact does not exist and plays no role, incredible as that seems. Erber’s own excellent review of The Stalinist Road to Power in Czechoslovakia (March NI) would seem to have been struck off in some distant time and place. In that respect, Hal Draper’s article (The Triangle of Forces, April NI), with which I generally concur, bore an intimate relationship to the factual basis of this discussion.
 
All-Pervading Contradiction
But if the Czech CP came to power – the essence of state power – as long ago as 1945, what earthly sense does Point 1 of the resolution make? What then invested the February events with such mind-shaking significance? As a matter of fact, the whole of Eastern Europe was already written off to the Stalinist empire by all responsible observers, and no one (certainly no one in our movement) considered Czechoslovakia as anything but a semi-Stalinist state completely subservient to the Kremlin prior to February. This was already evident when the feeble Benes regime tried to sneak under the Marshall Plan umbrella. One crack of Stalin’s whip brought them tottering into line again.
So, then, there was no revolution in February, and no one can imagine why the Stalinists needed an “insurrection” if they did not even need to make a revolution-possessing as they already did “the essence of state power.”
Riding roughshod – or rather groping blindly – in the teeth of this all-pervading contradiction, the resolution insists that the Stalinists could take power as they did because they had the total support of the masses, in particular the mass of the proletariat:
“The ability of the Stalinists to dominate the state apparatus after the Russian armies were withdrawn was made possible by their considerable mass base, predominantly composed of the industrial proletariat.”
But here again the resolution overlooks the more cogent reason it gave earlier for “the ability of the Stalinists to dominate the state apparatus”: the Russian army placed the CP in control of the police and the army (not to speak of the propaganda ministry and a host of other key posts), “the essence of state power.” Once given this, the Stalinists will bear on their way whether they have the support of the masses or no, with them or against them.
Are the authors claiming that the CP would have been incapable of maintaining state power if the great mass of workers had not been for them or had merely tolerated them? All evidence speaks against this notion. It would have been more interesting to see what might have happened in Czechoslovakia if the native Stalinists had not been kindly supplied with “the essence of state power” by the Russian army and GPU, and were forced to fight their way to power in equal competition with other parties and movements. On such a basis it is at least just as possible that the CP would have suffered a severe defeat.
At least, that is what the experience of Hungary indicates. Despite the physical presence of the Russian army there and their control of key government posts, the Stalinists were trounced in the Hungarian elections. Even in Czechoslovakia the CP had suffered a telling defeat within the Social-Democratic Party, and there too despite their control of “the essence of state power.”
One of the reasons why the Czech government parties forced the February coup by their resignations from the cabinet was that (rightly or wrongly) they were confident that the Stalinists would be defeated at the polls. The Stalinists themselves apparently were afraid of that too – else they would never have jumped so quickly to destroy even the miserable remnants of the former democratic state. But this singular fact which precipitated the Stalinist coup is not even mentioned in the resolution.
There is no dispute about the fact that the Stalinists had the support of large masses of people and perhaps the majority of the working class. Given the bankruptcy of capitalism, the pro-Russian orientation of the Czech bourgeoisie, the anti-capitalist character of the Stalinist movement, there is nothing surprising about this fact.
But the fact that the Stalinists had this support did not necessarily produce the coup! The Italian CP has an even greater proletarian mass support than the Czech CP and at one time wielded an even greater influence in the country at large. Yet it could not and did not even attempt a coup. Why? Because it did not have the police power in its hands and it did not have the favorable proximity to the Russian state-in addition to the international factors (possibility of U.S. intervention) which militated against such action.
 
Confusions and Tendencies
The resolution tries in other ways to perform the impossible feat of suggesting (on the one hand) that what took place was something like a proletarian insurrection while (on the other hand) admitting that there was no revolution at all. In Point 6 we read that:
“... the Stalinists brought the pressure of the masses to bear through techniques traditionally associated with the proletarian struggle for power-street demonstrations, workers’ militia, and extralegal seizure of key points by the Action Committees.” [1]
The key word here is “techniques”: three of the four techniques cited are characteristic generally, not of any specific proletarian methods, but of any class’s methods of seizing power – demonstrations, armed militia, seizure of key points; and the fourth (strikes) are possible pressure instruments for the Stalinists for the familiar reason that the Stalinists’ mass support is based on the working class. But it is one thing to say that the Stalinists’ mass support does as a matter of fact come from the working class, and quite a different thing to claim that the Stalinists’ road to power is based on their use of this mass support – especially when one has already conceded that they had “the essence of state power”!
In the next point, the resolution adds: “The fact that the masses participated in the events in a restrained, orderly and disciplined manner was the result, not of their disinterest or apathy [2], but of the absence of serious opposition.”
In the first place, it is to be doubted whether the authors have any grounds for claiming to know the subjective relations of the social groupings. In any case, the description contained in Erber’s account of the Stalinist road to power does not square with this view of the resolution. The working class evidently was quite passive. So were the organizations in which the workers were corralled by the Stalinist apparatus. The Stalinist gangs were active and mobile. And if anyone has had any experience with Stalinist-controlled organizations, he knows almost instinctively how such events are carried off.
In its effort to ride all horses in all directions, the resolution hastily adds:
“To see a ‘fear of the masses’ on the part of the Stalinists in the Czech events is to conceive of the revolutionary action of the proletariat in terms of spontaneity and to discard our traditional view on the role of the party. Especially is this true where the Stalinists lead the masses in a struggle against the bourgeoisie.”
Now no one (except the Cannonite Socialist Workers Party, and we assume the resolution is not directing itself against them) has argued that the Stalinists failed to unleash the “revolution” because of a “fear of the masses” – whom they obviously controlled by their police powers in any case. What the resolution is denying is that a mass revolution of the workers and other classes does have – in all previous historical experience has had – a spontaneous character.
To see the element of spontaneity in a mass revolutionary uprising that springs from the depths of proletarian class struggle is not to “discard our traditional view of the role of the party.” The authors are misguided in raising this point and are suffering from semantic inertia in trying to tie their “new” gropings to “our traditional view.”
The “traditional view of the role of the party” does not exclude the element of spontaneity in working-class struggles. On the contrary, it was in recognition of this element of spontaneity and its limitations that the conception of the revolutionary party was developed by Lenin. Our “traditional” conception is that, while the spontaneity of the masses is an active element of the mass revolutionary event, spontaneity alone cannot resolve the class struggle into a successful proletarian revolution. The polemic of the resolution makes no sense, unless it is arguing that the “orderly and restrained” rebellion was a mass proletarian revolution precisely because the element of spontaneity was completely lacking.
The authors of the resolution are too glib in dismissing what Trotsky once called Stalin’s “fear of the masses.” In the long-term sense of our historical struggle against Stalinism, the latter’s fear of the masses in its integral meaning will be one of the most important factors in our struggle for socialism. What the resolution does, as we shall see, is in reality to write off the working class as the decisive element in the struggle for socialism,while at the same time it pays a gratuitous compliment to it by saying that “the proletariat remains for us the only class which can overturn the rule of the bourgeoisie.” [3]
To lend a further air of credibility to its view that the Czech events were primarily the product of internal class-struggle conditions, the resolution says: “A majority of the industrial workers of Czechoslovakia have followed the Communist Party almost continuously since 1920.”
This is intended to indicate that the current size and power of the Czech Stalinist party is not closely connected with the fact that it has had “the essence of state power” since 1945. The claim, however, just happens not to be true!
The Czech CP, at its height in 1924. never had more than 140,000 members. From that point on, it declined steadily for almost fifteen years and reached a low point in 1939 with only 70,000 members. In all the years from 1920 on, the Social-Democracy was a vastly larger and more influential movement. Only after the war, as a result of the resistance struggle and the influence of the Russian army and GPU did the CP reach its present proportions.
Why, then, did the resolution find it necessary to make this erroneous observation? I believe that we begin to get closest to the political heart of the author’s thinking in the following passage:
“This experience once more underscores the fact that wherever Stalinism is a mass movement that is waging a struggle against capitalism, the proletariat, as such, is incapable of playing an independent role, except where there is a sizable anti-Stalinist, revolutionary socialist party to give the workers a program.” (Point 15)
Because of the qualification at the end, this sentence has an air of familiarity: we have always insisted that “except where there is a ... revolutionary socialist party” the proletariat cannot carry its class struggle to a victorious revolutionary conclusion. But this is precisely what the resolution does not say! Its view is that, in the circumstances described, the proletariat as such is incapable of playing an independent role. The difference is enormous. It is sufficient to ask: “If without a revolutionary socialist party the proletariat can play no independent role, then how will it ever be possible for a revolutionary socialist party to be built?”
This line of thought is reinforced by the preceding point:
“Had the relation of forces been less one-sided and had a mass struggle broken out, there is no reason whatsoever to believe that the Stalinists would not have utilized measures associated with revolutionary proletarian warfare to achieve their victory. The complete domination of the mass movement by the Stalinists under conditions of military conflict does not become less but greater as a consequence of military rule on both sides.”
The conclusion is inescapable: Given the running start that the Stalinists have in all countries, a revolutionary socialist defeat of Stalinism is impossible in the sequence of events. The working class is doomed to be sucked in by the anti-capitalist revolution of the Stalinists.
How then can Stalinism be defeated if (in the absence of a revolutionary socialist party where the Stalinists are waging an anti-capitalist struggle) the proletariat as such is incapable of playing an independent role? The resolution tells us in brief:
“Such a counter-offensive [against the Stalinists] can be successful only if (a) Western Europe experiences a period of economic revival which eases the most pressing problems of the masses and (b) a socialist regroupment takes place which produces strong anti-Stalinist, anti-reformist parties.” (Point 19.)
Now the authors of the resolution before us are the very same comrades who in the discussion on the Marshall Plan in Labor Action, have made clear their belief that in the above (b) depends on (a), and that both depend on the success of the Marshall Plan. In his own discussion article on the Marshall Plan which appeared in the June 14 issue of Labor Action, these views were put most directly by Erber. It is a pity then, that they were not incorporated in the resolution on the Czech coup, where one might come to grips with some concrete ideas rather than misty declarations.
The working class cannot play an independent role in the face of the Stalinists’ anti-capitalist struggle for their own power; the only hope for a defeat of Stalinism depends upon the camp of bourgeois imperialism, in particular American imperialism, which alone has the power to reverse this trend of doom ... If the resolution does not have this meaning, it has no meaning whatsoever.
*
I should like to summarize briefly what in my opinion the Czech events did show, in order to illustrate how different they appear in fact from the views presented by the Erber-Garrett-Judd resolution.
(1) The Stalinist coup in Czechoslovakia was the product of the deterioration of international relations, expressed principally in the struggle over Europe between the U.S. and Russia. Given Stalinist control of the police powers of the state, the Czech CP could have taken full power whenever it so desired.
Prior to the organization of the Western bloc under the Marshall Plan, the Stalinists required the “democratic façade” it had erected in Czechoslovakia under the Benes presidency. From the moment the Benes government made the mistake of seeking membership in the Marshall Plan club, the Kremlin decided to bring to an end the ambiguous political conditions it had created. Perhaps Stalin sensed the coming defeat in the Italian election. The situation in France was also not then favorable to him.
It was necessary, under these circumstances, to finish with the remnants of the old regime and take complete control of the country. Thus, the decision to take undivided power in Czechoslovakia was adopted by Stalin in the Kremlin and not by Gottwald in his Prague offices.
(2) The Stalinist coup was not the product of an intense and running national struggle between the classes. The country was in a general state of quiet for many months prior to February. What did happen is that the Stalinists deliberately created a state of hostility and tension. It put into motion its controlled organizations, its armed mercenaries and professional organizers, joined with the secret police and the reorganized armed forces.
Manipulating the mass organizations of the workers, it created the illusion of a mounting rebellion, although the working class was not actually in rebellious motion. Whatever the concrete methods employed, we did not see a working-class insurrection (as the resolution intimates) similar in character to the Russian Revolution of 1917. The distinction is important and has nothing to do with the question whether the Stalinists could or might employ such methods of taking power.
In any case it is abundantly clear from the events of the past several years that the primary factor in a Stalinist seizure of power is the manipulation of the mass movement with the aid of their mercenaries, thoroughly organized by Stalin’s trained agents.
Stalinism does not and cannot permit the mass movements to have the freedom of action and motion such as is characteristic of all mass rebellions. This remains true even when the Stalinists try to portray their coups as spontaneous and elemental class movements.
(3) The failure of any resistance to the Stalinist coup can be attributed to a variety of factors, but one of the principal ones was the pro-Russian orientation of the Czech bourgeoisie. It is evident that in this case their pacific course arose out of a feeling of hopelessness and their perspective of eventually returning to power after a military defeat of Russia by the Western bloc.
Benes and his government had considerable support in the country at large. But even though the Russian army was not physically on the country’s soil, a vigorous resistance to the Stalinist coup would have invited direct or indirect Russian intervention. If the geographic position of Czechoslovakia were closer to the Atlantic or within the Western orbit, this coup could not have taken place in the way it did.
(4) The resolution, however, views this advance of Stalinism as further evidence of its invincibility. That is why it poses the future struggle against Stalinism along non-socialist lines, since the proletariat is incapable of carrying out this necessary battle to any successful conclusion.
Naturally, we cannot claim that the authors state this in a clear-cut way, since we have already stressed that they state nothing – absolutely nothing – in clear-cut, unambiguous terms.
This is further evidenced in the way the resolution regards Stalinism as an invincible power, developing greater and greater strength without disruptive contradictions. We have already seen a few developments which give color to the view that Stalinism cannot expand into Europe without creating conditions for the growth of its internal contradictions and forcing into existence a new wave of national struggle by peoples under the heel of Stalinist imperialism.
In brief, the Erber-Garrett-Judd resolution projects a postponement of the struggle for socialism in favor of a “new” type of struggle against Stalinism based on the Western bourgeoisie, which alone is viewed as capable of defeating it.
Through the maze of its contradictions and ambiguities, this at least is the direction in which the authors are groping.

Footnotes
1. Incidentally, this flatly contradicts the later statement in Point 14 of the resolution which puts this idea in the future conditional tense: “... had a mass struggle broken out ... there is no reason whatsoever to believe that the Stalinists would not have utilized measures associated with revolutionary proletarian warfare to achieve their victory.” This implies that such measures were not actually utilized in February since they were not necessary, I do not think the authors know which of the two they mean.
2. The words “disinterest” and “apathy” are introduced by the authors as straw men. I (and Comrade Draper in his article) do not put forward the view that the Czech workers were either disinterested, uninterested or apathetic. We state that the facts show that the role of the Czech workers was essentially a passive one in the coup. The one is a subjective estimate of their state of mind, the other is an objective description of their behavior, to be explained by their political impasse and lack of an alternative to the CP.
3. Even when the authors seek to pay a compliment to the proletariat, they cannot get it straight. It is NOT true that “The proletariat remains for us the only class which can overturn the rule of the bourgeoisie.” This feat has already been performed in Poland and the other Russian satellites by an alien class, the Russian bureaucracy. What IS true is that the proletariat remains for us the only class that can bring about socialism. The resolution, in fact, carries this correct formulation in the very next sentence after the incorrect one, just as if the two were interchangeable. The observation is worth a footnote only to underline the unutterably confused character of the document.
 



For some considerable period the pages of The New International have been open to a discussion of the national question in Europe, forcibly introduced by the specifically new conditions created by the war. The discussion is meritorious because it is concerned with the concrete question: What is the main task of the revolutionary socialists on the Continent and what is the attitude of the international Marxist movement to the European problems? The discussion reached its high point with the publication of the resolution of the Workers Party, The National Question in Europe.
The Way Out for Europe, by J.R. Johnson, which appeared in the April and May issues of this magazine, published in keeping with the discussion policy of this Marxist journal, contributes a number of views which, in the opinion of the writer, are extremely confusing, unreal and totally at variance with the actual situation in Europe today. For a number of reasons, which are the subject of this article, they can completely disorient a reestablished and revitalized revolutionary socialist movement.
The idea that capitalism has long ago outlived its progressive functions has been propagated for several decades by Marxian socialists. It has been the central theme of their world program described by the graphic term: capitalist barbarism or socialism. By capitalist barbarism is understood a condition where the social order, in a state of decay and disintegration, continues to exist without the prospect of its replacement by a new and higher order of society, namely, socialism. By counterposing these alternatives, revolutionary socialists placed on the order of the day the socialist revolution as a practical international goal.
Thus, Lenin characterized the present epoch as a period of “wars and revolutions.” In this way he succinctly described the chaos of imperialist capitalism. The concept was thereafter embodied in all the writings and in the thinking of the modern generation of revolutionary socialists. Moreover, it has been and continues to be the central thesis of any Marxist analysis of the objective world situation which predetermines the active program for the realization of socialism.
 
How Lenin’s Comintern Viewed the Question
On the basis of the above conception of modern capitalism as an outlived social order, the internationalists of the heroic period of the Communist International developed the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe. This was the socialist solution to the impasse of European society in the 1914–18 post-war period. The slogan, adopted by the Comintern in 1923, was thereafter incorporated in the programs of the individual revolutionary parties. In this way was presented the progressive socialist way out of the morass of European society, in opposition to the bourgeois continuation of the chaos. [1]
The Russian Revolution was the first successful evidence of the new order emerging from this chaos. The Socialist United States of Europe would have marked a higher stage in the development of the new society; it would have insured the victory of world socialism. With this in mind, the Communist International during the years 1919–24 developed a strategy and series of tactics designed to win for it the support of the majority of the masses, to bring into harmony the activities of its affiliated parties with the revolutionary possibilities latent in the objective conditions of a moribund European capitalism. If the Comintern of Lenin and Trotsky failed, it was due, not to the absence of the historical stage, “barbarism or socialism,” or the lack of the essential complementary objective conditions, but solely to the failings of the revolutionary parties.
In consequence, Allied imperialism was able to create its reactionary system of small states, not only to establish a certain delicate balance between the capitalist powers in Europe, but equally to establish a barrier against the development of the indispensable Socialist United States of Europe.
The logic of the crisis of capitalist society, however, was so powerful that even sections of the bourgeoisie, their politicians and theorists, developed and advocated programs for a United States of Europe (naturally, not a socialist United States), which in their minds implied a “unification” under the domination of one or a set of imperialist powers. This idea, in its variegated forms, persists to this day. The inability of the democratic bourgeoisie to realize its program resulted from the specific relations between the national states and the fact that its kind of United States depended on a military struggle for power. Hitler, in form at least, has established a “unified” Europe: the unification of the sword and flame, wherein Germany, as the one economic, political and military power, exploits the Continent in the interests of the Reich’s imperialist ruling class.
 
Objective Conditions and the Vanguard
It is important to bear in mind that, however overripe the objective conditions of European capitalism have been for socialism, they did not automatically mean the victory of socialism. For, in the final analysis, the factor which is all-decisive is the subjective force – the organization, strength, intelligence and will to power of the revolutionary socialist parties, equipped with an unassailably correct program. It was this element in the situation which was lacking. The reasons for this are not essential for the present discussion. But it will readily be seen that, for the proletariat to realize its goal, the requirements are altogether different from those which are sufficient for the bourgeoisie.
One important distinction must be borne in mind even when recognizing the fact that the Socialist United States of Europe was a central thesis of the Marxist program: this end aim for Europe was itself contingent upon the national victories of the parties of socialism. Even in the good days of the Comintern, the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe was not the main active slogan of the revolutionary parties. It was a programmatic and ultimate European goal. Yet the necessity of the slogan and its urgency were just as valid and historically correct as they are now, even when wrongly posed by Johnson. Moreover, the Communist International had something with which to give substance and power to the slogan. But a fundamental distinction between the concept of the old days and the concept of Johnson is that the Comintern did not view the slogan as being achieved automatically, spontaneously and simultaneously. In the concept of Lenin, the Socialist United States of Europe would be inevitable only after the victory of the workers in a number of European countries. Again, in the minds of the Marxists, the subjective factor, in view of the decline and decay of capitalism, became in turn an objective factor of inestimable significance, nay, of decisive importance. This is a change from quantity to quality. For this reason, the question of the vanguard organization, its program and its transitional policies, its tactics and their application, was and remains today the fundamental problem of the epoch.
In The Way Out for Europe everything is stood on its head. Johnson shows by the development of his thesis that he has no comprehension of the main problem which the Marxist movement is confronted with in the present period of capitalist decline. The fact that the working class has suffered a series of uninterrupted and paralyzing defeats for twenty-five years, the fact that the working class movement as an organized political force in Europe does not exist, has completely passed him by, as we shall demonstrate by Johnson’s own words.
Johnson believes that the important problem in assessing the current European situation is not to determine the relationship of class forces and the concrete program for socialist emancipation, but to analyze the historical epoch of capitalism. Thus, for the most part, his contribution to a discussion of the national question is a wordy essay entitled: barbarism or socialism. He is wasting his time. That characterization was fully established by an older generation of Marxists; it has become the flesh and blood of the present generation. For this reason, his elaboration of an old theme, which is basic and integral to our thinking, is rhetorical generalizing which has completely missed the core of the problem as it exists concretely in Europe today.
 
The Views of the Workers Party Resolution
In the resolution of the Workers Party (The New International, February 1943), there is indicated the kind of epoch in which we live. It is upon this concept that the entire resolution is predicated. In proceeding on this basis, the resolution is in keeping with the tradition of Marxism.
What is new in this resolution? That the “unification” of Europe under German fascism, i.e., its conquest, which has reduced the European nations and the European masses to the state of oppressed and conquered peoples, has revived the national question on the Continent. This “unification” of the Continent by German arms has reintroduced the problem of national liberation as a burning question and need for the nationally oppressed European masses. The resolution points out that the “mass movements” in Europe today are largely movements which have been born around the single issue of national freedom from the yoke of a foreign oppressor; that this struggle for national liberation will rekindle the whole struggle between the classes for power, “for the old order or the new”; that there is a possibility of recreating the vanguard party through the instrumentality of these national movements; that these movements are plebian movements which, in the context of the European situation, are basically progressive; that national liberation, when and if realized, no matter if only for a few days, or a few months, can only pose the question of the workers’ power; that revolutionary socialists must support these movements, integrate themselves in them, in order not to lose contact with the masses and to prevent these movements from becoming the instruments of an unchallenged imperialism; that the national movements are transitional in nature, and the participation of socialists in them is part of a transitional program leading to the struggle for socialism; that before the slogan of a Socialist United States of Europe can become a reality and an action slogan, we will see the reestablishment of the national states, and, more important, this development will be necessary to reestablish the International of Socialism as a genuinely functioning organization composed of a number of revolutionary socialist parties in the leading European countries, finally, that the Socialist United States of Europe remains a central, programmatic concept and slogan for revolutionary socialists.
How does Johnson react to this concept and series of ideas? By accepting and rejecting the main idea contained in the resolution, by creating a barrier between the slogan for national liberation and the Socialist United States of Europe; and finally, by mixing up the two, thereby disorienting himself on what is the essential, immediate and active problem for the European working class now.
 
A Strange Stew
In the very first paragraph of The Way Out for Europe, the author declares that the slogan of national liberation is correct, but immediately qualifies and negates this by saying: “Yet never has the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe been so urgent as it is today.” However, “the slogan is a propaganda, not an action, slogan.” Again: “Yet the socialist slogan has its place.” From merely having its place, we are treated to a vigorous argumentative denunciation of somebody, because “any political orientation which seeks to place it further away and not nearer to the day-to-day political slogans rests on a deep, a profound, miscomprehension of the European crisis.”
There are many things mixed up in this very first paragraph. First, the impression is created that someone other than the bourgeoisie and their Stalinist lackeys is opposed to the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe. Secondly, this quoted tautology says that those who place the slogan further away and not nearer (whatever that means), “rest on a deep, a profound, miscomprehension of the European crisis.” What does that mean? Do those who advocate the main action slogan of national liberation rest on these serious miscomprehensions? Or does Johnson disagree with this slogan, to which he at least gives lip service?
If the slogan of the United States is a propaganda slogan, no matter how urgent (!), that means it cannot be used as an agitation slogan. It means that some other slogan must take its place as the day-to-day slogan around which the socialist movement, and through it the working class, is mobilized for action. While implicitly recognizing this, Johnson demonstrates that recognizing the problem, if only in part, does not mean that he understands it, i.e., understands the difference between a partial, agitational slogan, and a programmatic, final, ultimate demand or slogan. A programmatic, propaganda slogan cannot at the same time be a partial and agitational slogan (national liberation).
The truth of the matter is that Johnson’s support of the slogan of national liberation is unclear and not at all motivated, for his emphasis is always on the “concrete” character of the slogan of the Socialist United States.
This point is strengthened by Johnsons query: Is that slogan nearer or further away? Nearer or further away from what? one might well ask. The resolution of the Workers Party says that the “democratic interlude” cannot last very long; that the issue of workers’ power will arise directly from the struggle for national liberation; that the struggle for national liberation will immediately create a dual power; and, finally, the question of a socialist solution will of necessity emerge out of the struggle for national liberation. Further, the resolution records that under the given circumstances it is impossible to set a time, or a date, on the passage of one phase of the struggle into another. It is enough to be aware that the change will be certain and swift, in order to be properly oriented. For the resolution views the whole situation as a dynamic one, its outcome dependent upon the organized strength of the proletariat.
 
What Does “Urgent” Mean?
Therefore, to pose the question “nearer or further away” is a totally fruitless proposition, since it is based upon a “feeling” about the situation and not upon the actual relation of forces. Nevertheless, the whole system of ideas developed by Johnson rests upon the tenuous foundation: he believes it is nearer, not further away. The argument is without a measuring point; it has no relation to time and space. It is in the realm of fantasy, where belief is substituted for reality.
Who is opposed to the “propaganda” slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe? The resolution contains a section on it, properly relating it to the agitational slogan, and fixing its place in the socialist program. Why, then, does Johnson repeatedly declare: the slogan is more urgent today! More urgent than before the war? More urgent than twenty years ago? Wasn’t European capitalism ripe for socialism before the war? How much more urgent is it, then? How much nearer than is stated in the resolution? How much further away (from what, nobody can tell, not even Johnson) than is stated in the resolution?
No matter. Johnson writes (page 149, May issue, NI):
To think that in this continent, today, the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe has less urgency than it had because Europe is divided into one national state and several subordinate ones (even this is not accurately stated – A.G.), that is a proposition drawn entirely from superficial forms, and devoid of any content whatsoever ... To push into the background or to moderate the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe ... is completely false. Exactly the opposite must be done. (If that means anything, it means making it the chief slogan, the fighting, agitational slogan – A.G.) ... If you grasp the basic fact of degenerating capitalism, grasp it in its concreteness, the slogan can be seen here in this true relation, nearer, not further away.” “... living truth is that the slogan is now more concrete than at any time since 1933” (page 153). (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Yet Johnson repeatedly says that he is for the slogan of national liberation. But if what he says above is true, then he must state very bluntly that the slogan of national liberation is false; that we must make the propaganda slogan the active, agitational slogan of the day. Is this unfair? Why, then, does the author of The Way Out for Europe develop this argument? Better yet, we have it in his own words.
 
One Reference to Trotsky and One to Lenin
In one place in his article he makes reference to Trotsky for the purpose of proving that the national question in Europe does not exist. The case in point is an article written by Trotsky on the occasion of the Czechoslovakian crisis. (The New International, November 1938) Trotsky stated that the German seizure of the Czech Republic would not cause the working class movement to raise the slogan of national independence and organize for the defense of the bourgeois state. Johnson continues to quote Trotsky to the effect that there is no national question in Europe, ... unless a new war ends in a military victory of this or that imperialist camp, if the war fails to bring forth the workers’ power, if a new imperialist peace is concluded, etc. In other words, Trotsky posed a number of ifs in a changing world situation. The war has not yet ended, but the conditions created by the conflict, the unforeseen Hitlerian sweep over the Continent have given rebirth to the national question. Trotsky, five years ago, dismissed these possibilities. And Johnson, not in 1938, but in 1943, says that none of these probable conditions posed by Trotsky have occurred. For emphasis, he adds: “Most obviously not.”
Elsewhere he writes: “Behind any proposals to make a change (what kind of change, and who proposes it? – A.G.) in the application of the socialist slogan undoubtedly lurks some variant of the idea that Lenin put forward in 1915. Given certain conditions of continued reaction (!) and domination of Europe by a single power, a great national war is once more possible in Europe. No such situation as Lenin envisaged is visible in Europe today.” As clear as crystal; and therefore we shall return to this crucial selection from the Johnson contribution.
In his article, The Pamphlet by Junius, Lenin takes up the question of a probable return to national wars in Europe. What he says is also clear:
It is highly improbable that this imperialist war of 1914–16 will be transformed into a national war ... Nevertheless, it cannot be said that such a transformation is impossible: if the European proletariat were to remain impotent for another twenty years; if the present war were to end in victories similar to those achieved by Napoleon, in the subjugation of a number of virile national states; if imperialism outside of Europe (primarily American and Japanese) were to remain in power for another twenty years without a transition to socialism, say, as a result of a Japanese-American war, then a great national war in Europe would be possible. This means that Europe would be thrown back for several decades. This is improbable. But it is not impossible, for to picture world history as advancing smoothly and steadily without sometimes taking gigantic strides backward is undialectical, unscientific and theoretically wrong. (Emphasis in original – A.G.)
It has not happened exactly as Lenin said, yet several important conditions cited by him have indubitably occurred. But Johnson says: “No such situation as Lenin envisaged is visible in Europe today.” We have merely to ask: if this is so, why, then, do you say that you support the slogan of national liberation? Obviously, Johnson’s support is merely formal. It has no great significance to him. He does not understand his responsibilities to such a slogan. For this reason, the agitational slogan and the programmatic slogan are consistently counterposed throughout his article. Wherever he declares the correctness of the slogan of national liberation, it is qualified by the declaration that the slogan of the United States is “on the order of the day,” and all the emphasis is on the necessity of a “ceaseless pounding, day and night, of the slogan, the Socialist United States of Europe.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
“The Abstract and the Concrete”
Because Johnson is completely absorbed in a programmatic question, over which there is no fundamental dispute, and in which there is nothing new, he has failed to absorb the significance of the reintroduction of the concept of a struggle for national liberation in Europe. On the basis of a completely one-sided approach and his inability to understand the revolutionary consequences of this fighting slogan, Johnson’s only effort to deal concretely with the question has led him into a hopeless quandary. He has addressed a leaflet in the name of the French workers to the German conquerors, the occupying troops, admonishing them to leave the territory of France. The leaflet is a compound of bourgeois nationalism in the tradition of de Gaulle, with the programmatic slogan of the Socialist United States tacked on at the end. Everything is mixed up in this leaflet, which ends with the de Gaullist slogan: “Long Live Free France.” Despite the fact that only a page afterward he writes that the “powerful barriers between the workers of Europe so elaborately organized by bourgeois society have been destroyed by declining capitalism itself,” he says to the German soldiers: “All Europe hates you and is aching to destroy you.” Then, after pleading with the Germans to leave the country or become friends with the French, to cease being oppressors, he warns that “we shall fight against you and do our best to kill everyone of you.” “Long Live Free France.”
Is this leaflet the product of some hypothetical group of revolutionary workers? Then it is not a leaflet written in the spirit of socialism. If it is a leaflet written by “raw” workers, then the tacked-on slogans, “Long live the power of the workers! For the Socialist United States of Europe,” are a gratuitous contribution, not by the hypothetical authors of the leaflet, but by the author of the article, The Way Out for Europe. There is not the slightest harmony between the content of the leaflet and the slogans attached thereto.
The source of Johnson’s errors is to be found in his inability to understand the rôle of the subjective factor in world and European politics, the need of a revolutionary socialist party and the indispensability of such a party to a solution of any class problem. Instead, we are treated to generalities which in themselves are wrong because they have no relation to any vital concrete situation. He concerns himself with the end-aims, without resolving the many steps that must necessarily be traversed before the proletariat can be emancipated. In his presentation, everything is telescoped.
 
Three Revealing Errors by Johnson
For example, the resolution of the Workers Party argues that there are powerful national barriers between the masses of Europe which must be overcome. Johnson says: “Today these powerful barriers ... have been destroyed by declining capitalism.” Under the subhead in his article, The Abstract and the Concrete, the author commits three grievous errors, which explain a great deal about the whole contribution. In one place he writes in support of the argument that the Socialist United States is more urgent than ever that: “The most dangerous enemies of the militancy of the workers, the flourishing Social-Democratic and Stalinist bureaucracies, no longer exist.” Whatever world he is writing about, it is certainly not our world, not on this planet. He adds to this erroneous statement another: “Our hypothetical half a dozen revolutionaries (in Lyon) have an opportunity a hundred times greater than in 1939, so long as they do not counterpose theories and slogans to action.” Against whom is Johnson polemizing? Against the workers who might “counterpose theories and slogans to action”? Obviously, Johnson does not mean the workers! And what theories and slogans should not be counter-posed by the workers? Is it perhaps the slogan for national liberation? If it is not that slogan and the theory behind the slogan, what is the meaning of the sentence? The author of The Way Out for Europe unwittingly supplies the answer.
To say that the workers of Lyon have “an opportunity today a hundred times greater than in 1939,” means that the possibilities of socialism are today a hundred times greater than in 1939, and that the power, strength and organization of the workers are a hundred times greater than in 1939. For the word “opportunity” has no meaning if organization, program, strength, tactics and strategy are not part of the concept of opportunity. The workers have an opportunity in general, in an historical sense. But the opportunity can never be realized unless it is fortified by the mass organization of the working class, by the existence of the revolutionary vanguard, by the existence of a correct program, and the proper application of this program! This is the idea, above all, which needs to be hammered home incessantly.
As if in anticipation of this argument, he says, in his third error, on page 153: “But, it is urged, the proletariat in the occupied countries is sluggish, it is not organized; the revolutionary movement is non-existent, etc. But how much bigger was the revolutionary movement yesterday than it is today?” Here again, Johnson has missed the whole lesson of the meaning of the fascist victories in Europe and their effect upon the proletariat and its organized movements. It seems odd to have to answer such an argument ten years after Hitler seized power, after the defeats in Spain and France, the victory of Stalinism and the realities of the Second World War.
Prior to the war, a large pan of the European labor movement existed. Today it does not exist! Prior to the war, working class fraternal organizations were in existence. Today they have been wiped out. Prior to the war, there were large cooperative organizations. Where are they to be found on the Continent today? Prior to the war, there were revolutionary organizations in existence. Where are they today? Their size, their influence, their weight in the labor movement varied. It is true, they were not strong. But under the conditions of prewar Europe, they existed and functioned and had the possibilities of enjoying growth and influence. Today, they do not exist!
The problem, to repeat, is one of reconstituting the workers’ movement in Europe, and through it to reestablish its organized revolutionary socialist wing. This the resolution of the Workers Party seeks to do. Johnson has an entirely different conception.
 
Spontaneity versus the Organized Party
The theory which is implicit in his entire analysis of the historical epoch is not a new theory. It is as old as the socialist movement. I have already indicated what it is by saying that he visualizes the development in Europe on the basis of the “spontaneity of the masses.” Otherwise, what is the meaning of the long, involved and stratospheric discussion of the general historical stage of present-day capitalism? To show that the crisis of capitalism must drive the masses along the socialist road. While this is true, in general, it is only the beginning of the problem. But for Johnson it is the end of the problem. To him, the process is automatic: the workers must become revolutionized! The workers must take the socialist road!
Yet between the compulsions created by the crisis of capitalism, which makes life for the masses a hellish nightmare, and the organization of the masses for the struggle for power, is a long road. It is the road of organization, education, training and preparation. Without the existence of strong mass parties of socialism, the working class is hopelessly doomed. Even a correct program is not enough. A correct program can make it possible to reach the masses, to win them to socialism, to organize them for the struggle. But the vanguard party is the indispensable link between the objectively ripe conditions for socialism and the establishment of socialism in one or more countries. [2]
Johnson’s views are sectarian. In practice, they can never solve the one great problem of this stage, the reorganization and revitalization of the working class movement for socialism. That decisively fundamental idea does not become an integral element in his schema of the European situation.
Johnson has sought to create the impression that the position embodied in the resolution of the Workers Party means postponing the struggle for socialism for an impossibility: national liberation. He is for a Socialist United States of Europe now. What he does not comprehend is that the present situation in Europe has created a condition where the struggle for national liberation becomes interlinked with the struggle for socialism; that revolutionary socialists must be in this movement to lead on the high road of socialism.

Footnotes
1. The slogan was adopted after considerable dispute inside the Comintern. Lenin, for example, hesitated for a long time before he assented to the adoption of the slogan into the program because, under the conditions which existed at the time, he feared that the slogan might cause the revolutionary parties to overlook, modify or weaken their activities In their respective countries which were directed toward the organization of the masses with the specific aim of establishing the workers’ power in the intensely revolutionary European situation which then existed. Lenin also feared, as a result of Bukharin’s concept of the permanent revolution as a simultaneous European process in which the workers would seize power at once on a continental scale, that the entire international might become disoriented by the slogan. Bukharin’s views had, at that time, great popularity. Once adopted, however, it was put in its proper place as outlined in this article.
Why, then, was the slogan adopted in 1923? Because it was the belief and hope of the Comintern that a victory in Germany was virtually assured and therefore the whole question of the socialist reorganization of Europe would instantly become an aktuel question for the working class. It was the immediate possibility of state power In the West which made the slogan a reality in 1928. The defeat in Germany did not alter the programmatic place of the slogan, since it held true as long as decadent capitalism existed. But its utilization depended upon how close the proletariat, through Its parties, was to soviet state power.
2. In his Strategy of the World Revolution, Trotsky wrote: “Politics, considered as a historical factor, has always remained behind economics.” This observation has been accepted by all Marxists as an unassailable truth. It reveals why economics and politics do not develop simultaneously, why the economic collapse of capitalism does not bring about an automatic and Immediate corresponding political response on the part of the masses. For the latter an additional series of experiences are necessary, plus an unprecedented activity by the vanguard socialist party to close the gap between “economics and politics.”
 



At the time of this writing, the coal miners of America are still waging the struggle for their most elementary rights. In the beginning there was arrayed against them the coal operators and the reactionary and liberal press, which charged that the justified demands of the coal diggers were merely auxiliary to the ambitions of John L. Lewis. If the past two months have taught anything to the advocates and practitioners of yellow journalism, it is that the coal miners are not dupes, but the best organized and most conscious section of the American working class.
The analysis we made of this struggle in our last issue holds with even greater force as the passing weeks reveal the Administration plan to destroy the effectiveness of this great labor organization, not merely because of the requirements of the labor situation in general, but also to save its tottering structure of the War Labor Board and its entire labor policy. The element of revenge against Lewis also enters into the picture, but it is by no means the decisive aspect of this situation.
The past months witnessed the continuation of Lewis’ determined refusal to submit his case before the WLB, fully cognizant that the interests of the miners would be ill served within this house. Working through Ickes, who seemed to be pursuing an independent policy in his own determination to bring about a solution to the coal crisis, Lewis went back into negotiations with the coal operators. The time of the second truce had already run and, without a contract in effect, the miners again went out on strike. The strike was only a few days old when it appeared likely that a contract with the operators would be signed. But in the midst of these negotiations, which both Lewis and the operators had declared were well along the road to solution, the WLB ordered them to cease, on the ground that the miners were on strike in violation of the no-strike agreement!
The third truce runs to June so. Agreements were already reached in Illinois and central Pennsylvania. In other words, a group of operators, tired of their own stalling and fearing the consequences of an agreement which would mean paying off beginning with April 1, felt that, in their own profit interests, the signing of a contract with the miners was necessary. But the WLB is still to be reckoned with, since its heavy hand holds back any genuine progress in the settlement of the dispute.
 
Ickes Fines the Miners
And, finally, as if to goad the miners on, Ickes announced that he was fining the men one dollar a day each for the five days’ duration of the strike. This, said Ickes, was perfectly legal since it was in accord with the old contract between the operators and the union. The action by Ickes, however, is only calculated to intensify the present situation because the miners will not and cannot take this fine lying down. It is a flagrantly illegal action! The Administration hasn’t a legal leg to stand on.
The miners’ contract expired on April 30. Since then, the miners have worked under the wage and hour conditions of the contract only to permit negotiations for a new one to be completed. The conditions of the old contract had expired and the miners did not understand and certainly would not accept the idea that by continuing their work for the old rate of pay they were subject to all the provisions of this expired document. What, then, is the propriety of Ickes’ action? He declares that he has extended the provisions of the contract! By what right? Under what theory of law?
But this brings us to the whole question of the government’s policy in the coal situation. Roosevelt has taken over the mines. He has declared that the miners are employees of the government. It would seem logical that the government would then negotiate a new contract with the miners. But nothing of the kind. The government orders the miners to negotiate with the operators who are, under the presidential decree, no longer the owners of the mines. Are the operators acting for the Administration? Are they merely the servants of the government? Or are they negotiating a new contract as the legal and actual owners of the mines? Merely posing the questions elicits prompt answers. The coal operators are not representing the government; they are representing themselves. The miners are not on the government payroll; the government is not the actual employer.
 
Government Ownership or Employer Ownership?
Roosevelt’s action in taking over the mines was merely a strategical move to weaken the miners in their struggle for a decent contract to meet the rising cost of living. Furthermore, the President took this action to save his War Labor Board, a body without any statutory power, from ignominious collapse. But the action which he believed would quickly resolve the miners’ dispute has only intensified and confused the struggle.
In his widely syndicated column, Drew Pearson revealed the inner struggle among Roosevelt’s aides and committees. Pearson reports a meeting, called by the President, of the WLB, Ickes, Byrnes and Hopkins, at which the WLB threatened to resign unless Ickes pulled his oars out of the mine situation and permitted them to take complete charge so that they might bend the will of Lewis and the miners. It was and is the aim of the WLB to compel the UMW to pay proper obeisance to the board. The WLB feels highly insulted and its position imperilled by the refusal of the miners to permit their case to be adjudicated by them.
Ickes countered by charging the WLB with standing in the way of a settlement of the miners’ dispute because of their narrow interests. While it is reported that Roosevelt sided with Ickes, he finally gave in to the WLB because of its threat to resign. Its resignation would destroy the President’s whole set-up for solving the labor problems as expressed in the present wage struggles of the working class. Since he could not permit the resignation of the WLB, he decided to go along with it.
We do not know whether or not this report is accurate. Nor is it important to this discussion, for in the last analysis the Administration will endeavor to carry out its general policy, which is inimical to the best interests of labor. But this story does show what conflicting interests stand in the way of the coal miners.
 
A Threatening Danger
In the welter of confusion arising from the miners’ fight, one important and significant, as well as dangerous, element in the situation is the new policy developing in Washington. This policy takes the form of state interference in collective bargaining between employers and workers, which is presumably guaranteed by the Wagner Act. This is a grave danger for the union movement. Under the best circumstances of a “friendly” Administration it would cause the labor movement to rely upon “friends” in Washington, rather than upon the independent and organized strength of the working class. Under more normal conditions, it would mean that the employers have an additional weapon in their hands with which to combat labor. Such state interference is but added expression of the increasing totalitarianization of government. It is a sign of a mounting bureaucratization which can never be of interest to the working class. An illustration of the practical consequences of such a development is found in the miners’ struggle.
If the miners have held their own and even made gains, something which is good for the entire labor movement, it is precisely because they have maintained their ranks, their independence and their will to struggle in defense of their most elementary rights.
The miners’ struggle reflects a new mood of American labor. Thus, its significance cannot be overestimated. This increasing will to struggle, however, is accompanied by increasing reaction in general, and in the Administration and Congress in particular. Now is the time to take inventory of this situation. The next steps of labor, both political and economic, will largely determine the character of the coming period of class relations in America.
 



The bloody “race riots” in Detroit which have resulted in the death of 25 Negroes and three white persons and injury to scores of others is one of the worst outbreaks in the history of the country. But it is no isolated event: These pogroms against the Negroes have become frequent in recent times. Only last week the press contained harrowing reports of lynch mobs roaming the Negro districts of Beaumont, Texas, burning down homes and beating Negro men, women and children.
A couple of weeks ago, soldiers and sailors, incited by the Los Angeles press, participated in what yellow journalism termed “zoot suit” riots. A Negro was recently lynched in Florida. Five Negroes were killed in the Sun Shipyard at Chester, Pa., by company guards. A Negro soldier was just slain at El Paso, Texas. He is not the first colored serviceman to meet his death in this way. Is this a complete list of the violence, organized and unorganized, against the Negro people of this country? Not at all. There are hundreds, literally hundreds, of cases comparable to those cited. Prior to the outbreaks listed above, we had the attacks on Negro shipyard workers in Mobile, Ala. It is now clear that company officials inspired that attack. The pattern of the Mobile riots is found in other cases. The anti-Negro walkout at the Packard plant in Detroit was also organized at the top, entirely inspired by company officials and aided by the KKK. As a matter of fact, in most instances these attacks upon a racial minority are inspired from above and are organized!
 
Who Incites Race Hatred?
Since the war broke out, racial tension has increased. The propaganda against racial and national minorities has been both open and secret. But it has increased steadily and to a point where open attacks, reminiscent of Hitler’s pogroms against the Jews, were bound to take place. And all of this in a country at war, presumably in defense of the principles of the so-called “Four Freedoms” and the Atlantic Charter.
But, it will be said: the Administration is firmly against race discrimination, has made attempts to solve the racial problem and to improve the status of the Negro people. In some respects, this is true. However, it must be explained that whatever concessions the Negro people have won in the fight against Jim Crow and discrimination were largely the result of their own determined efforts.
Yes, the Negro people have made progress, but it is this very progress which has incited the race haters, Hitler’s spiritual comrades, the Southern politicians, the Klansmen of the North and South, and many in high places in industry, to open their vicious and vile propaganda against racial and national minorities.
How and why is this possible when presumably the Negro people have made progress in their struggle for equality? It is possible because all the necessary bases for inciting race tension and maintaining it are with us every day.
Jim Crow, Administration protests to the contrary, is a national policy. There is Jim Crow in the armed forces, in every branch of the service – in the Navy, the Army, the Air Force. Jim Crow is practiced in nursing and in the Red Cross. There is Jim Crow in government service. These evils alone would serve to keep alive race tension and race discrimination. But this is not all.
The Southern states are poll-tax states. The fight in Congress to abolish the poll-tax brought on a Southerners’ filibuster and speeches by such human rabble as Rankin, Bilbo and Starnes which were calculated to incite pogroms against the Negroes. Thus the legislative halls in Washington were used as a podium to express the basest and most reactionary thoughts of ignorant Southern Bourbons, still fighting the Civil War and, in essence, endorsing the entire racial program of Hitler and his degenerate hordes. The debate over the poll-tax and the speeches of these champions of darkness and hate have been one of the main springs for the current racial violence.
Last but not least in this list of race baiters, are the industrialists who thrive on racial antagonisms because it takes the attention of exploited labor away from their real problems of life and directs their dissatisfactions into racial and national channels. The current situation has brought much proof of this charge!
 
Jim Crow – A National Policy
But in addition to the fact that Jim Crow is a national policy, in addition to the fact that the congressional discussion over the poll-tax has incited racial feeling against the Negro, there is the ordinary day-to-day hatred of the Negro and all minorities nurtured by the apostles of darkness in the South and the North, in the Democratic as well as the Republican Parties.
Negroes are Jim Crowed every day of their lives, North and South, East and West, and in every sphere of life. They are Jim Crowed on trains, in restaurants, in public places. They are segregated in the slum districts of cities, in dilapidated houses where they pay the highest rents. They cannot go to certain theaters. They are overcharged for the food they eat and the clothes they wear. Moreover, they face the daily insults against their race. In a word, they are discriminated against socially, politically and economically.
What does Jim Crow arid discrimination mean? It means that you single out one racial group or a national minority, and vilify it. It means that you charge such people as being inferior, mentally, physically and spiritually, to another group; in this case, the Negro people as against the white. The moment that is done, racial conflicts are inevitable. They are especially unavoidable when incited from above, in the congressional halls, by the reactionary press, by high political figures, by industrial leaders who find it profitable to divide the workers in their employ.
 
What Race Hatred Does
Obviously, relations between Negro and white peoples in this country are not simply solved. Decades of Jim Crow and racial discrimination have led to a certain conditioning of the thinking of large sections of the population. Children are not born to it; they are raised and educated to race hatred by their elders. But race hatred is a prevailing doctrine in the South. From the South it spreads to all parts of the country. It infects other groups where national antagonisms exist. And thus we have a vicious circle of race and national antagonism which cannot serve the real interests of the overwhelming mass of the American people, the workers and the poor farmers.
We revolutionary socialists are opposed to Jim Crow and racial and national discrimination not only because it is inhuman and reactionary. We are opposed to it because such doctrines hurt labor and hurt the poor farmer. The well-being of the working class and the poor farmers depends upon their unity, and not division. Division plays into the hand’s of labor’s exploiters. It plays into the hands of reactionary politicians, big business and the rich farmers. They are the ones who profit from the attacks now made upon the Negroes.
But that isn’t all. Today these attacks are made against the Negroes. Tomorrow they may be made on the Jews. The next day on the foreign born, and a third day upon the Catholics. Once this disease becomes rampant, it has no limits!
The efforts of the liberal press to lay the blame for the anti-Negro riots solely upon the Axis is dangerously false. We have no doubt that those who echo Hitler’s racial doctrines in this country are active in these events. But remember, long before Hitler was even known this race situation existed in this country. It was present in the last war and after the war. It was present before Hitler came to power. The existence of Hitlerism only served to make our native racial haters more outspoken and more vicious in their propaganda. But if the blame for these recent outbreaks is placed exclusively upon fascism in Europe we will overlook the fact that these events have a native base which must be thoroughly uprooted.
 
How to Defeat Race Hatred
How can this deplorably anti-working class, that is, anti-social, conduct be eliminated?
By ending Jim Crow as a national policy! By abolishing Jim Crow in the armed services! By abolishing the poll-tax and all forms of race discrimination in the South! By abolishing all forms of race discrimination in the North, East and West! By abolishing all forms of Jim Crow and race discrimination in industry! By creating genuine racial equality, national equality, social, political and economic equality for all peoples!
One step in this direction is to make it a criminal offense to practice race discrimination – in industry, in political life, in the armed services, in transportation. Discrimination on account of race, creed or color must be destroyed in every community in every phase of life.
Do this and progress on the racial and national front will be made immediately.
Overcoming and fighting Jim Crow and all forms of race discrimination is a chief task of white workers. The Negro people know what race hatred means and everyone knows how determined they are in fighting it. The white workers, organized and unorganized, must also recognize that race and national hatred is a weapon that can be turned against their best interests as workers. They must fight it with all their vigor and prevent any groups or individuals from introducing such practices in their ranks.
But above all it is necessary to unite the labor movement – the working class, the poor farmers, and all people who toil – in the fight against the scourge of race antagonism. It is they who in the end will suffer most from this condition. It is they who become the prey of vested interests which profit from divisions of color, race or creed. Such a movement of all who toil is the best safeguard against race and national hatred.
 



The formal decision of the Presidium of the Communist International to dissolve that organization which, from the point of view of revolutionary internationalism, has long been dead, brings to mind a speech by Stalin at the Sverdloff University on June 9, 1925, in which he warned of the dangers of nationalist degeneration. Stalin prepared a reply to a number of written questions drawn up by the students of the university. Coming in the midst of the struggle with the Russian Left Opposition, these questions naturally concerned matters of domestic and international policy. For the first time, the theory of “socialism in one country” was formally introduced into the Russian party and the International.
The answers made by Stalin are interesting for several reasons. They disclose his evolution as a confused theoretician and thinker inside a degenerating revolutionary party, to the leader of a new type of state and class power. They reveal that this degeneration did not take place at once, but continued for a number of years in which the characteristic line is a zigzag from left adventurism to opportunism. The end result has been a complete counter-revolutionary degeneration. The characteristics of this counter-revolutionary development are unusual, for the background to this new political phenomenon arising out of the working class movement is the Revolution of 1917. They show that Stalin himself was quite unaware of the final results of his empirical policies, his rejection of theory and principle, and his rôle as the personification of the powerful Russian bureaucracy.
The students at Sverdloff put the following question to the general secretary: If the stabilization of capitalism should last for a long time, by what degenerations will our party be threatened? The question was obviously a natural response to the charges levelled against the epigone leadership by the Left Opposition in their struggle against the new nationalist theory introduced into the movement. Stalin’s reply is extremely interesting both in the way it aptly discloses the bases for nationalist degeneration and the inauguration of a new policy – the one which has been in effect for some years, epitomized by the recent decision to dissolve the Comintern. He said:
Does any such danger of degeneration exist?
The danger is, or, rather, the dangers are, real enough, and they exist quite independently of the stabilization of capitalism. The stabilization of capitalism makes them more tangible, that’s all. In my view there are three main dangers to reckon with:

a) The danger of losing sight of the socialist goal which is the aim of all the work of reconstruction in our country; this danger, therefore, is an intensification of the tendency to relinquish the conquests of the revolution.
b) The danger of losing sight of the international revolutionary goal – the danger of a short-sighted nationalism.
c) The danger that the party may lose its position as leader and, therewith, the possibility of the party becoming no more than a tailpiece to the state apparatus.

It would be of immense interest and importance to discuss all three dangers outlined by Stalin. But for the present discussion it is important only to be concerned with the second danger in this trinity. It must be remembered that in this discussion of nationalist degeneration, he was at the same time the advocate of a national socialist state. Yet, with seeming acuteness, he stated in reference to the second danger:
The distinguishing marks of this danger are a lack of trust in the international proletarian revolution; a lack of faith in its victory; the adoption of a skeptical attitude toward the liberationist movements in the colonial and vassal lands; the failure to understand that, in default of the support of the world-wide revolutionary movement, our country cannot make an effective stand against world imperialism ... to understand that the victory of socialism in one land alone cannot be an end in itself, but is merely a means which can be utilized for the development and growth of the revolutionary movement in other lands.
Should we follow this road, we should land ourselves in a quagmire of nationalism, degeneration and the complete surrender of the international policy of the proletariat. Those who are attacked by this sickness look upon our country not as part of a whole which goes by the name of “the international revolutionary movement,” but as the alpha and omega of this movement. Such folk imagine that the interest of all other countries should be sacrificed to the interests of our country.
In view of the developments in world politics in the last decades these remarks by Stalin sound like a grim joke. But let us get on. The “genial” general secretary continues:
Now it is abundantly clear that the first proletarian state can retain its position of standard bearer of the international revolutionary movement only on condition that it retains a consistently internationalist outlook and promulgates the foreign policy of the October Revolution. It is equally obvious that the adoption of the line of least resistance and of a nationalistic viewpoint in the domain of foreign affairs will lead to the isolation and decay of the country where the proletarian revolution gained its first victory.
Thus we see that the lack of an international revolutionary outlook threatens us with nationalism and with dissolution.
Thus Stalin in 1925; an utterly different man, a man still living close to the years of the victorious revolution. Lenin had died only a short time before. The internationalist character of the revolution was still fresh in the minds of millions. Stalin has already prepared the doom of the Soviet state, but he still speaks the language of a partial internationalist; he still remembers some of the most obvious of Lenin’s lessons. Eighteen years later, the final danger of which he spoke were something which had occurred. Hardly a single vestige remains of the heroic revolutionary period of 1917–24.
* * *
Of course, there are much better sources for understanding the inner significance of internationalism and the specific place of the Russian Revolution and the Communist International in history. We were prompted to go to Stalin, in order to show that even this source was fully aware, at least verbally, of the danger of national degeneration. The dire forecasts contained in his address have become the reality; its significance lies in the fact that he who warned of this degeneration has himself become the apostle of the new nationalism which has brought such ruin to the former Soviet Union and such distress to the once glorious Comintern and the international working class.
The theoretical premises contained in the statement of the erstwhile Presidium are themselves of no great importance. What else could these little people say? They were given their orders; they carried them out. In order to dress up the dissolution in its proper “Marxistical” phraseology, we were given a miserable attempt at historical references to antecedent experiences of the First and Second Internationals. So we are told that the First and Second Internationals were born, developed and died. Conditions brought about the formation of these bodies; conditions compelled their dissolution. Thus the present misleaders of Stalin’s international were merely following historical precedent. We shall return to this soon enough. First, however, let us consider the question of the action. What does it actually mean? Why did Stalin do it now?
 
The Degeneration of the Comintern
As an international of revolutionary socialism, the Comintern has been dead a long time. The International ceased to be that the moment that the doctrine of socialism in one country became its main theoretical premise. The degeneration, however, did not follow a single downward curve; it was a zig-zag development, itself expressive of the contradictions inherent in an international dominated by a single party which had state power and which traveled the road of nationalism and opportunism. Its primary function has been as an agency of the Russian Foreign Office, as an adjunct of Stalin’s GPU. It is therefore correct to say that in reality nothing has been changed by the decision: the sections of the CI will continue to function as before.
Two obstacles lay in the path of the Stalinist betrayers: The Russian Left Opposition and the Bucharinist Right Opposition. Employing the reserves of the latter against the Left Opposition, Stalin took the offensive in the new civil war fought on Russian soil to determine whether the rising new class power would prevail over the internationalists. Having defeated the Left Opposition, Stalin next turned against the Right. In each of these struggles, the new bureaucratic power swayed left and right, depending upon the economic and political needs of the moment.
Within the period of these struggles, the Comintern had experienced a series of catastrophic defeats. Beginning with Germany in 1923, the “organizers of defeat” led the international from disaster to disaster: England, China, and the Third Period. Each defeat served to push further into the background the revolutionary elements and the revolutionary élan of the movement; conversely, it strengthened the revisionist and counter-revolutionary direction.
Stalin, it has been said, always regarded the Communist International as an expensive luxury. Quite obviously this had no bearing on the international under his domination. The international which Stalin regarded with disfavor was the Comintern under Lenin and Trotsky. His Comintern was an indispensable weapon for the defense of his new state. Stalin’s Russia, as a non-capitalist state, could not meet the competition of world imperialism with weapons which are peculiarly adaptable to the needs of the bourgeois powers. Military power to offset the danger of intervention was insufficient, because Russia could not hope to cope with a united capitalist attack. Foreign policy in Russia was dictated by the necessity to maintain peace, to balance off the powers, one against the other, or to make an alliance with the strongest nation or group of imperialists. At the same time, in case none of these alternatives succeeded, Stalin would be able to use his trump card, the sections of the Comintern which were completely subservient to him, and prepared to carry out any and all policies emanating from the Kremlin. In the meantime, the Comintern parties were usefully employed in propagating the aims of the Foreign Office.
Hitler’s victory in Germany, guaranteed by the policies forced on the German Communist Party, impelled the adoption of the policy of collective security. Collective security thenceforth became the main political agitational activity of the international. Collective security, the Stalinists insisted, would secure peace. Reckoning on the failure of this policy, however, Russian diplomacy was busily engaged in seeking to obtain advantageous political and military alliances. The signing of pacts with the various powers was integral to the main foreign policy. The mounting danger of war found Russia traveling from a military alliance with France and Czechoslovakia to the Hitler-Stalin pact. Between these two poles of diplomatic achievement, Russia was near a military alliance with the Allies. Lack of faith in the prospect of the Allies in the war led to the pact with Hitler, which in turn gave the signal for the war to begin. In this way, Stalin had hoped to ward off involvement in the conflict while the imperialist powers wore themselves out in a fruitless endeavor to destroy each other. But Stalin miscalculated. When the German general staff concluded that it was impossible to storm and take the British Isles, the attack on Russia was a certainty.
During the hey-day of the alliance with fascism, Stalin embarked on his expansionist program. In rapid succession we had the division of Poland, the seizure of the Baltic countries and the war with Finland. When the Wehrmacht crossed the Russian borders, that phase of Russian diplomacy ended (in defeat) and a new one commenced. This time Stalin turned to a complete military and political alliance with Allied imperialism.
 
Effects of the Decision
The “dissolution” of the Comintern becomes more understandable with the foregoing background. As long as Stalin held hands with the brown-shirted murderers, the Comintern served a useful function. It must be remembered that no parties existed in the Axis countries – at best there were only the phalanxes of the GPU. Stalinist parties, however, were to be found in almost every country making up the United Nations. Their strength and influence was not great, but they had tremendous nuisance value and did, in fact, cause considerable embarrassment to the Allied war effort before Russia became a full-fledged member of the alliance. Thus, while the Stalintern had a useful job to perform in the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact, the situation was considerably altered by the logic of the war.
For Stalin, the formal dissolution of the Comintern was a cheap price to pay to the Allies for the considerable aid given him to prosecute the war on its main front. Self-interest controls the conduct of all the members of the Allied camp. Keeping Russia in the war is absolutely indispensable to the United States and Great Britain. Obtaining material aid and the opening of other fronts is the only way to take the pressure off Stalin’s army. Thus the national interests of these powers dictates the policy of mutual aid.
The decision on the Comintern was therefore no loss to Stalin. On the contrary, it was of considerable gain. Since there were no organizations in the Axis countries, the decision could in no way affect events in this quarter. But he likewise has nothing to fear from the formal action as it affects matters in the Allied countries. First of all, the parties, after a decade and more of conditioning, will remain the devoted and obedient servants of the Kremlin, no matter what formal decision is taken in Moscow. Secondly, the policies of the parties are in complete accord with the needs of Stalin and they are in complete conformity with the essential interests of the bourgeois states. In a real sense, then, nothing has been changed by the decision – the commentators from all camps notwithstanding.
The Stalinist parties have received another slight impetus in their current nationalist degeneration, in pursuit of their chauvinist and strike-breaking rôles. They remain the worst enemies of the world proletariat.
* * *
The most crucial question involved in the decision of the Presidium is proletarian internationalism. When we say that nothing has been fundamentally changed by the Kremlin action, we merely mean that its formal action will not alter the fact that Stalin will continue to control his parties, which remain consistently subservient to his interests. The need for the recreation of the Socialist International, however, has been with us for a long time. It would be foolish to say that the existence of Stalinism has not hurt the idea of internationalism; it would be just as foolish to believe that the decision of the Presidium is not another blow against this same tenet of Marxism
For example, in its decision, the epigone Presidium presented the following “theoretical” argumentation for the dissolution:
But long before the war it had already become increasingly clear that to the extent that the internal as well as the international situation of the individual countries became more complicated, the solution of the problems of the labor movement of each individual country through the medium of some international center would meet insuperable obstacles.
The deep difference in the historical roads of development of each country of the world; the diverse character and even the contradiction in their social orders; the difference in level and rate of their social and political development, and finally the difference in the degree of consciousness and organization of the workers, conditioned also the various problems which face the working class of each individual country.
The entire course of events for the past quarter of a century, as well as the accumulated experiences of the Communist International, have convincingly proved that the organizational form for uniting the workers as chosen by the First Congress of the Communist International, and which corresponded to the needs of the initial period of the rebirth of the labor movement, more and more outlived itself in proportion to the growth of this movement and to the increasing complexity of problems in each country; and that this form even became a hindrance to the further strengthening of the national workers’ parties.
Using the “language” of Marxism, the bureaucrats dress up their lies with the cloak of false objectivity and logic. But it is a lie nevertheless. It is only necessary to recall the history of the formation of the Third International to expose this new falsification. At its founding Congress, the Communist International clearly stipulated the reasons for its formation. It was based on world conditions not unlike the present. The “internal as well as the international situation of the individual countries” was “complicated,” and “the solution of the problems of the labor movement of each individual country through the medium of some international center ... (met) insuperable obstacles.”
At the same time there also existed a “deep difference in the historical road of development of each country of the world.” Their characters were “diverse” and even their social orders were “contradictory.” The Comintern of Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Rakovsky and Bucharin understood that capitalism developed “unevenly,” that the degree of class consciousness and class organization of the workers in all countries were different and that their problems were different.
In his explanation of the formation of the Communist International, Lenin wrote:
The Third International was in reality created in 1918, after the protracted struggle with opportunism, and “social chauvinism,” especially during the war, had resulted in the formation of a Communist Party in various countries. The formal recognition of the international dates from the first congress of its members held in Moscow in March 1919. The most prominent feature of the Third International, namely, its mission to carry out the principles of Marxism and to realize the ideals of socialism and the labor movement, manifested itself immediately in that this “third international association of working men” has to a certain extent become identical with the League of Socialist “Soviet” Republics.
As if in anticipation of the present decision of the Presidium of the Comintern, Lenin wrote:
Any Marxist, nay, anyone conversant with modern science, if asked whether he believed in the probability of a uniform, harmonious and perfectly-proportioned transition o£ various capitalist countries to the dictatorship of the proletariat, would undoubtedly answer that question in the negative. In the capitalist world there had never been any room for uniformity, harmony and perfect proportions. Every country has brought into prominence now one, then another, feature or features of capitalism, and of the labor movement. The rate of development has been varied.
In the early years of the Communist International, this was the prevailing theory. Difficulties of communication, objective difficulties of functioning, uneven development of capitalist countries, different tactics for different parties, varying rates in the growth and activities of the national parties, had nothing whatever to do with the necessity for the existence of the international organization of the revolutionary socialists of the world. It only stressed the nature of the problems which had to be overcome, and the general difficulty of ushering in the new society of genuine freedom and security for the whole of mankind.
These concepts hold true to this very day and will remain true until the final triumph of socialism.
* * *
In his criticism of the draft program of the Communist International adopted at the Sixth Congress in 1928, Trotsky spoke of the historical place of the three internationals. He wrote:
The basic principles of revolutionary strategy were naturally formulated since the time when Marxism first put before the revolutionary parties of the proletariat the task of the conquest of power on the basis of the class struggle. The First International, however, succeeded in formulating these principles, properly speaking, only theoretically, and could test them only partially in the experience of various countries. The epoch of the Second International led to methods and views according to which, in the notorious expression of Bernstein, “the movement is everything, the ultimate goal nothing.” In other words, the strategical task disappeared, becoming dissolved in the day-to-day “movement” with its partial tactics devoted to the problems of the day. Only the Third International reestablished the rights of the revolutionary strategy of communism and completely subordinated the tactical methods to it. Thanks to the invaluable experience of the first two internationals, upon which shoulders the third rests, thanks to the revolutionary character of the present epoch and the colossal historic experience of the October Revolution, the strategy of the Third International immediately attained a full-blooded militancy and the widest historical scope.
In this analysis, Trotsky has only reechoed the thoughts contained in the Manifesto of the First Congress of the Communist International. That is, he maintained a strict adherence to the thoughts of the founders of the new world organization of which he was one of the initiating spirits. He closely paraphrased the analysis made by Lenin when the latter wrote:
The First International laid the basis for the international struggle of the proletariat for socialism.
The Second International marked a period of preparation, a period En which the soil was tilled with a view to the widest possible propagation of the movement in many of the countries ...
The importance of the Third Communist International in the world’s history is that it was the first to put into life the greatest of all Marx’s principles, the principle of summarizing the process of the development of the socialist and labor movement, and expressed in the words, the dictatorship of the proletariat [the democratic workers’ state – Editor].
There is an interesting parallel of historical events in the case of the Comintern. The First International, which had as its task the propagation of the theoretical principles of Marxian socialism, floundered in the crisis created by the Franco-Prussian War and the defeat of the Paris Commune. The International Workingmen’s Association, the arena in which the theoretical struggles within the labor movement were fought out, reached its climax when the objective events had made clear that the international had outlived any further usefulness to the workers. And Marx and Engels did not hesitate to adopt a decision that led to its inevitable dissolution. While they had overestimated the rate of development of the revolutionary mass movement, they were certain that the future of capitalism must give rise to conditions demanding the recreation of an international proletarian organization.
The capitalist crisis which served as a background to the dissolution of the First International was a crisis of growth. It preceded the imperialist rise in the latter decades of the nineteenth century. The growth of mass production was accompanied by the rapid development of the national labor and socialist organizations throughout Europe and thus the reestablishment of the international was guaranteed. This body enjoyed an enormous growth and influence, but developing in the “Victorian” era of capitalist growth, it bent before the pressures of opportunism and adaptation. Moreover, it never really embraced the internationalist doctrine of Marxism. When the crisis of the imperialist war of 1914 came, the Second International broke like a reed in the wind. The national parties of this great body rallied to the support of their respective ruling classes. The collapse of internationalism led to its death – not its formal organizational, or even political, death – as the international of the working class. It remained in existence, and does to this day, but its functions are not unlike those of a decade or two ago: a left prop of dying capitalism. In the post-war period, when the struggle of the classes gave abundant evidence that capitalism might be finally destroyed, when the question of state power was posed, social democracy entered into the service of imperialism for the purpose of maintaining its existence and rule.
The war was the life and death problem for the Second International. In this case, a formal adherence to the idea of internationalism was insufficient to ward off the influence of national chauvinism. The international succumbed to the virus of nationalism. Capitalist growth militated against integration of the national parties into a genuine world organization in which the interests of the international working class would be regarded paramount to the interests of any national party. This historical parallel is continued in the case of the Communist International.
The Communist International was born out of the conditions created by the First World War, the victory of the October Revolution and the chaos of the post-war period. In its unequivocal acceptance of the theory, practice and spirit of Marxism, it reacted violently to the nationalist degeneration of the Second International. Internationalism was the great spirit which emanated from the Comintern. It was fortified by Lenin’s incessant hammering that under no circumstances was it permissible for the international to deviate from this unchangeable principle. That is why he always emphasized the international character of the Russian Revolution, continually stressing the point that if the international working class did not come to its aid, the new Soviet state would perish, either by the assault of imperialism, or by nationalist degeneration.
Lenin’s fear, alas, did come true. The Soviet state did perish, not as a result of the direct assault of imperialism, but by nationalist degeneration which began with the adoption of the theory of socialism in a single country. If this process of degeneration and decay has taken a long time, it is to be explained by the peculiar state of international relations and the relationship of class forces in Russia and the capitalist world. The Communist International was transformed from its position as the leader of the world working class to an appendage of Stalin’s regime a long time ago. But it has taken another war to disclose this fact to millions.
The present great task of the revolutionary socialists the world over is not unlike that of the internationalists in the war of 1914–18. It is to revive the spirit of socialist internationalism, to recreate the new, the Fourth International of socialism. The objective conditions for the realization of this goal are overripe. It is only necessary for the true Marxists to proceed with vigor against all the great obstacles which stand in their way. This task is the order of the day!
 



The viciously anti-labor Smith-Connally bill, passed by the Senate and the House, is now resting on the President’s desk, awaiting his signature to make it a law of the land – or his veto, which would send it back to the reactionary legislative halls of Washington. It is only now that a storm is brewing in labor and liberal circles over the passage of this “fascist bill” as William Green, president of the AFL, described it.
While the bill was passing through Congress, too many of these labor leaders and liberals were busy denouncing John L. Lewis and the coal miners for their gallant struggle in the interests of all American labor against the oppressive conduct of the WLB and the coal operators. Had they understood the real meaning of the Smith-Connally bill earlier, the fight against it would have started some time ago Not that the liberals could have accomplished much; but certainly the organized labor movement was in a position to wage war against the designs of the congressional lackeys of big business and their allies, the Southern Bourbons.
Starting late, the labor leaders have a difficult struggle ahead of them. But their difficulty is caused not merely because their fight has begun so late, but also because their weapons cannot help a great deal. The labor leaders do not rely upon the independent and organized strength of labor. They are relying upon “pressure” on the President; they are living in hopes that the political interests of Roosevelt and his administration will direct him to veto the bill.
Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins has joined Green and Murray in a denunciation of the bill and in requesting a presidential veto. Dean Alfange, erstwhile gubernatorial candidate of the American Labor Party, also denounced the bill as anti-democratic. In that, he merely echoed the position taken by the ALP. But a real ferment is to be found in the ranks of labor where the workers are fully aware of the repressive nature of the bill.
The so-called liberal press, in characteristic fashion, blows hot and cold on the issue. While PM has attacked the bill from the start, the New York Post is opposed to it merely because it would bar political contributions by labor unions. This is particularly anti-democratic because, while the Post doesn’t give a fig about the other fascistic measures of the bill, it is concerned with money contributions since it is already hawking the fourth term for Roosevelt and would like to see the labor unions help to pay for his campaign!
Any way you look at if, the Smith-Connally bill is the most vicious piece of anti-labor legislation to pass the House and Senate in many years. Arrayed behind the bill is a powerful, reactionary bloc of industrialists, politicians, the Southern Bourbons who sponsored the bill, and a host of professional labor-baiters and flunkeys of big business.
Tear away the veil of pretenses and the weasel words, and the object of the bill is clear: to destroy the powerful union movement and to render labor impotent to fight in defense of its basis interests!
The yellow boss press knows its stuff. It has been fighting for this bill from the day it was introduced and it knows how to emphasize the importance of this bill to big business. Its criticisms of the President and the Administration are not on account of their “pro-labor” policy, but on the grounds that they have not been fighting the union movement and the workers with “proper weapons.”
The Smith-Connally bill is a “proper weapon” because it can tie the labor movement hand and foot by “legal” means, by legislative action. Any attempts made by labor to break the restrictions imposed by the provisions of the bill can be met by fines and imprisonment!
All the real threats and penalties of the bill are clearly directed against the working class. That the capitalist press understands this is obvious from the fact that all the material published by it has stressed the penalties that may be employed to destroy the militancy of the labor movement and its allies!
It has been charged that the bill is a means of taking revenge upon the labor movement because of the miners’ strike and the militant conduct of John L. Lewis. This is, of course, pure rubbish. The reactionary congressional bloc and their big business associates have been trying to pass such a bill for years. They have succeeded now because this is the most reactionary Congress in history. From the very opening of this Congress, it has been flooded with similar anti-labor bills, some more drastic, some less so.
The point to be brought home, however, is that there weren’t enough struggles, like the one Lewis and the miners waged, to defeat such a bill. It is only because of the conduct of the officialdom of the AFL and CIO that the bill passed so easily. Had they been more determined, had they threatened to invoke the power of the united strength of the labor movement against the bill – they MIGHT have prevented its passage.
But it is only now, when the bill is on the President’s desk, that the leaders of the union movement have become alarmed. How do they fight the bill? By relying upon the personal intervention of the President, hoping that his political ambitions will redound to their benefit, they are really weakening the fight of the labor movement.
We have mentioned the fact that pressure from all sides is being exerted on the President. Roosevelt is in a dilemma for only one reason: a presidential election is due in 1944 and he plans to run for a fourth term. His problem is to satisfy all forces in order to insure his nomination and then his election. There are, then, two reasons for his hesitation. He is afraid that if he signs the bill he will lose the labor vote. And he is afraid that by making the bill a law, labor’s dissatisfaction will be so great as to interfere with war production. In either case, it would mean his defeat in 1944.
This brings us to the political heart of the present situation, for the Smith-Connally bill forces the question of labor political action to the forefront. Up to now, the labor chiefs have tied the union organizations to one or another of the boss political parties. The results have always hurt the workers because they have been compelled to rely upon the political flunkeys of the capitalist parties. By their own experiences, thousands upon thousands of rank and file unionists know that in every crisis, great or small, the professional politicians have acted against the best interests of labor.
The great political need of the workers today is an Independent Labor Party based upon the trade union movement. Only such a party, free from any entanglements with the Republican or Democratic Parties, can offer any political hope for labor. All that the workers have gained from the official policy of supporting one of the boss parties or another, either because one was a “friend of labor,” or under the theory of “rewarding your friends and punishing your enemies,” is a stab in the back.
The action of the conference of Labor’s Non-Partisan League in Detroit (a report of which is published elsewhere in these columns) is symptomatic of the feelings of American labor. They are getting fed up with the political run-around from the Democratic Party with its share of reactionaries, labor-baiters and Southern Bourbons who dictate the actions of the party in Congress. They know that there is nothing to expect from the Republican Party of big business.
Great possibilities are offered to the labor movement in the creation of such a party. It would give the workers a powerful weapon on the political field to supplement their weapon of trade unionism. Unified politically as well as economically, American labor can advance the position and power of this country’s exploited millions.

DEFEAT THE ANTI-LABOR, ANTI-STRIKE SMITH-CONNALLY BILL!
UNITE THE FORCES OF LABOR ON THE POLITICAL FIELD!
FORWARD TO AN INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY!

 



June 11 will mark the sixth month since Carlo Tresca, noted figure in the labor movement for many years and a fighting anti-fascist, was murdered by hired assassins. The murder was well planned and simply executed.
On the night of January 11 [1], Tresca and a companion waited in the office of his newspaper, Il Martello, for a meeting which did not materialize. He left the office at Fifth Avenue and 15th Street in New York City, crossed the street and then was assailed by a gunman, who fired two shots into him and rushed away in an automobile which was there for the purpose of a get-away.
The automobile was found abandoned a short distance from the scene of the murder. Shortly afterward the New York City police arrested one Carmine Galarite, an ex-convict out on parole. Galante’s parole officers observed him entering the car which was later found near the scene of the murder. Cross-examination of this ex-convict disclosed that his alibis were all shaken, but no confession was obtained. It was obvious to the police and to all familiar with such incidents that this ex-convict was a hireling for some powerful forces.
From the time of the arrest of Galante until now, no progress has been made in the case. The police and the district attorney’s office pursue this case as they would any ordinary murder case, overlooking the fact that this was a political murder. As a political assassination, the forces behind the murder are unquestionably well organized and the murder planned in such a manner as to circumvent police methods. Some weeks ago, Walter Winchell, the nation’s snooper, wrote that the powerful individuals involved in the Tresca murder made it certain that the ease would never be solved! Does Winchell know anything about it? Does he have any information which could lead to an indictment of the real culprits?
Shortly after the Winchell item, the New York Mirror, in a lead story, declared that the Tresca case would be broken very shortly, and the murderers and their employers brought to justice. But nothing has happened.
Rumors point sharply in the direction of Generoso Pope, publisher and editor of the Italian daily, Il Progresso Americano. Pope was for many years America’s leading spokesman for Mussolini and the Italian fascist regime. He was one of the outstanding opponents of the American anti-fascist Italians. It is only since America’s entry into the war that Pope suddenly became an advocate of democracy and an enemy of fascism. It is only in recent months that he took full-page advertisements in the metropolitan papers decrying anti-Semitism, racialism, and fascism.
But in a pamphlet, The Tresca Case, by Ezio Taddei, we are given a great deal of information about Pope and his aides. There is Frank Garofalo, noted gangster and gunman, and an associate of Pope. He is a prime figure in the case. At an Italian-American War Bond banquet, Tresca refused to participate when he found that Pope was present with Garofalo and more of his friends.
Tresca openly denounced Garofalo at the banquet as a gangster and walked out. He was followed by Garofalo, who threatened to get Tresca for denouncing him in public. Garofalo was accompanied by an assistant attorney general, Dolores Faconti. When Tresca threatened to publish the whole history of Garofalo and Pope, this woman went to see him and begged him not to do it, warning Tresca that Garofalo would stop at nothing to prevent publication of the story. She even promised Tresca that she would break off all relations with Garofalo
According to Taddei, Tresca said; “This is serious. I’ve got to notify the FBI.” He then called Inspector Genco of the FBI and informed him of the incident. In two statements, Tresca is reported to have written: “If I’m murdered, look for Generoso Pope.”
As the case dragged on, Mrs. Tresca sought the intervention of the FBI, which was refused her. Her audience with Biddle resulted in nothing. The local police are getting nowhere. And the district attorney’s office proceeds in routine fashion.
Will the Tresca murder – a political assassination – go unsolved? On the face of things, this seems impossible. But already six months have gone by and no progress is recorded. Nor is there any promise that the next six months will witness a change in the progress of the case.

Footnote by ETOL
1. In the printed version this date is erroneously given as June 11.
 



The newspaper PM calls it “The Most Shameful Story of the War.” It would” have been more correct to have added the words: “So Far.” There were others before the Truman Committee bared the facts of the fraud which the Curtiss-Wright Corp. perpetrated. There will be many more before this war is over.
We are sure that “shameful” is not the appropriate word to use in this case. It would have been better to call it one of the biggest steals of the war or better yet, “The Most Murderous Story of the War, So Far.”
What are the facts in this case? The Wright Aeronautical Corp. plant at Lockland, Ohio, turned out “defective plane engines with the cooperation of the Army Air Force inspectors”!
The Truman Committee found that the company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Curtiss-Wright Corp., has been selling the government “defective and substandard plane engines by falsifying tests, forgiving inspection reports, and by eight other practices designed to by-pass Army specifications.”
The committee learned that Army inspectors cooperated with the company for fear of losing their jobs; that they were threatened with disciplinary action if they did not accept engines which were leaking gasoline.
In secret sessions, the committee took testimony, but it remarked that during its investigation, “most of the representatives of the Army Inspection Section displayed an undue regard for the well-being of the Wright Aeronautical Corp. and too often seemed to be motivated by a desire to protect the company and its interests.”
In this connection, PM points out that “Air officials, ‘apparently led by the chief inspector for the force, Lieut.-Col. Frank C. Greulich,’ tried to cover up by misrepresenting the facts, attempting to intimidate witnesses introducing evidence prepared specially for the investigation, and otherwise impeded the Senate investigators, the committee charged.”
 
Schemes of the Company
Some readers will remember that this company was up for investigation once before. At that time a special board was set up, headed by Lieut.-Gen. William S. Knudsen, who was former director of the OPM, to investigate conditions at this plant. While this board found some of the facts cited by the Truman Committee, it did not agree that they were serious! As was to be expected, Big Business Leader Knudsen whitewashed Curtiss-Wright!
But here is what the Trumann Committee did find when it said the company was “producing and causing the government to accept defective and sub-standard material.” The company used the following ways to get around the government:

By falsifications of tests.
 
By destruction of records.
 
By improperly recording results of tests.
 
By forging inspection reports.
 
By failing to segregate substandard and defective material.
 
By failing to destroy promptly or mutilate such defective and substandard material.
 
By orally changing tolerances (the maximum allowable errors in machines) allowed on parts.
 
By circumventing the salvage committee set up to pass on the usability of parts outside tolerances.
 
By allowing production to override the inspectors’ force, thereby destroying morale of both company and Army inspectors.
 
By skipping inspection operations.

The Truman report also disclosed that the company would not cooperate with inspectors, argued about defective material and constantly counterposed the interests of the company (read: profits!) against defective materials.
 
The Press and the Under Secretary
All in all, you have here one of the dirtiest schemes by a monopoly firm to increase its profits no matter what the consequences.
How did the big business press treat the Truman report? With virtual silence. The report was buried on the inside pages. There were no screaming headlines! There were no charges of treason! There were no demands by a reactionary Congress that Curtiss-Wright officials be charged with treason and sent to jail! There were no special bills introduced by the anti-labor champions in the Senate and the House.
What we did find is that the yellow press rose up as one in support of this giant monopolist corporation.
That pious hypocrite among the big business press, the New York Times, went out of its way to excuse the company by referring to its crooked ways as “detailed errors.” After all, says the Times, when a company has orders of more than four billion dollars (out of which it is now making and will continue to make enormous profits) a few mistakes will be made!
Under Secretary of War Robert Patterson likewise jumped to the defense of the company, saying of the report that it was “much less sensational than some of the inferences drawn in recently published statements.”
One might well ask: What does the Honorable Under Secretary want? Scores of dead airmen before this matter becomes serious?
But Patterson did acknowledge the correctness of the Truman report by his transfer of Army inspectors from Lockland.
The big business press and the Under Secretary of War are obviously arm in arm with big business. How they unite under criticism! How they defend each other when under attack!
Can you imagine what the press and responsible officials would say if labor was making a fight for higher wages at Curtiss-Wright? You’re right! There would be no limits to their fierce denunciations of the workers.
 
Truman Report Toned Down
Patterson says the facts are not nearly as sensational as the Truman Committee report. But the Truman Committee says that in view of the shocking charges and the effect it might have on morale, the report was “the most favorable and the least critical that the committee can render and at the same time fulfill its duty to the Senate and the public ...”
In other words, the situation is even worse than pictured by the toned-down report of the Truman Committee,
What will Curtiss-Wright get for this fraud? A light censure and perhaps a light fine? Remember the Anaconda Wire case! It too defrauded the government and the soldiers at the front by sending out defective communications wire. For such treachery, to which it pleaded guilty, the company and its officials were fined a few thousand dollars!
We suppose that Curtiss-Wright will also plead guilty under the legal term of Nolo Contendere, get its fine, and go merrily along its way. After all, its ten schemes to defraud, says Patterson, are not so sensational. We have no doubt that it must be a widespread practice. For what are the lives of American soldiers compared to blood-soaked profits?
 



Congress took a recess without overriding the presidential veto on the matter of subsidies to enable a roll-back of prices. This was hailed as a great victory for Roosevelt over those who sought to bar price control and price ceilings.
As a matter of fact, the issue involved only partial and limited subsidies, and these were to be employed by Director of War Mobilization Byrnes and Price Administrator Brown with the knowledge that the Senate twice voted to prohibit roll-backs.
According to PM, the congressional agreement not to override the veto of the President came after Byrnes, Brown and the new Food Administrator, Marvin Jones, promised that they would not attempt to roll back prices and use the subsidies, but only try to hold food prices at their current levels!
This means that food prices, which have risen over forty per cent in the last year, will either remain at their present high level, already beyond the wages of the working men and women of this country, or will rise to even greater heights.
Like all the previous plans of the Administration, this new price stabilization program is a fraud. There will be no stabilization of prices, even at their present high levels!
Under this new so-called stabilization program, an attempt will be made to hold prices on some major food items, but on a number of lesser items prices will be permitted to climb.
In contrast to the refusal of Congress to permit subsidies for a rollback of prices on consumer goods which affect the overwhelming majority of the population, there is the secret agreement between Jesse Jones, Rubber Director William Jeffers and the same Prentiss Brown to grant the payment of a huge “roll-back subsidy” on synthetic rubber.
The roll-back on synthetic rubber is more than fifty per cent of current sale prices. This will give enormous profits to the big corporations involved in synthetic rubber production.
It is interesting to note in connection with the matter of price rollbacks on foods and other items necessary to the mass of people that the organized labor movement was never consulted on any of the actions taken by the Director of War Mobilization. These Roosevelt-appointed administrators are not at all concerned with the labor movement and the mass of working men and women.
Despite the threat of the AFL and the CIO that, unless some drastic steps are taken to roll back prices, they would open campaigns for general wage increases, Roosevelt’s administrators went on their merry way, showing that they are not at all interested in the feelings and desires of the working class, even as hesitatingly and badly expressed by their union leaders.
Matters are altogether different so far as big business, that is to say, the war profiteers, are concerned. Roosevelt’s pre-war declarations that there would be no new – or old – war millionaires, were just words. The fact is that they are becoming enriched as a result of war production.
The Economic Outlook of the CIO points out in its latest report that despite the fact that taxes in the years 1940, ’41 and ’42 rose ten times, profits increased by seventy per cent, or over $2,800,000,000. Profits in the year 1943 will exceed even those of the previous three years! The Outlook writes:
“Profits, in short, continue to climb. For all our determination, the war has become what we were determined it should not – a tremendous windfall for a few ... While profits have soared and continue to soar, workers, whose wages are still stabilized at a level 15 per cent above January 1941, are paying at least 25 per cent more to live than they did when the United States entered the war.”
Thus the whole situation is summed up. Enrichment for a few – destruction of the living standards of the vast majority of the people.
Beyond this general picture of the situation there is the fact that profits are only one side of the picture of the enrichment of America’s capitalist class.
Direct profits are not the only source of this enrichment. There is the enormous increase in salaries and bonuses of company officials. These salaries, already over-large, have been doubled, trebled and quadrupled.
Big business puts away its contingent funds, reserves and adds in miscellaneous expenses – all of which are profits in other forms.
On top of all this, these companies have added hundreds of millions of dollars in property values. Thus, rubber companies have increased their property from $700,000,000 to almost a billion dollars. This is only one example; there are hundreds more.
Food or profits? The answer is clear by the decisions made in Washington, in the Administration and in Congress. They have chosen profits against food!
Profits climb! Prices climb! Taxes climb! The cost of living climbs! But wages have actually been reduced – REAL wages are lower! The standard of living has been lowered. The general well-being of the mass of people is being destroyed. The capitalist greed for profits and wealth is unabated!
*
P.S.: Washington, July 14 – Price Administrator Brown left Washington today for a month’s vacation!
 



Profits, salaries, and still more profits and salaries! Here is part of the evidence, printed on this page of Labor Action. Naturally, it is impossible to print it all. But is more needed?
Isn’t this evidence enough to show what is the real situation in this country? It is as plain as day. The capitalists, the whole gang of them, bankers, manufacturers, mine operators, mill owners, and a host of others, are fattening themselves out of the war!
With all the talk about “equality of sacrifice,” it is still the biggest farce of the war. The American ruling class is getting rich from the war; there is a new crop of war millionaires!
Where do the workers stand in this heyday of profit-grabbing? Just about where they have always stood, getting the butt-end of it all.
Prices have, risen way out of line with the wages of the workers. First the victory tax and the income tax, and now the withholding tax eats into the earnings of labor. But it is eating into wages which are already below the cost of living.
The yellow bosses’ press and the pen prostitutes who write their daily lies have been screaming that the workers are the profiteers in this war, that their wages have far exceeded the rise in the cost of living.
It is easy to nail this lie down. The cost of living has risen almost twenty-five per cent in the last year. Food prices, the most important item in the worker’s budget, have risen nearly twice that. There is no real price control and no real price ceilings!
What have the workers received in the past year in the form of wages?
The average 1942 wages of workers in manufacturing industries (that means the war industries) was $37.88! Of these workers, those engaged in durable goods production averaged $44.47 and those in non-durable, $29.71!
These are the averages for the higher paid workers! But there are millions of workers who do not get such “high” wages.
More than 4,000,000 workers still receive less than forty cents an hour. More than 10,000,000 workers made less than $16 a week in 1942 – about $850 for the year!
Sure, workers have received some wage increases in the past year. But compare the following increases with the 25 per cent rise in the cost of living:

Apparel and finished textile workers received an 18.2 per cent increase.
 
Manufacturing workers received a 20.5 per cent increase.
 
Firearms workers received a 2,4 per cent increase.
 
Machine tool workers received a 4.7 per cent increase.
 
Aircraft and aircraft parts workers received a 6.5 per cent increase.
 
Aircraft engine workers, received a 6.5 per cent increase.
 
Anthracite miners received a 5.3 per cent increase.
 
Ammunition workers received a 9.6 per cent increase.
 
Electric light and power workers received an 0.4 per cent increase.
 
Telephone and telegraph workers received a 7.8 per cent increase.

This is not a complete list. But it is enough of an indication to show exactly what the workers are getting. True, some of them have received greater increases than others, and get higher absolute wages than others. But, on the whole, the American working class is grossly underpaid and its wages are far below the rise in the cost of living.
Who benefits from these low wages? The answer is spread all over page one of this issue of Labor Action. The American capitalist, the profiteers of every kind, big business and the monopolies, are waxing fat on the sweat and toil of the workers.
Compare the wages and increases of the workers with the salaries and profits of big business and you have your whole story. What to do about it? Here is a start:

Fight for higher wages. Defeat the infamous WLB and its “Little Steal Formula.”
 
Demand a government levy on accumulated wealth (capital) to cover the cost of the war. Confiscate all war profits. Take the burden off the backs of the American workers!
 
Conscript all war industries under workers’ control! Put an end to the farce of “equality of sacrifice.”

 



The revolution in Argentina, engineered by former President Castillo’s army officers, is now several weeks old. It followed a Hollywood pattern. Top officers led by General Rawson pulled a coup. No sooner had they ousted Castillo, when Rawson resigned. He could not form a new cabinet. His successor as president is General Pedro Ramirez, who was War Minister in Castillo’s cabinet. A few days after fleeing Buenos Aires, Castillo returned to the capital and resigned his office!
General Ramirez appointed himself president (read: dictator). Yes, he appointed himself head of the state. Just as the masses in Argentina had nothing to do with this “revolution,” they had nothing to do with electing Ramirez to office. As a matter of fact, Argentina has been ruled dictatorially for some years, and during this period has been a German and Italian “sphere of influence.”
Behind the new regime in Argentina stand the reactionary pro-fascist industrialists and big landowners. They stand behind this regime, as they did when Castillo ruled, not only for reasons of foreign policy, but as much because these regimes enable them to rule the economy and exploit the people of Argentina without difficulty.
 
What the Officers Have Done
What has this new regime accomplished in the short period of its existence? It promised to hold a presidential election on September 5. It has now cancelled indefinitely this election. The new government (read: dictatorship), which had heretofore acknowledged that it was a provisional, i.e., temporary, regime, has issued a decree ending its “provisional” status. It is now the real government!
What else has it accomplished? Well, the new state power appointed a fascist by the name of General Basilic Pertine as mayor of cosmopolitan Buenos Aires. Appointed, mind you, not elected. This fascist is one of the directors in a half dozen German firms which have been blacklisted by the U.S. State Department. He is the leader of the pro-Nazi elements in the army. Fascist papers continue to be published and distributed freely. Democratic papers and working class periodicals of every variety are suppressed. The new regime is now reaching out to take over and control the leading radio chains.
But what did the U.S. State Department do about this new regime set up by a group of fascist and semi-fascist army officers? Why, it immediately recognized the new government and thereby gave it an official status. And that’s not strange. The State Department, in charge of carrying out American foreign policy, finds itself traditionally at home with reactionaries the world over. Remember how quickly it recognized the fascist dictatorships of Mussolini, Hitler and Franco? What the State Department fears most are the people and action of the masses who might assert their economic and political rights against all reaction.
 
State Department, Past and Present
This Argentine revolt and the quick recognition of the new dictatorial government by the State Department brings to memory the manner in which the State Department acted on the question of recognizing the workers and peasants government of Russia after the masses overthrew the Czar. For more than fifteen years, the United States refused to recognize the new government, which represented the overwhelming majority of the people and their desires.
The State Department would have nothing to do with the governrnent of Lenin and Trotsky because it was an anti-capitalist regime. It wasn’t in a great hurry then. On the other hand, it joined the reactionary world chorus against the new, young and weak government, Moreover, the Wilson Administration also joined the interventionist forces and sent American troops to occupy Russia in an attempt to overthrow a government set up by its people.
Yes, Russia was finally recognized by the Roosevelt Administration. But it was Stalin’s Russia which was recognized not the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky. It was the regime of the new bureaucracy that as acceptable to American capitalism, not the regime of the workers and peasants.
So it is not really strange that the State Department recognized the Argentine officers’ regime immediately after it had seized the reins of government. That the people had nothing to say about it did not matter. That the people did not elect General Ramirez as president, also did not matter. So long as it is not a regime of the masses, a regime of the workers and peasants of Argentina. If it were government of the majority, the State Department would take more than enough time to consider such recognition – if it ever would recognize a workers’ government.
 



The New Course
by Leon Trotsky
The Struggle for the New Course
by Max Shachtman
Published by the New International Publishing Co., New York. 265 pages; price: $1.50 paper; $2.00 cloth.
The American and British student of the revolutionary movement, particularly of that phase that has now become known as Stalinism, will often have had occasion to confront references to The New Course, written by Trotsky in 1923. If such a student reads the Stalinized version of the history of the Russian Revolution and the development of the Bolshevik Party, an endless tirade against this book will be found. But in this reading there will be little or no textual reference to the work.
On the other hand, a study of the growing Trotskyist literature will likewise reveal only references or textual quotations, for the Trotskyist movement made the error of not long ago publishing that book which opened the struggle against Stalinism and forecast the kind of degeneration which must follow in the world revolutionary movement unless the cancer of bureaucratism was rooted out of the state and party apparatus in the newly-conquering proletarian revolution.
It must be constantly borne in mind that the great theoretical disputes which divided the early political labor movement and which, in a brief period of time, came to the forefront as the predominant features of the so-called Russian struggle did not actually originate the struggle against Stalinism. That such theoretical disputes were “in the cards" was not revealed in the early conflict over organization questions. The fact that the theoretical disputes, subsequently, not only overshadowed the struggle over “party" questions and the nature of the regime, cannot, however, historically speaking, or in any other way, diminish the enormous importance of the way in which the struggle broke out.
With the publication of The New Course, a big void in the anti-Stalinist literature has been filled. For now it is possible to trace the origins of the great struggle to preserve the gains of the October Revolution. While the conflict over such questions as regime in the state and the party, democracy and centralism, the rôle of the vanguard party in relation to the mass of workers, the relation of the workers to the peasantry in a backward country overwhelmingly peasant in population appeared to be prosaic questions, they can now be seen in their historical importance as completely related to the theoretical and political struggles which logically and inevitably followed.
The distant past now comes to life in the way it reveals the path of organizational degeneration – but a degeneration based upon a political degeneration away from revolutionary theory, program and activity. The terrible bureaucratic regime which arose in Russia on the basis of the rejection of the ideas expressed in The New Course, has had its reflection not only in the Communist International, completely dominated by the Russian Communist Party under Stalinist direction, but was thereafter transferred and integrated into the radical labor movement of the entire world. Wherever Stalinism had its representatives, we have had the automatic carry-overs from the regime in Russia.
The bureaucratic regime of Stalinism found its counterpart in the bureaucratic regimes of the official labor movements and these in turn coalesced in different forms to produce a vast network and technique of bureaucratic rule visible in the whole decaying social order of capitalism.
The prevailing idea of The New Course is that the progress of the Russian Revolution and the world labor movement and, conversely, the obstacle to “organizational" degeneration, lay not merely in a “correct political program," but in the active democratic intervention of the masses in the state power conquered by the proletariat and also in all the spheres of economic and political life of any state in which the working class had power. But it was not only true for a state where the working class had taken power; it was just as true in the Capitalist world in the working class organizations, under conditions where the bourgeoisie still maintained power.
Thus the struggle for democracy is a constant struggle at all times and under all conditions. In The New Course, Trotsky revealed not only what the proper attitude on this question should be, but ably demonstrated that this was the traditional position of the Marxian movement, and it was threatened now, not by the old bureaucracy of the moldy Second International, but by forces in the very party which had made the Russian Revolution, and that the democratic existence of the revolutionary party was not alone threatened, but the very workers’ state which that party had erected.
There is a prevailing legend, nurtured by the Stalinist falsifiers of history, by the bourgeois and petty bourgeois journalistic admirers of Stalinism, that it was Lenin the “Blanquist" who supplied the theory and practice behind the totalitarian degeneration of Stalinism. But The New Course, which is based on the real beliefs of Lenin, dissipates this view.
A study of Lenin’s writings on democracy and bureaucracy reveals not only that Lenin had nothing in common with his traducers, but that from the very beginning of the Russian Revolution – even if we add to this history the adoption of the Tenth Party Congress resolution barring the existence and activity of party factions, he carried on a vigilant struggle to prevent the bureaucratic degeneration which followed the period immediately after the War Communism and the Civil War. This is completely borne out in the break between Lenin and Stalin immediately before the leader of the Russian party died.
The fact that The New Course is somewhat obscured by the passage of time is overcome by The Struggle for the New Course, by Max Shachtman, the excellent essay appearing in the same volume. The Struggle for the New Course is an invaluable companion piece to the Trotsky book, because it not only traces the origin of the book, but places it in the context of the struggle which was then beginning in the Russian party and which subsequently went through many convulsions to the final triumph of the Stalinist counter-revolution in Russia. Even more important than this, however, is the fact that Shachtman traces the development of the conflict within the Stalinist movement into the conflict over similar questions within the Trotskyist movement. The main differences which developed between the present Workers Party and the Cannonite Socialist Workers Party, supported by Trotsky, over the nature of the Russian state, was similarly not confined to the borders of one country. This struggle too revealed its international ramifications, for it was a discussion which existed at one time or another in almost every anti-Stalinist organization.
The impact of events of the last ten years, especially the impact of the war and the formation of alliances between the two imperialist camps, merely revealed the Stalinist degeneration in a new light. In this great dispute, Trotsky revealed, in our opinion, an inability to draw the necessary conclusions based upon his own analysis, namely, that the workers’ state no longer existed in Russia. Trotsky clung to an outworn belief, based on a specious formula: Russia is a workers’ state because property is nationalized; because property is nationalized, it is a workers’ state. And thus the present misinterpreters of Trotsky’s ideas are left with the theory of the “degenerated workers’ state" which leads them into the ludicrous but dangerous position of proclaiming the victories and advances of Stalin’s armies as the victories and advances of nothing less than the socialist revolution!
The present book, The New Course and The Struggle for the New Course, takes the most important questions which confront the world socialist movement and provides an answer to the past and shows the path to the future.
No one can really be without the book. It is truly a historical treasure.
 



The great famine in India, which has reached a death-toll of about a hundred thousand weekly, was highlighted this week by the announcements that Canada and Australia had offered aid to the stricken people but that this aid was rejected by the British government with the curt remark that there was “no shipping space.”
It isn’t the war which has caused this great misery to the Indian people. Misery has been part of India as long as British imperialism has ruled the country.
About ten years ago, Major-General Sir John Megaw, director of the Indian Medical Service, reported that:


Forty-one per cent of India is poorly nourished!
 
Twenty per cent of India is very poorly nourished!
 
Eighty million Indians are always hungry!


With special reference to the province of Bengal, this same report disclosed that seventy-eight per cent of the people are underfed, and added:
“The peasantry of Bengal are in large proportion taking to a dietary on which even rats would not live for more than a few weeks.”
The situation has not improved In the past ten years. This is clearly represented in the fact that in the present starvation period hundreds of thousands of Indians have already died, with millions in the process of dying. It is further represented by the fact that the life expectancy of the average Indian is twenty-seven years, while that of the Englishman is sixty, and the American almost sixty-four.
The real truth about India is that it has been and continues to be cruelly exploited by British imperialism for the immense profits which it grinds out of the native population.
The attitude of the British government during the present starvation is not only determined by its long-time hard-headed imperialist policy, which always regards a native population as merely something to exploit and enslave. There are some immediate interests involved.
It is common knowledge that there is a great deal of hoarding of food in India – indulged in by Britishers and native profiteers. This hoarding has resulted in a tremendous rise in prices and, therefore, in the profits of .the merchants and speculators. An influx of food in any form would force these war profiteers to disgorge their hoardings and compete with relief food – they would be compelled to lower their prices.
In addition, there are political reasons for the brutal policy of the British government. An alleviation of the inhuman conditions under which the Indian masses live would be an indication of weakness on the part of the British rulers. Keeping the masses in a state of semi-starvation, the British rulers believe, strengthens their hold on the country and weakens the fighting power of the native population which yearns for freedom and independence.
In the face of mass dying and the “corpse brigades” (they go about the major cities of India collecting the dead for burial in common graves), Australia and Canada offered to send wheat and other foods to the colony.
Australia has a surplus of four million tons of wheat. This, according to the New York newspaper, PM, is several times the amount needed to end the Indian food shortage.
The Canadian government, which likewise has a great surplus of wheat, offered 100,000 tons of grain, equivalent to 37,500,000 loaves of bread, free of charge to the Indian people.
The press reported that Lord Wavell, new Viceroy of India, accepted the gift, but it was rejected by the former Viceroy, Leopold Amery, British Secretary of State for India, a big business man with a reputed fortune of five million dollars. The rejection was necessary, said the former Viceroy, noted for the brutality of his rule in India, because of the lack of “shipping space.”
The excuse about the lack of shipping space has now been fully exploded. An investigation made by I.F. Stone, Washington correspondent of The Nation and PM, disclosed that such shipping space was available. He reported that a great amount of shipping space is now used to bring “unneeded bauxite from South America,” while production of bauxite in Arkansas has been cut down.
The report further disclosed that a great amount of shipping space is utilized to keep British gold mining industries of South Africa going. While gold mining in this country has been reduced by seventy-five per cent.
With fifty million tons of shipping now owned and controlled by the Allies, Stone says, food could be easily transported to India. This fact he confirmed with government officials and trade union leaders in the shipping industry.
For our part, we haven’t the slightest doubt that if British policy favored relieving the starvation of India, ways and means could be found for the transportation of food and other necessities. But that is exactly what the British imperialists oppose, as they have always opposed the “pampering” of the colony.
The present situation in India indicates how absolutely necessary is the freedom and independence of the country now. British rule has brought nothing but misery, poverty, slavery, exploitation and starvation to the people.
The British government, which has only recently freed the fascist Sir Oswald Mosley from his three-room apartment prison for ill health, keeps Gandhi, Nehru and thousands of other Indians in jail who demand the national independence of their country. This is not because Great Britain has any intention of granting such independence after the war. Churchill already made that clear when he said that he was not the King’s Prime Minister for the purpose of presiding over the “liquidation of the British Empire.”
American workers, however, can do something to help the Indian people. The unions must demand that the Roosevelt, Administration set aside shipping space to help relieve the starvation. The unions themselves can raise relief for the Indians.
But, above all, the whole labor movement must join in one chorus to demand the immediate freedom of India. Get rid of British rule in India and the greatest possible step will have been taken for the reconstruction of the country by the native population itself, by its millions of workers and peasants./P>
 




The Meaning of the Two-Party System
For some time now, we have called the attention of the labor movement to the need for independent political action by labor through its own political organization, a Labor Party. Developments in recent years have demonstrated that this is a prime need of the American workers. There are thousands and thousands of workers in the country who are more than sick of the rooking that labor has been receiving at the hands of the political parties of big business and its servants.
If you really want to know how important an independent Labor Party is, you have only to note who opposes such a political policy and such a party. The Republicans are against it; the Democrats are against it. Willkie is opposed to a Labor Party, and so is Roosevelt. Big business would fight it tooth and nail; its press screams out against independent labor politics every day.
But these are outright capitalists, or their supporters. But in the labor movement the officialdoms also speak and act against such political action by the workers.
Behind the labor officialdom stand the arch-enemies of the working class, the Stalinists. They are the most conscious and therefore the cleverest opponents of genuine independent political action by labor and are especially vigorous in their fight against any kind of organizational steps that would lead to the formation of a Labor Party.
One of the oldest arguments used against a Labor Party is that it would upset the two-party system in this country. But you might ask: What is so all-fired holy about the two-party system? Certainly experience shows that the two-party system, especially when it is represented by the Republican and Democratic Parties, as it has been for so many years, is really a choice between tweedledum and tweedledee.
 

Tradition – Good or Bad?
The two-party system is a bad tradition for labor. It means choosing between two capitalist, anti-labor political parties, that is, parties of big business.
When the capitalists and their servants defend the two-party system it is because they fear a party of labor and do everything in their power to prevent its formation. In their success lies their political strength.
When the labor movement accepts the two-party system it is merely aiding the parties of big business and weakening the political and economic position of the workers.
In the light of the above, it is easy to see how harmful the CIO political policy is today. I do not speak about the AFL now because that organization with its old and foggy leadership is reactionary, politically speaking. It continues to adhere to a policy of “reward your friends, and punish your enemies.” This has meant support of either Republican or Democratic candidates and has usually meant no support to any third progressive or labor party.
But the CIO gave promise of progressive labor political action in its early years. More recently, local unions and officials have spoken out openly in favor of a Labor Party and genuine independent political action by the trade union movement.
 

Hillman and the CIO Political Action Committee
The CIO officialdom, however, has become very active politically – but also in a reactionary way. They too oppose genuine political labor action and the formation of an independent Labor Party.
Instead of pursuing such a progressive course, the CIO executive board set up a “Political Action Committee.” There are obviously two reasons which led to the formation of this committee:


to mobilize support for Roosevelt and his party of big business and poll-tax Southerners;
 
to head off any movement for a Labor Party, which would defeat the first purpose.


And who was placed at the head of this committee? None other than Sidney Hillman, the social worker-union leader, who, as the Maryland Labor Herald says, “is losing caste among the members of the union he heads because he thinks fifty cents an hour should be top pay for members of his union who work in cotton goods.”
Hillman is not carrying on independent political action. He is playing boss politics. He is acting as a henchman of the Democratic Party national machine. This is revealed not only by the policy which his committee pursues, but most alarmingly by the assistants he has chosen.
As his first assistant, Hillman has chosen C.B. Baldwin, former administrator in the Farm Security Administration, a Roosevelt appointee, and not a member of the labor movement in any way.
As director of CIO political activities in Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin, Hillman named Raymond C. McKeough, former Democratic member of the House and long-time politician associated with the Kelly-Nash-Horner machine in Illinois.
 

Hillman’s “Labor” Assistants
Isn’t it as plain as day that the politics of the CIO under Hillman and the executive board is essentially the same as that of the AFL officialdom? The only difference is that the AFL has not yet decided which boss party it will support, while the CIO Political Action Committee is unmistakably pro-Democratic Party.
What has this to do with independent political action by labor? What has it to do with an independent Labor Party? Exactly nothing!
The only thing that can be gained from such policies is another defeat for labor. It is more than high-time to call a halt to this kind of political action.
It is necessary now more, than ever for the ranks of the trade union movement, and the union movement as a whole, to embark on a determined course which would lead to the formation of a Labor Party to fight for the economic and political interests of the whole working class.
 

ms: The Cost of the War (February 1943)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Sam Adams
The Cost of the War
A Preliminary Survey
(February 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 2, February 1943, pp. 46–47.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


At the end of World War I, when an economic assessment was completed on its costs, the world was shocked by what it then considered astronomical expenditures made by all the warring nations in a futile imperialist conflict. The direct financial expenditures for that war were almost equalled by indirect costs, i.e., capitalized value of life and property losses. A summary of the costs of the First World War revealed that the Allied Entente made a net direct expenditure of $125,690,476,497, while the Triple Alliance spent directly $60,643,160,600. The total direct costs of the four years’ war were over $186,000,000,000. Indirect costs of the war, capitalized in life and property losses, totalled over $151,000,000,000, thus making a grand total of almost $338,000,000,000, representing the total cost of the First World War. [1] Since the outbreak of the present conflict, various attempts have been made to estimate the costs of prosecuting a global war. From time to time reports of war expenditures for one country or another have been published, but no over-all picture was drawn. It is much too early to determine total costs, and information which is the property of government bodies is rarely made public in a coordinated way or for mass consumption.
 
How the Powers Prepared
In the February 6 issue of Foreign Commerce Weekly, however, Leon S. Wellstone, of the Division of Commercial and Economic Information of the Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, has written a preliminary observation on this subject entitled, The Cost of Hitler. Extremely interesting tables of war budgets and expenditures by all the warring countries make up the main content of the study, but the opening theme is that the war budgets and war expenditures are the result of the existence of Hitler and the Nazi regime.
Naturally, from an historical point of view, this has no fundamental significance; it is only a partial truth, or half-truth. The real truth is that war is the decisive way in which capitalist society endeavors to solve its inherent contradictions. Thus, Mr. Wellstone stretches a point when he includes in his estimates the war budgets of many countries dating from 1932. For the most part, the big powers (the United States, Great Britain and France) did not materially increase such budgetary expenditures in the early years of Hitler’s reign. It was only in 1938 that Great Britain and France announced a huge increase in the military budget. Up until that time, the bourgeois regimes in these two countries at least were quite prepared to aid or appease a “revitalized” German imperialism. Prior to that time, expenditures were not unusual for normal peacetime military budgets. The smaller countries, Poland, Belgium, Holland, etc., whether content or not, followed the lead of their masters.
The military budgets of all the countries rose sharply only when war appeared imminent, when all hope for an understanding with Germany had paled. The degree of preparedness by the powers is graphically revealed by the following figures.
It is common knowledge today that Hitler began preparations for war almost from the day he became Chancellor. As a matter of historical truth, the German industrial and financial ruling class prepared for a new war from the day Germany signed the Versailles Treaty, in order to seek again what it failed to achieve in the last war, namely, a redivision of the world in its favor.
 
The War Budgets
The estimate of German expenditures for war since Hitler’s assumption of power is over $100,000,000,000. A much poorer country, Italy, under Mussolini, has had an enormous military budget for many years. Since her entry into the war in June of 1940, Italy has spent about $8,000,000,000. This comparatively small amount has, however, resulted in a complete dislocation of the weak Italian economic structure.
No figures are supplied for Japanese war expenditures since they are almost too difficult to obtain. Japan has been at war with China for many years. Even though this war was not fought on so nearly as large a scale as the present, it has been very costly. Despite an extremely low national standard of living, the Japanese war budget and direct expenditures, considering the experiences of all other countries, must run into billions of dollars.
What is the cost of the war to the United Nations? It is vastly greater than that of the Axis. In first place comes the United States. The actual expenditures have risen from $6,700,000,000 in 1940-41 (fiscal year) to an estimated $77,000,000,000 by the end of July, 194$. The presidential budget plan calls for an actual expenditure of $97,000,000,000 for the fiscal year 1942–43, while Congress has already agreed to a national debt expansion of $209,000,000,000. Wellstone writes: “Taking only the expenditures already used or now appropriated we arrive at the total of $112,300,000,000 for the last three years.”
The fact that the United States is the arsenal for the United Nations has created some confusion to the effect that her Allies have no means to finance the war and rely entirely upon the efforts and resources of Washington. A cursory examination of the war budgets of the Allied countries will easily dispel this notion.
Right behind the United States stands the United Kingdom (note that this does not include the Commonwealth). The British budget rose from 102,990,000 pounds sterling in 1932–33 to an estimated 4,500,000,000 pounds in 1942–43. The total expenditures of the United Kingdom have been 14,239,000,000 pounds, or $58,200,000,000. As will readily be seen, the expenditures of the United States and the United Kingdom alone exceed those of the Axis. Canada, with a relatively small population, has already spent almost $5,000,000,000 for war. The three additional British dominions, Australia, New Zealand and the Union of South Africa, have spent almost two and a half billion dollars.
Although knocked out of the war in its early stages (June 1940), France had expended over ten billion dollars in a relatively short period of time. Over a billion dollars was spent by Holland, Belgium, Norway, Jugoslavia and Greece. More than two and a half billion dollars was the cost of the devastating war to Poland.
Outside the orbit of the capitalist countries stands the Soviet Union. The figures presented by Mr. Wellstone, which cannot be verified by independent or Soviet sources, are extremely interesting. They show that the military expenditures of Russia jumped sharply from a billion and a half rubles in 1932 to almost fifteen billion rubles in 1935; that great yearly increases followed up through the year 1941 (there are no figures for 1942). On the uncertain estimate of forty cents to a ruble, the report shows that the Soviet Union has spent about $96,000,000,000, a sum greater than that of the United Kingdom and its dominions! A partial answer to those seeking the source of military strength of the Red Army is to be found in the military expenditures of the Stalin régime and the unquestioned preparedness by Russia for war.
Adding the costs to Czechoslovakia, Mr. Wellstone’s preliminary survey shows that the United Nations have already expended $293,000,000,000 for this war. If we include the expenditures of the Axis, the figure will rise to over $400,000,000,000.
 
A Forecast of the Future
The economic editor in the Department of Commerce has not considered the increased budgets and expenditures of Latin American countries. Nor does he supply any figures on what the war has cost the Chinese.
The above figures concern only budgetary and direct expenditures. They do not take into consideration the capitalized value in loss of life and property which has already greatly exceeded such losses during the four years of the First World War. The figures cited in the opening paragraph of this article showed that the latter losses equalled direct costs. Mr. Wellstone takes note of this fact when he says: “... it would be difficult, if not impossible, to make estimates in human life and property losses at this writing. It may be noted, however, that during the Fust World War they were considered equal to moneys expended in military operations.”
For this reason alone his estimate that the war will cost $500,000,000,000 before it is ended, is far too low. The economic editor “assumes” that the war with Hitler will end in another year, an assumption that is pure speculation. If we accept the estimate of other costs to be equal to direct costs, the war cost now is swiftly reaching toward one thousand billion dollars!
It is impossible to leave this subject without recalling the congressional struggles over the New Deal budget for unemployment relief and insurance, WPA projects and social security taxes. The struggle of the reactionary bourgeoisie against a six billion dollar budget sought by the reformist Roosevelt Administration to “alleviate the suffering of more than fifteen million unemployed” is contrasted to the swift passage of a military budget more than thirty times as great! The same situation prevails in Great Britain in the early skirmishes over the Beveridge Plan, which is a more diluted form of social insurance without even the social significance of the American New Deal.
Behind these astronomical figures on the costs of the war one can observe the disintegrating tendencies of capitalism busily at work. If the capitalist order continues for many years, the costs of this global war will be placed, as it is now, entirely on the shoulders of the workers, peasants and colonial peoples of the world. The increasing disproportion between the living standards of the capitalist classes in all the warring countries and those of the masses, the workers, the peasants, the middle classes and the colonial peoples becomes greater day by day. The destruction of the existing low living standards, not only nationally, but throughout the world, is sharply contrasted to the enrichment of the international capitalist class in the midst of the present conflict.

Footnote
1. These figures are from Kirby Page’s National Defense, and are based on tables in Bogart’s Direct and Indirect Costs of the Great World War.
 

orth Africa Interlude (February 1943)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
North Africa Interlude
(February 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 2, February 1943, pp. 36–37.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


The invasion of North Africa by the Allies and the subsequent Casablanca conference of the Anglo-American leaders heralds a turning point in the war. Involved in these events is not only the military strategy of the United Nations, but more important, its political strategy, and even its moral position in the world.
Hardly more than a year ago the military position of the Allies was quite feeble; its strength was to be found essentially in its economic and military potential. But its military position largely influenced its political and moral conduct. There is a striking parallel between the former weak military position of the democratic camp and the liberal-democratic, and at times, even radical, political and moral positions assumed by the Roosevelt-Churchill declarations.
It is not difficult to recall the great prominence given to their meetings which produced the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms. The bourgeois liberals were not merely certain of a new era; it was guaranteed, they declared, by the Anglo-American assent to the right of self-determination of all national minorities, the occupied countries and, some even thought, the colonial peoples. Moreover, the right to free speech and free press were declared an inviolate right of all humanity. This was not merely a military struggle, said the leaders of the Allied camp. It was a political and moral crusade against fascism, intolerance, bigotry and the darkness of the Middle Ages. Truly, if words were accepted as reality, a millennium, even if a little one, was on its way.
Yet, in the midst of endless palaver delivered from the high places and the low, there were many events which gave unmistakable evidence that, behind the liberal facade forming the public face of the Allied camp, there lurked the real war aims completely incongruous to the professed programs.
 
The Four Freedoms Applied
The Indian situation became very acute in the midst of the democratic splurge. In this particular case, the British attitude was made abundantly clear through the declaration of the Prime Minister that the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter had no application to India. The attitude of the British did not find a happy accord in the United States, where national interest desired an Indian solution which would accrue to the American position in the Far East.
There were other smaller incidents occurring with monotonous regularity which indicated the wide gulf between the real and the verbal. But the denouement came in North Africa. Here was a concrete circumstance in which the Allies could have demonstrated, if it were in any degree an integral part of its economic, political and military physiognomy, that despite almost insurmountable difficulties and immense contradictions which reside in its alliance, the democratic political aims which it professed would be realized step by step with an improvement in its military position. But quite the contrary took place. As military improvement came, political degeneration accompanied it.
The deal with Admiral Darlan, which Roosevelt was compelled to announce as a temporary political expedience, thus placating, at least momentarily, the bitter reactions which followed all over the world, especially among his own “New Dealist” colleagues, was fortuitously “solved” in the assassination of Petain’s collaborationist disciple. In the Darlan case, however, the American leaders were able to plead military needs for the arrangements which were made. Subsequent events, however, do not have even this reason to justify the political collaboration with the reactionary Giraud, the fascist General Nogues, the numerous other fascist and semi-fascist military men of Vichy, and the political collaboration with similar fascists and semi-fascists, the outstanding example being the appointment as Governor of Algeria, the fascist Peyrouton.
 
Morality and Bourgeois Politics
The buck-passing which has followed the storm of protest from all official quarters is merely subterfuge. Any and all explanations are given by Secretary of State Hull for the conduct in North Africa. He even found it “expedient,” when questioned by The Nation Washington correspondent, I.F. Stone, to ask if his name were not really Feinstone! It is now explained that General Eisenhower had nothing to do with the Peyrouton appointment, that he was enlightened about this fascist gentleman who received exit papers in Brazil on the orders of Hull, by his brother, Milton Eisenhower. The blame was then placed on the State Department’s special man in North Africa, Robert Murphy, long noted for his reactionary views and associations. But Murphy acted in complete concert with directions and agreement of the State Department. In all these machinations, the liberals of the New Republic and The Nation would have you believe that President Roosevelt was uninformed about all these events, or was unable to intervene; that Hull, unable to fight any longer, succumbed to the pressure of the fascists, semi-fascists and reactionaries who are his subordinates, and finally, that the liberals in Washington, the true Rooseveltians, were completely powerless!
Only a few days ago, the Social-Democratic New Leader published an article which declared that the whole North African venture was laid many months ago through Vichy, in understanding with Churchill and Roosevelt, and that behind Vichy stood a large group of the French 400, industrialists and financiers. It is this same group of bourgeois reactionaries who were described by Winkler in The Nation as playing the delicate game of repairing their fences in case the Allies won the war, or retaining their relations with Hitler in the event of a German victory.
 

ussia's War Aims (February 1943)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Russia’s War Aims
(February 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 2, February 1943, pp. 37–38.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


With the upturn in the military fortunes of the Allies, the war aims of Stalinist Russia have again become of utmost concern to the bourgeois world. Stalin has recently been as silent as a Sphinx on this question. But the concern of the Allies undoubtedly reached the Kremlin, for Pravda, under the by-line of David Zazlavsky, a new political observer for the Russian Stalinists, repudiated the “rumors” about Russia’s annexationist aims in Europe and Asia. The basis for the article was a London report stating that Russia sought territory in Asia (China), Iran, sea outlets in the Baltic and the Black Sea, as well as European territories.
In his May Day address of last year, Stalin had declared that: “We haven’t, we can’t have such a purpose in this war as the conquest of foreign territories or foreign peoples in Europe or Asia, including Iran.” Zazlavsky, in referring to this portion of the speech, went on to say that the regime was fighting to keep the “Soviet state intact,” and that Bessarabia and the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) are organic parts of that state.
Why are they organic parts of the Russian state? Because they were incorporated by the Soviet Constitution!
These are the territories which were obtained by force and violence during the hey-day of the Stalin-Hitler pact. They were forcibly seized and incorporated into the Soviet Union in violation of every principle of proletarian internationalism. But Stalin’s allies are in a quandary. Great Britain in particular cannot challenge the position of the Soviet Union, even though it is an express declaration of Roosevelt and Churchill not to recognize any seizures and territorial incorporations by force and violence. If the territorial expansion and acquisitions by the Soviet Union are questioned or challenged by her Allies, Stalin can, with equal justification and right, question Britain’s rights to her empire. And he can go a lot further than that. Thus, it is apparent, they will recognize each other’s “rights.”
Interestingly enough, Zazlavsky makes no mention of that part of Poland which was Russia’s during the division of that nation with Germany. Nor is anything said about Finland, whether it is intended that parts of that country seized during the Russo-Finnish war will be retained or whether all of Finland shall come under the reign of Moscow. Nor is any specific denial made of other parts of the London report.
The reference to a speech of Stalin made a year ago, is in our opinion, of considerable significance. Since the recent military victories of the Red Army and at a time when Russian war aims are discussed by her allies, the Holy Father of Russia has not uttered a single word on this question. But two things stand out sharply. First, Russian aims are completely nationalist, seeking immediate preservation of the existing state and retention of those territorial gains made through the aid of the alliance with Hitler, i.e., the retention of territories which were seized by military means. Secondly, there is a complete absence, as there has been since opening of the war in 1939, of proletarian socialist internationalism. Only a simpleton or political novice can believe that Stalinist Russia is the purveyor of this outstanding pillar of Marxism. The above-cited reference to the Pravda article is only additional evidence of the nationalist degeneration of a once glorious workers’ state.
 



The fight of the United Mine Workers of America against the prevailing labor policy of the Administration, as expressed in its position on wages and the cost of living, has brought the labor situation to a crisis. When John L. Lewis announced, before the expiration of the miners’ contract on April 1, that he would demand a $2.00-a-day wage increase to meet the enormous rise in the cost of living in the coal areas of the nation, the crisis was certain. For against the altogether legitimate demands of the miners, and the increasingly determined demands of workers all over the country for wage increases, the Administration held steadfastly to the position that it would permit no departure from the “Little Steal” formula under which the ignominious War Labor Board operated.
In our Notes for last month, we point out that the President’s “hold the line” order was directed exclusively against the American working class, because it sought to doom their living standards in this period when the cost of living has already gone beyond their ability to meet the fantastic rise in prices. The “hold the line” order, therefore, demonstrated that Roosevelt was prepared to meet the mounting dissatisfaction of the American workers with a head-on opposition. In doing so, and insisting that the WLB maintain an undeviating adherence to its wage formula, the crisis on the WLB, already sharpened, was extended. The AFL and CIO representatives, the former especially, threatened to resign unless remedies were immediately forthcoming. It is interesting to note how the Administration endeavored to meet the crisis in its relations with labor.
Lewis made it abundantly clear that unless the wage demands of the miners’ union was met he would call a national strike. This announcement was the signal for one of the dirtiest journalistic campaigns in American labor history. It is necessary, in order to understand all of the ramifications of this situation, to recall the specific problems that existed.
The coal miners of America, engaged in a skilled, difficult and dangerous occupation, worked at a wage scale set before the war economy went into full swing. Under their contract, they could not alter their wage scale until its termination, despite the disparity of their income and the cost of living. Thus the miners worked for more than a year at inequitable wages.
The Office of Price Administration indicated its complete impotence to intervene for a rectification of the price rise. It could hardly do so when its director, Premiss Brown, announced upon taking office that prices could not actually be controlled and that there would be a slow but persistent monthly rise. As always, those who suffered in this situation were the workers, and in this case, particularly the underpaid miners. Lewis showed that the miners, because of their occupation, need a certain supply of basic foods which they were not getting with their existing wages. He put the issue squarely when he stated that “the miners are hungry” and need immediate relief.
 
The Administration Seeks to Break Lewis
This is when the show began. The Administration was determined to fight Lewis now for at least two reasons: a victory for Lewis would be the signal for which all workers were waiting to begin an open struggle to overthrow the WLB and its wage formula; political revenge on Lewis for his fight against Roosevelt.
The vermin press began its work when it was certain that Roosevelt was prepared to break Lewis and, in the process, strike a blow against the miners’ union. Naturally the reactionary press was uninfluenced by anything that Roosevelt and his aids did or said. Their anti-labor line is fixed. But the so-called liberal press, the Pucks of bourgeois democracy, the New York Post and the scurrilous semi-Stalinist sheet, PM, became positively hysterial in their denunciation of John L. Lewis. With unabated fury, they carried on a daily denunciation of Lewis, his threat to strike and the arbitrariness of his demands. The only issue in the struggle, according to these sycophants, was President Roosevelt or John L. Lewis. In their completely totalitarian outlook they demanded that the miners, and the workers in general, choose between Roosevelt, the friend of labor, and Lewis, the dictator! James Wechsler, ex-Stalinist, was beside himself. He posed the issue: faith in Roosevelt or Lewis. And then he virtually pleaded with the miners to put all their trust in the President, the proved friend of labor!
But these gentlemen do not understand the working class, they do not understand labor’s union organizations. Above all, they do not understand the interests of the workers. And in this case they showed themselves completely ignorant of the United Mine Workers, the most powerfully organized and experienced labor organization in this country.
The miners saw through the gas pouring out of the mouths of the “liberal” misleaders. In their simple proletarian way, they knew that the only ones who could gain from their defeats were the coal operators and the ruling class in general. They automatically understood that if they were defeated it would mean a defeat for the whole working class. And they also knew that if they won, the workers everywhere would win – the only group that stood to lose was the rapacious capitalist class enriching itself off the backs of the workers in this war period. The miners were not alone. Hundreds of thousands of other workers rallied to their support (witness the outbreak of strikes in Detroit), much to the discomfort of the Administration and its liberal wheelhorses of the yellow press.
One must have a class attitude toward the miners’ fight. Lewis is not and cannot be the issue. Would it make any difference in this situation if the miners had another president? Would the Administration and the bosses act any differently? Obviously not! The presence of Lewis affected only secondary questions, not the main one. The point is that Lewis is fundamentally correct in this miners’ fight. He has demonstrated a courage that is rare among labor leaders. He has exhibited a determination that must galvanize the labor movement. He has displayed an elasticity of tactics that has strengthened the fight of the miners against an array of foes which seem insurmountable. And, this is what hurts the anti-labor forces and the totalitarian liberals, the Administration and their Stalinist strike-breaking supporters, Lewis has remained coolly indifferent to their veritable lynch campaign against him.
 
Lewis’ Rôle in the Situation
Does this mean that Lewis understands the full implications of his struggle against the Administration and the operators; that he is conscious of the class issues involved and their political significance; that he has advanced in a proletarian political way? No, Lewis hasn’t changed in that respect at all. We believe that he remains a conservative political force in the labor movement; that he is unable to lead the labor movement in progressive class political directions; that he remains tied to the worst political enemies of the working class, the bourgeois politicians and their organizations. This is Lewis’ greatest failure: a lack of political class consciousness; a lack of fundamental class consciousness! Otherwise he would now form an independent political party of labor against both capitalist parties.
His present fight does not change the past or cancel out his bureaucratic rule in the AFL, the CIO and the UMW. Neither does it obliterate the many serious mistakes he has made for many years prior to the organization of the CIO. But how can one overlook the initiative he took and the responsibility which is his, for the organization of the CIO? How can one overlook the progressive character of the present fight which he is leading?
Lewis seems to understand one thing: Unless the labor movement maintains itself during the war, adheres to a militant policy, seeks to extend its organization, achieves labor unity, it will be chopped up in the mad hysteria of the war and the inevitable economic collapse in the post-war period. He sees the forces now at work which threaten the entire labor movement. Unlike his inferior colleagues in the labor movement, he prefers not to put his trust in Roosevelt and the Administration, but in the fighting strength of labor. As far as he goes, Lewis is engaged in a progressive struggle and this is all that matters.
The press sent its representatives into the field, and these correspondents could not believe their eyes and ears. The miners are in ferment, they wrote. They are behind Lewis to a man because he is fighting for their very lives. They will strike unless they get their demands. They will strike even if Lewis calls off any strike. They admired Roosevelt, so it was reported, but Lewis was the leader of their union and their union meant their lives. This was quickly borne home even to the most obtuse.
 
A Frame-Up Against the Miners
It was clear from the opening day of the negotiations between the miners and the coal operators that something was afoot. The coal operators, on a tip from Washington that the Administration would not deviate from the “Little Steal” formula (this meant that the miners would get no raise) refused to negotiate. They held their ground in silence. Lewis in presenting his demands to them asked for counter-proposals so that collective bargaining could begin. But the operators would not budge. They had nothing to offer. By their refusal to deal with the union, the operators knew that the case would go to the WLB and the miners would get a big zero.
Lewis had already made clear that he would have nothing to do with the WLB; that such a step meant the end of any miners’ demands; that the WLB was already stacked against the miners; that it operated under the “hold the line” order and thus automatically precluded any redress for the miners, and finally, the board was, in its majority, anti-labor.
Negotiations broke down, the miners’ contract ended and the strike began automatically. Then follows a whole series of events which are in part still foggy. Roosevelt meets the strike danger with a seizure of the mines and proclaims them “government property” and the miners “government employees.” Now there can be no strike! In the meantime, Lewis and Ickes, government “custodian” of the mines, meet in Washington and apparently a settlement is on the way. The strike is called off. Lewis takes the position that since there is no contract, since the government is now the mine owner, an adjudication of the miners’ demands will take place through the “custodian.”
In a pathetic way, the OPA suddenly announces its intention to investigate prices in the coal areas. Finding a disparity of only five per cent in prices, the OPA determined that prices were not “out of line”! But immediately thereafter it ordered a roll-back of prices of ten per cent as a partial face-saving gesture. This act was proof, if any proof was needed, that the position of the miners was completely justified. How do the OPA and the President proceed to effect a roll-back of ten per cent? By paying a subsidy to the purveyors of staple goods, the big farmers, the food processors, the rich merchants and commission houses. It is impossible, you see, to grant the miners a wage increase, but it is possible to effect a roll-back of prices by handing the profiteers a subsidy! The important point, however, is that a ten per cent roll-back will not materially improve the position of the workers.
 
Lewis and the Miners
Roosevelt, in proclaiming his order, called upon the miners to return to work on Monday. Lewis, following his meeting with Ickes, instructed the miners to go back on Tuesday. Whom would the miners follow? This was one crucial test and the miners answered it in a straightforward way. They followed the president of their union, their organization, and went to work on Tuesday. A two-week truce had been effected.
The WLB enters the situation and demands that the case, no matter what adjudication is made between Ickes and Lewis, or the operators and Lewis, must come to them for review! In the inter-departmental struggles in Washington, furious battles take place. Now Ickes announces that he cannot settle anything, the whole matter must go before the WLB. The union officials charge a double-cross somewhere along the line, and maintain their position that they cannot and will not appear before the WLB. Once more the strike is imminent as the two-week period runs out. Again Ickes calls for Lewis and another truce is effected. This time it is certain that Ickes will force a settlement which will give the miners at least part of their demands, either in the form of a six-day week guaranteed for a year, with time and a half for the sixth day, perhaps a portal-to-portal rate, or perhaps a straight raise in the daily wage rate. But no sooner is another two-week truce announced than the WLB again demands that the issue be tried before it and orders the operators and the union to appear. But Lewis is adamant and will not fall for this old army game. What is the authority under which the WLB operates? It has no statutory rights. It has no right of subpoena or arrest. In other words, it has no real power except the power of “public opinion” and “persuasion.” Then, too, what does it mean to say that the mines “are government property” and the miners are “employees of the government”? If that is true, why, then, does Ickes send the issue back for negotiation, and why does the WLB presume control over negotiations between the operators and miners? Contrast this with the case of the New York Transit Workers Union. In that situation the WLB declared it could not intervene because it was a struggle between a government and its employees!
The struggle between the miners and the coal operators is complicated by the political aims of the Administration in seeking complete control over and unanimous support from the labor movement in preparation for its political campaign, which is soon to begin. Lewis is a stumbling block in their plans.
And, finally, in the midst of this struggle, Lewis presents the miners’ application for reaffiliation with the AFL. It is difficult, because of lack of information at the time of this writing, to assess the full significance of this action. It would seem, at first hand, to strengthen Lewis’ position enormously and thus to fortify the fight of the miners. Lewis has far more allies in the labor movement than most people believe. His move will strengthen the tendencies toward labor unity. It will hasten the militant development of other large sections of the labor movement. On the whole, it appears as if Lewis has outgeneraled the formidable array of foes who are determined to kick the miners in the back.
The next issue of The New International will contain a complete review of the miners’ struggle as the most important labor development since the outbreak of the war.
 



The end of the war is nowhere in sight, but already the bourgeois leaders of the United Nations are busily engaged in discussing and mapping out post-war plans for so-called economic reconstruction. These discussions take on a more practical character with the increasing military strength of the Allies and the growing conviction that they shall win the victory in the war. The burdens of the economic and political theorists have become lighter – not in the problems they must solve but in the need to hurl vistas of the beautiful post-war life awaiting the masses. We have pointed out many times that, as the military power and the military fortunes of the Allies improves, the reactionary political and economic policies to which they really adhere, are spoken of more openly. The Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms are now hardly uttered by their initiators and popularizers. Their watchword is: first the victory, then we shall see.
But at home the Administration and the congressional leaders are deeply concerned with the concrete economic problems which will confront the nation in the post-war period. Congress, the Administration and the organizations of big business (the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce of the United States) have been studying post-war economic problems and discussing these among themselves. They attempt to determine, on the basis of economic data of the pre-war period extending over four decades, i.e., the economic trends and experiences through the the rise of American imperialism, the prosperity years and the crisis, what lies in store for their economy immediately after the war.
 
Senator George’s Future for America
All of them are acutely aware of one thing: There is a rocky road full of pitfalls ahead for capitalist economy. The crisis of 1929–32 shook this order to its very foundations. The effort of reformism to stave off complete and irremediable collapse through the New Deal failed in its basic experiments. During the years 1929–40, there were improvements in the economy, but these improvements were measured against the low years of 1929–32. At no time did the Administration feel that it had really conquered the crisis. Prior to the outbreak of the war in Europe (September 1939) American economy was again headed for a sharp decline. The war, with its tremendously abnormal demands, saved Roosevelt and his panaceas for capitalist economic survival. For the war demanded so much in goods that it absorbed the mass of unemployed and called upon the total capacities of American industry (primarily heavy and manufacturing) to meet its needs.
But these gentlemen are now worried again. Supremely confident of a military victory, they are also aware of the fact that the demands created by the war will cease immediately upon the military triumph. What will be the main problem then? How shall it be met? Needless to say, the main single problem facing the bourgeoisie will be mass unemployment. They will endeavor to solve that problem as in the past, and they will be unable to solve it. But other problems – decline in production, change in the character of goods, mass unemployment, reconstruction and readjustment – will be uniform to all the powers. They will be especially acute in the United States, with its tremendous industrial plant and high rate of productivity. That is why the discussion over these problems in this country has become so practical recently.
The greatest fear of American capitalism is that the economic problems of the post-war period will be so acute as to endanger “free enterprise.” That which they fear so much, another period of “New Dealism,” is a dead certainty. This was the theme of the speech made by Senator Walter F. George at the annual dinner of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. Senator George is not a New Dealer. He came to the dinner to discuss the common problems of big business and the government and he said many things. He was for free enterprise (read: big business), but unfortunately he foresaw the inability of free enterprise to live without the closest collaboration and aid from the government. This must be reasonable, however. It must not interfere with initiative, ownership and profit. The government, in his eyes, as in the eyes of the Chamber, exists to aid business in need. Taxation will be high, but the government will try to keep it as low as possible; it will try to spread it so that it covers the mass of workers and poor farmers in the country. He is in favor, as are his listeners, of a national sales tax. Pay-as-you-go is likely to remain in the post-war period, etc. But the most important point made in the George address relates to the general problem of the rate and level of production and employment.
On the basis of well-established figures, the senator estimates a post-war labor force of fifty-five or fifty-six million workers. This figure is half again as large as the labor force in 1929 and two and a half times as large as that of 1932! In order to keep employment at a “normal” level, production will have to reach a peacetime level of $155,000,000,000 annually! What this means concretely we shall soon discover.
 
A Department of Commerce Study
Senator George’s figures are the result of many studies now being made by government economists and statisticians. But of particular interest is an important review entitled Post-War Manpower and Its Capacity to Produce, by S. Morris Livingston, published in the April issue of the Department of Commerce Survey of Current Business. Mr. Livingston investigated several basic tendencies in economy observed over four decades beginning with 1899: growth in labor force, a general shifting from industries of low productivity to those of high productivity, a constant increase in productivity in general and productivity per man-hour, and a tendency toward the shorter work-week. These basic tendencies, the study reveals, have been uniform during these many years covering the period of the upward development of American capitalism and its most severe and devastating crisis. In some respects, the tendencies were accelerated during the period of the crisis when capitalist economy sought to increase production at the expense of its labor force.
Dealing with the aim of American capitalism to enjoy a “normal” existence in the post-war period, Mr. Livingston writes that it will not exist unless “productive jobs can be provided for the vast majority of those seeking employment; and, that in providing these jobs, the volume of production could go far above any pre-war level.” (emphasis mine – A.G.) The writer takes the year 1940 as a measuring point. In that year, “the nation turned out more goods and services ... than in any previous year.” Yet of the total labor force, only 46,000,000 persons were employed. There were still 8,900,000 unemployed! There were other millions “ekeing out an existence on sub-marginal farms and in other unproductive occupations.”
The year 1940, however, marked the turning point in the transition from a partial peacetime and war economy to a total war economy. America’s entry into the war implied a complete transformation of the economy. This transformation took place more rapidly than appeared during the days of the actual change. The most easily discernible features of this war economy is the almost complete change-over to the production of war goods and the precipitate decline in the production of consumer goods, luxury and service commodities.
A marked shift took place in the occupations of millions of workers. The tendency to shift from unproductive to productive industries was sharply accented by two factors: the guaranteed profits arising from government war orders and the establishment of priorities in raw materials virtually excluding non-war industries and compelling either their permanent dissolution or temporary closing. By the year 1943, unemployment was reduced from 8,900,000 to about 1,000,000, which is regarded as normal in capitalist economy. This decline in unemployment was accompanied by the longer work-week, an influx of women into industry, partially offsetting the drain of manpower by the enlarged armed forces, and an increase in the physical volume of production half again as large as in 1940.
 
Some Basic Trends in Economy
In assessing the relative values of production in 1940, when there was a reserve army of unemployed totalling 8,900,000, to 1943, when unemployment reached a “normal” stage, Mr. Livingston points out in a footnote that the present annual rate of production of the gross national product is at about one hundred and seventy billion dollars as compared to ninety-seven billion dollars in 1940 (first quarter estimates). Taking the price differences into account, the 1940 production value would be one hundred and forty-six billion dollars as compared to one hundred and seventy billion in 1943. According to the Federal Reserve index of industrial production, an increase of sixty-five per cent is to be recorded from the year 1940 to the first quarter of 1943.
We have already mentioned several constant factors in the economy, as, for example, growth of the labor force arising from the natural growth of population (despite the fact that the birth rate in this country has been declining), and increasing productivity per man-hour. Livingston points out that during the years 1929 to 1941 there was a two and a half per cent growth per year in output per man-hour. At the rate of growth of the labor force and productivity, the available manpower capacity in 1946 (1946 is used on the assumption that the war might end in that year) will be fifteen to twenty per cent greater than the capacity in 1940 and output will be forty to fifty per cent greater than the actual output in 1940. The writer than adds: “This takes into account the long-term trend toward shorter hours. It allows for only a rock-bottom minimum of unemployed. Therefore it it an optimum goal and not a forecast.” Why it is a goal and not a forecast is indicated in his review and we will refer to it.
There is an interesting discussion of population growth and the sources for increased manpower in Livingston’s study, but these are not wholly essential for this article. He does show that the present increase in the total number of workers employed has been 3,500,000, despite the vast expansion of the armed forces. Moreover, the “abnormal” increase in the number of workers may reach 6,000,000. A large section of this labor force will, upon the conclusion of the war, leave industrial occupations. In general, however, it is expected that by the year 1946, the total labor force will have reached 59,400,000. Population growth after 1946 will “add about half a million per year in each of the years immediately following.” This will not lessen the problem of employment, but make it more acute.
Interestingly enough, this Department of Commerce economist hazards a guess as to the number of persons remaining in the armed forces for “policing the world” at 1,900,000. This might be inadequate, he adds, but points out that it is more than “five times the manpower devoted to this purpose in 1939.”
Another factor of interest revealed by Livingston is that while there has been a decline in the work-week and the output per worker has greatly increased, as previously mentioned, the output per worker has been two-thirds greater than the increase in output per man-hour. This means that the process of rationalization, i.e., the rate of exploitation of labor, has greatly increased. One of the features of the crisis years was the rise of productivity with a reduced labor force and this was one of the reasons, though not the most important, for the inability of American capitalism to relieve mass unemployment.
Thus, on the basis of past trends and current tendencies, the potential “man-hours of productive employment in 1946 become twenty per cent greater than the actual employment in 1940, or ten per cent greater than in 1941.” Taking the figure of 2,000,000 as a “normal” army of unemployed in 1946, Mr. Livingston presents the following chart:



 


Average
1940


Average
1941


Average
1946




(Millions of persons)




Total labor force


55.5


56.1


59.4




Armed Forces


  0.6


  1.7


  1.9




Civilian labor force


54.9


54.4


57.5




Unemployed


  8.9


  5.6


  2.0




Civilian employed


46.0


48.8


55.5




Increase 1940–46                                                                             20 pct.




Increase 1941–46, adjusted for shorter hours in 1946 – 10 pct.



It will be immediately noted that the reduction by one-half for shorter hours is an assumption based on past trends. This seems very probable, but how great a decrease is difficult to estimate now because that too is dependent on many factors, economic and political, which the writer does not even consider, but which are completely dependent on the war, which side wins, how the victory is won and what the relations of the powers will be in the post-war period as respects the domination of the world market.
On the other hand, Mr. Livingston is quick to recognize that the reduction of the unemployed army to one million in March of 1943 has been unusual and resulted wholly from the demands of the war. “In other words,” he adds, “it is better than we can hope for during a peacetime year.”
Part of the explanation is to be found in the following situation: increase in productivity. From 1899 to 1941 “the number of persons employed in all manufacturing increased by 130 per cent. The average hours worked per week declined 25 per cent from 54.0 to 40.5. Thus the number of man-hours worked in manufacturing increased only 72 per cent. Over the same period the physical output of manufactures increased 458 per cent. Over the forty-two years the gain in output per man-hour averaged 2.9 per cent per year compounded. From 1929 to 1941 the increase was 3.1 per cent per year.” (emphasis mine – A.G.)
It is obvious that the sharp rise in per man-hour output during 1929–41 resulted from the requirements of the economic crisis. But the main over-all tendencies are dear. “In constant prices the gross national product in 1941 was approximately thirty-one per cent greater than in 1929 ... Thus the output per man-hour was increased by roughly one-third over the twelve-year period, or at the rate of about 2.5 per cent per year compounded.”
In addition to all the factors already cited, the problem of technological advances must be considered. That these will be enormous, goes without saying. To what extent productivity will be influenced is difficult to say now, for the facts are as yet unavailable. But the war will greatly accelerate technological progress as it did after the First World War. Livingston, while mentioning this factor, is unable to incorporate the problem in his forecasts except on the basis of past trends. But it is certain that the rate of acceleration will be greater now than twenty-five years ago.
 
Post-War Output and Employment
On the basis of his investigation, however, taking the figure of a 2.5 per cent per year average increase since 1929, our economist determines that by 1946 output per man-hour will be 13.5 per cent greater than in 1941. And further, on the basis of the available labor force, improved technology, increased productivity, Mr. Livingston writes: “the potential output of available manpower in 1946 would be 25 per cent greater than the actual output in 1941 and 46 per cent above 1940.”
Thus, for unemployment “to be held within reasonable bounds,” output in 1946 must “substantially exceed the 1940 level.” And suppose that this enormous output cannot be fulfilled? Mass unemployment will be the outstanding feature of economic life! If production is maintained on the level of 1940, on the basis of the same hours of work, Mr. Livingston concludes that there will be the 8,900,000 unemployed which was normal in 1940, plus 2,600,000 of the increased civilian labor force (population growth), plus 8,000,000 who will have been displaced by “improvements in efficiency over the six-year period, or a total of more than 19,000,000! And he adds: “Even with an average work-week five hours shorter than in 1940 there would be more unemployed than in 1932.” (emphasis mine – A.G.)
These are the prospects of the continued existence of capitalist society. All of this assumes the best variant of a quick military victory (not a paralyzing war-exhaustion). Only American economic dominance of the post-war world can effect the above prospect. But if the war is protracted, if exhaustion accompanies a long war, if American imperialism fails to achieve its economic and political aims, the above variant will be unrealized, i.e., a variant of 19,000,000 unemployed! It will be much worse! Thus the victory will confront the masses with economic conditions worse than 1932. The problems which the working class will need to solve in such a situation become inherently clear.
Fully conscious of these economic prospects, American imperialism plans to solve them by a ruthless drive for world political and economic hegemony. In this endeavor, it will face the competition of the other powers composing the United Nations. Whatever the concrete turn in events, international relations are certain to be sharply antagonistic, the economic and political rivalries severely intensified. Given the certain inability of capitalism to solve its problems on the home front, under conditions even less favorable than before the war, the class struggle will inevitably sharpen. It will be a period of heightened international and national contradictions of imperialist capitalism.
The new socialist society will be on the order of the day!
 



Hollywood has been called a land of fantasy which turns out movies – not for the purpose of depicting life and people but to distort life and people, to produce fairy tales, exciting romances, horse operas, tales of heroes long dead – all with the single aim of making money.
This is called entertainment value and it has succeeded because, after years of conditioning, the movie public accepts it – in the absence of anything else. Art values are completely subsidiary in the cinema world – profit is the primary consideration.
Thus, Americans get a steady diet of movies about love in which the poor girl marries the rich man – all of this, however, only after a series of near-catastrophic adventures. Or else, we get the hero pictures. Or the cycle pictures about war, great men, minor historical figures. On rare occasions, amid this welter of make-believe and distortion, we get a good picture which has artistic and entertainment value, some historical truth and social importance. But when compared with the mass of undiluted drivel that is produced by the ignorant rulers of the movie companies, it is totally insignificant.
That is why Hollywood gave the world a distorted picture of America. People in Europe, South America and the Far East thought of the United States as a land where everyone was rich – there were no poor people. This country appeared to the peoples of other lands as one in which nobody worked, everyone lived a life of leisure in immense luxury. Or, this was a country ruled by gunmen; that Al Capone was the high potentate of the forty-eight states; that all rich were crochety old men with hearts of gold; that cowboys, Indians and rustlers ruled the West, shooting up saloons and seizing women and cattle – in a word, everything but the truth.
 
Falsifying a Bad Book
It took Warner Brothers, probably the most sickening of all the Hollywood companies, to reach a new low in filming the greatest lie in cinema history. For Mission to Moscow, issued as a movie version of ex-Ambassador Joseph Davies’ book by the same name, is a lie from its opening scene to the closing. It is not a faithful reproduction of a bad book; it is not a documentary film, which nominally depicts a phase of life, or history, or a specific event. It is a lie which does not correspond to the book from which the movie was made. The scenario has the touch of the GPU, reflected in the mind and beliefs of Erskine Caldwell, the Stalinist literary fellow-traveler. The movie is a political offering to Stalin and his regime and was made to meet the political needs growing out of the war alliance between the United States and Russia. It was made for the specific purpose of making more palatable and acceptable to the people of this country the murderous regime of the totalitarian Stalin.
Has the film any official status? With the State Department? The Office of War Information? Nobody knows. It is said that of all the pictures Warner Brothers has submitted to the OWI, Mission to Moscow was not among them. Why? Was it because some people in Washington might have objected? Was it because there are currents of thought in this country which would have made public the scandal which is this movie before it was exhibited? Was it because Warner Brothers and those interested in a wide performance of the picture preferred to let it be shown before a storm of protest might prevent its release or compel drastic revision of all its lies? It is difficult to say, because those persons of responsibility in Washington and those who should comment are strangely silent!
Warner Brothers went all-out in producing this tedious and boring picture. Mission to Moscow was released after one of the biggest advertising campaigns in movie history. The usual previews by critics did not take place. Everything was prepared as a surprise. The ordinary movie reviewers went hook, line and sinker for the movie. These unfortunate people, lacking economic, political or social training, historically uneducated, themselves divorced from the real world, examined the picture as they would any ordinary Hollywood production. It did not dawn upon them that here was a purely political production destined to cause enormous controversy. Their reviews were of no importance. They concerned themselves with the question of whether Walter Huston was the proper person to enact Davies, whether the film characters looked or talked like the living models. Whether the movie told the truth, whether it adhered to the real history which transpired during their recent lives – of this there is nothing to be found among the everyday movie “critics.”
It took the political writers, columnists and commentators to open up a barrage against Mission to Moscow that threatens to become a veritable offensive against the biggest lie turned out by Hollywood.
 
Pious Mr. Davies Introduces the Picture
Mission to Moscow is opened with a five-minute statement by Davies testifying to the truth of the picture. Without shame the ex-Ambassador makes reference to his origins, his saintly mother and his adherence to the principles of Christian morality. Thereafter begins the series of lies! The mass of them are presented elsewhere, as in Labor Action. Let us, however, outline some of the more important ones.

Davies, in his book, stated that the principled reason for his being sent to Russia was to take up and see if he could not collect Russia’s war debts to the United States. The book makes the point that this ambassadorship to Russia was temporary, until a better place could be found, since Davies and his wife would have preferred the London post. In the movie, Davies is represented as being sent to Stalin’s country to find out and tell the truth about that country and to see what Stalin would do in the event of war.
 
In the book, Davies reports that his first experience upon crossing the border into Russia was the extremely bad food, the general appearance of poverty and dreariness of the country under Stalin. In the movies, Davies is elaborately greeted with a sumptuous meal. This is followed with scenes of happiness, sunshine and a joyful people.
 
In the book, Davies comments on the ever-present and terrifying OGPU, which makes life a constant nightmare for the people. In the movie, aside from a reference that the OGPU is spying everywhere, it is depicted in kindly and benevolent scenes as protectors rather than persecutors.
 
In the book, Davies writes of his own perplexity at the Moscow Trials, how “unbelievable” they were. He is aghast at the execution of the officers and generals without trial. He is aghast at the execution of the Old Bolsheviks, to whom he refers as old “government leaders.” It is all brutal and without sense. The trials repel him. Stalin’s justice is highly questionable and the conduct of the self-confessed saboteurs is suspicious. In the book, Davies recites the numerous trials of the different groups of Old Bolsheviks. But in the movie, all the trials are telescoped into one. Tukhachevsky, who was never tried, is shown confessing in a non-existent trial and uttering words which were made by Old Bolshevik Muralov. The defendants are depicted in the rôle of Hollywood villains!
 
Whereas Radek, Bucharin and the others were in jail during the ex-Ambassador’s stay in Russia, in the movie they are shown to have been out and about, plotting and planning sabotage and the destruction of Stalin’s state and industries. They are shown attending a diplomatic ball, where they hatched plots with the German, Italian and Japanese Ambassadors. That these Old Bolsheviks whom Stalin murdered were not even present at this diplomatic function can be very easily verified – but to the “truthful” ex-Ambassador and corporation lawyer upholding truth and Christian morality, any lie will do!
 

When No Mission Becomes a Mission

In the movie, Davies depicts himself as engaged in a mission of organizing the “democratic” and “peace-loving” powers in a front against aggression and fascism. As a matter of fact, he engaged in no mission whatever, other than that explained in the first point above. In the movie, he is shown visiting Churchill on his return from Russia, explaining to the present British Prime Minister the need for a bloc with Russia against Germany. As a matter of fact, he saw Churchill while he was Ambassador to Belgium and it had nothing whaever to do with what the movie describes.
 
While in the movie Russia is described as having been forced into a pact with Hitler because of the machinations of Britain and France, nothing is said or pictured of the fact that French and British military missions tried desperately for a period of months to get an alliance with Russia. Nor is the fact related that the Hitler-Stalin pact was already initialed while the French and British and Russian military staffs were negotiating. Nor is the fact related that the Russian representatives continued their negotiations even after the Hitler-Stalin pact was signed, because they did not know about it!
 
The movie says nothing about the significance of the Hitler-Stalin pact, nor does it point out that this alliance gave Hitler the go-sign to fire the opening shots in this war.
 
The movie is a complete distortion of the Finnish invasion by the Red Army. In the picture, Davies perpetuates the Stalinist lie, long after the event, that the invasion of Finland was for the express purpose of defending Russia against Germany. Yet at the time of the invasion, Stalin and his satellites claimed that the invasion was carried out in order to protect Russia against the threats of England, France and the United States! The picture creates the impression that the Administration was in accord with the invasion. But as a matter of fact, it was Roosevelt who called for a “moral embargo” against Russia and for aid to Finland. Robert E. Sherwood, one of Roosevelt’s closest advisers, wrote a play especially designed to win the sympathy of the American people for the Finns. The play denounced the invasion, as did the whole American press. But now, in the movie, and after the fact, in the hope that people’s memories will be short, Davies and his collaborators on the film have distorted the whole history of the event.
 
The movie shows a scene from the League of Nations wherein Haile Selassie makes an appeal to all its members against the brutal invasion of Ethiopia by the fascist Italian armies. Litvinov is then depicted as calling upon all the nations to rally behind Ethiopia. But the movie says nothing about the fact that Russia itself violated the covenant of the League by sending oil and other supplies to Mussolini to aid him in his war against the defenseless people of the invaded country.
 
The movie shows that upon Davies’ return to this country he engaged in a one-man campaign to win this country to its present policies, always championed by President Roosevelt. But the movie fails to show that precisely in the period when Davies was supposed to be making this veritable Superman campaign, the American Stalinists, pursuing the policies of their Moscow mentors, campaigned against the Allies, fought conscription, opposed the war budgets, and denounced England and the United States, not Hitlerite Germany, as war-mongers.
 
The movie does not show Stalin and von Ribbentrop smiling at each other during the signing of their pact. It fails to quote Premier Molotov’s declaration after the pact that “fascism is a matter of personal taste.” A Lend-Lease Offering to Stalin

We have cited some of the more obvious lies of the picture, the most glaring distortions of historical truth. There are many more like them, some just as important and some of a minor character – for the picture is fiction, pure and simple.
What is the purpose of all this? Who is being served by a GPU version of history? Naturally, the war and the fact of an American alliance with Russia makes possible the production of this fraudulent cinema. But even the exigency of the war is not a complete explanation of this bare-faced misrepresentation, this falsification of history. For in addition to the American-Russian alliance, which is the root of the distortion, there is the added element that it gave the Stalinists in this country an opportunity to push through their own vicious anti-democratic and anti-socialist propaganda. The willingly gullible Joseph Davies made an admirable foil for the Stalinist cinematic frame-up.
Thus, Congress, for whom revolutionary socialists have not the slightest brief, is represented as composed of a bunch of boobs. The socialist movement and the working class in general would be committing a crime against themselves if they believed that the parliamentary representatives of American capitalism were all morons. This is not true and never was true. They are diabolically clever representatives and defenders of imperialist capitalism and they serve their class exceptionally well.
But in comparing the so-called efficiency of the totalitarian Stalinist regime, where dissension is cured by execution, with the terrible inefficiency of the American parliamentary system, the picture conveys the idea that what is needed here is a little bit of blood-letting à la Stalin. Thus, too, Roosevelt is presented in oligarchical glory, a god-like figure who is all-wise and all-knowing. In this manner, the totalitarian idea and the totalitarian practice are subtly inculcated in the minds of the American people.
Roosevelt, Stalin and Joe Davies, these were the men who were right from the very beginning; they foresaw everything; they planned everything right! Those who opposed them, those who oppose them now, whether they be other sections of the capitalist class, liberals or revolutionary socialists, are fascists or dupes of fascism!
It has been said that Mission to Moscow has the purpose of glorifying Roosevelt and his policies, to prove that he was right about everything. But the picture does more than that. It glorifies Stalin, his regime, his policies. Most of the picture is devoted to that single purpose. But it could not be done without violating the truth, distorting history and lying about every event of importance that has transpired in the last ten years.
It is necessary that the widest protests be lodged against this vile picture, before its lies and distortions seep into the minds of people, before the type of thinking that is embodied in the picture and the practices of totalitarian Stalinists, who are its chief exponents, become a serious factor in American life. For here the reverse side of the totalitarian coin is revealed – and its face is as ugly as the face of fascism.
 



The announcement on May 22 by the Praesidium of the Executive Committee of the Communist International that it was proposing its dissolution to its affiliated sections came with the suddenness we have become accustomed to expect from Stalin’s Russia. The parties affiliated to the Comintern were not advised beforehand that its Praesidium had such a proposal under consideration. In a completely totalitarian manner, the proposal was given to the capitalist press and the “Communist” parties learned of it from this source. As was to be expected, those parties which continue to exist have declared their complete agreement with the Moscow action.
What is the significarice of this FORMAL action taken by the Communist International? Does it mean that the Comintern will actually dissolve? Does it mean the end of an international organization of socialism?
In order to answer these questions it is necessary to understand that with the advent of Stalinism, the Communist International ceased to be an organization devoted, to the task of fighting for the establishment of a world socialist society. With the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the destruction of the workers’ state, Stalinist society has evolved a new type of state, a state of bureaucratic collectivism – the rule of a new class of bureaucrats owning and controlling the nationalized property.
Stalin’s Russia is a nationalist society; it is the enemy of socialism and any movement which seeks to establish the socialist society – the free order of the exploited peoples of the world. Under Stalin, the Communist International was made to conform to the. nationalist interests of Russia. Every situation which developed in other countries, promising to further the new world order of socialism, was brutally destroyed – not only by the forces of reaction and fascism, but by international Stalinism acting through its agents in the “Communist” parties of other countries, and through the GPU, which operates throughout the world.
 
Why the Comintern Was Formed
The Communist International was formed in March of 1919 in Moscow. The victory of the Russian workers in the Revolution of November 1917 made it possible to convene the representatives of the revolutionary socialist parties of the world and to form this once brilliant international of socialism. But its real origin lay in the ruins of the labor movement brought about by the chaos of the First World War. The men responsible for the convening of the 1919 Congress were Lenin and Trotsky and their international co-thinkers.
They regarded the victory of the Russian workers as only the first step in the triumph of world socialism. As Marxists, they knew that socialism could exist only as a world society, , and that the task of the Communist International was to gather the independent revolutionary socialist parties of the world into one united organization, to exchange ideas and experiences for the single purpose of advancing the international interests of the oppressed.
This concept was not based on the idea that the problems of the workers were the same in all countries. On the contrary, the leaders of the Communist International understood full well that the problems of the various parties were quite different and that their specific tactics would be different. What, then, would bind these parties in one international organization?
This bond was the recognition that the principal aim of the workers everywhere – that is, the establishment of the power of the workers as the first step toward socialism – was the same, that it was an international problem. Moreover, the concept of socialism as an international social order based on the cooperative relationship of the peoples of all countries made such a world organization necessary ...
This was not wishful thinking. It was the outgrowth of the conditions prevalent in capitalist society. Marxism pointed out that in an economic sense, capitalism was itself an international order. Modern capitalism is based upon world trade, a world division of labor, and the interdependence of nations. One of the main contradictions of this capitalist order is that, while it is international in character, it remains national in form. Thus the national capitalist states remain in competition with each other, reaching periodic stages of crisis, war, destruction, poverty and unemployment.
Because capitalism had outlived its usefulness, that is, its progressive function, socialism was on the order of the day. To realize socialism, an international organization of the revolutionary socialist movements was indispensable. This was the underlying purpose behind the organization of the Communist International of Lenin and Trotsky.
Thus, when the Praesidium of the Stalinist International declares the contrary, it lies. In this lie, it pays verbal allegiance to the idea of internationalism while it carries out in practice the reactionary doctrines of nationalism, a nationalism based on a new type of ruling class (the Stalinist bureaucracy) resting upon a new type of property (nationalized property). Listen to what the Comintern says about the reasons which prompted its action:
“But long before the war it had already become increasingly clear that to the extent that the internal as well as the international situation of the individual countries became more complicated, the solution of the problems of the labor movement of each individual country through the medium of some international center would meet insuperable obstacles.
“The deep difference in the historical roads of development of each country of the world; the diverse character and even the contradiction in their social orders; the difference in level and rate of their social and political development, and finally, the difference in the degree of consciousness and organization of the workers, conditioned also the various problems which face the working class of each individual country.
“The entire course of a century, as well as the events for the past quarter accumulated experiences of the Communist International, have convincingly proved that the organizational form for uniting the workers as chosen by the First Congress of the Communist International, and which corresponded to the needs of the initial period of the rebirth of the labor movement, more and more outlived itself in proportion to the growth of this movement and to the increasing complexity of problems in each country; and that this form even became a hindrance to the further strengthening of the national workers’ parties.”
The three paragraphs are filled with distortions. What it actually says is that the organization of the Communist International was a mistake! Reading it, one would believe that the Communist International was formed because it believed the conditions in all countries to be alike, that the rate of political development was the same internationally, and that the problems of the workers’ organizations everywhere were the same. This is an utter falsification.
 
World Situation – Then and Now
When the Communist International was formed it was also extremely difficult to maintain good relationships between the parties and the international because of the persecution of the movement and the objective situation in which the Soviet Russia of Lenin found itself. That, however, did not prevent the formation of the International and its functioning.
The outbreak of the present war did not prevent Stalin’s International from functioning. Witness how well the Communist Parties in Great Britain, France and the United States carried on a struggle against the war during the Hitler-Stalin pact. Communicating its decision to sabotage the Allies was found to be quite easy.
Recall the First World War. The Socialist International destroyed its basis for existence when the national parties supported their respective imperialist governments. The International could not meet, and it too experienced “difficulties,” but not even the Social Democratic misleaders of that body dared to “formally” dissolve it.
In its founding Congress, the Communist International clearly stipulated the reasons for its formation. It was based on world conditions not unlike the present. The “internal as well as the international situation of the individual countries” was “complicated,” and “the solution of the problems of the labor movement of each individual country through the medium of some international center ... (met) ... insuperable obstacles.”
At that time there also existed a “deep difference in the historical roads of development of each country of the world.” Their characters were “diverse” and even their social orders were “contradictory.” The whole Communist International understood that capitalism developed “unevenly,” that the degree of consciousness and organization of the workers in all countries were different, and that their problems were different.
Here is what Lenin had to say about the formation of the Communist International:
“The Third International was in reality created in 1918, after the protracted struggle with opportunism, and ‘social chauvinism,’ especially during the war, had resulted in the formation of a Communist Party in various countries. The formal recognition of the International dates from the first congress of its members held in Moscow in March 1919. The most prominent feature of the Third International, namely, its mission to carry out the principles of Marxism and to realize the ideals of socialism and the labor movement, manifested itself immediately in that this ‘third international association of working men’ has to a certain extent BECOME IDENTICAL WITH THE LEAGUE OF SOCIALISTIC ‘SOVIET’ REPUBLICS.
“The First International laid, the basis of the international struggle of the proletariat for socialism.
“The Second International marked a period of preparation, a period in which the soil was tilled with a view to the widest possible propagation of the movement in many of the countries....
“The importance of the Third Communist’ International in the world’s history is that it was the first to put into life the greatest of all Marx’s principles, the principle of summarizing the process of the development of socialist and the labor movement, and expressed in the words, the dictatorship of the proletariat” (the democratic workers’ state – Ed.).
As if in anticipation of the present decision of the Praesidium of the Comintern, Lenin added:
“Any Marxist, nay, anyone conversant with modern science, if asked whether he believed in the probability of a uniform, harmonious and perfectly-proportioned transition of various capitalist countries to the dictatorship of the proletariat, would undoubtedly answer that question in the negative. In the capitalist world,there had never been any room for uniformity, harmony and perfect proportions. Every country has brought into prominence now one, then another, feature or features of capitalism, and of the labor movement. The rate of development has been varied.”
In the early years of the Communist International, this was the prevailing theory. Difficulties of communication, objective difficulties of functioning, uneven development of capitalist countries, different tactics for different parties, varying rates in the growth and activities of the national parties, had nothing whatever to do with the necessity for the existence of the international organization of the revolutionary socialists of the world. It only stressed the nature of the problems which had to be overcome, and the general difficulty of ushering in the new society of genuine freedom and security for the whole of mankind.
 
Stalin’s Totalitarian Rule
But this Communist International died a long time ago. Only the formal structure and the name remained. For it truly became a Stalinist International, interested only in the preservation of the rule of Stalin’s bureaucratic regime in Russia. Its chief role has been to act as the shock troops of Russian diplomacy. The national parties enjoyed ho independence. Their policies were decided in Moscow; their leaderships were changed at will. The question Which interested Stalin and his cohorts was simply this: What service can these organizations render me? And thus the Communist International was completely subordinated to the interests of the new Russia of Stalin!
When it was first formed, the Communist International was a democratic body. Its statutes required that it meet at least once every two years, to examine its policies, to correct them if necessary, to adopt new ones, and in general to take an inventory of the condition of the world organization and to ELECT its international leadership. Between the years 1919 and 1922, four congresses were held. The Fifth Congress met in 1924. Under Stalin, however, the Sixth Congress met four years afterward in 1928, and the Seventh Congress, or the last held by the. Comintern, convened in 1935. Thus, in a period of almost nineteen years, the Communist International, under Stalin, met only twice!
The war has undoubtedly changed Stalin’s mind about how to use his international apparatus, in what form it may further be; employed. For his present purpose, the establishment of a closer working alliance with Great Britain and the United States, the formal existence of the Comintern seems to be cumbersome and expensive. Moreover, in the present campaign to make Stalin and his state acceptable to millions in both countries and to enhance the alliance which is being worked oat by these nations, the Comintern is a stumbling block. Thus, if it stands in the way of the national interests of the bureaucratic collectivist state in Russia, then there is nothing left to do but to dissolve it.
How? By the simple expedient of killing it at the top. The Praesidium, meeting in Moscow under the patronage of the Kremlin regime, needed only a signal from Stalin. It acted at once. The decision was made. The parties throughout the world are “freed” from their obligations and with their customary docility they accept this formal self-destruction.
 
Only a Formal Dissolution
Will these parties actually dissolve? This is very unlikely. They will in their “new form” continue as they have in the past to serve the best nationalist interests of Stalinist Russia. That is, the ONLY basis for their existence: as the international arm of the Stalin dictatorship.
When the Comintern says that it hopes the end of the war will make possible the reorganization of an international upon a new basis, it merely signifies that the present Stalinist organizations throughout the world will hold themselves in readiness for whatever order will come from Moscow. Thus the present “dissolution” is merely a subterfuge to improve the international position of Stalin in the war, and in preparation for a post-war period.
Nothing has fundamentally been changed by the action of the Comintern. One of the greatest menaces to the international working class remains organized Stalinism throughout the world, whether in a functioning international or in one FORMALLY, BUT NOT ACTUALLY, dissolved.
The future of the workers’ movement, the future of socialism, depends upon the quickest divorcement of the labor movement from the cancerous influence of international Stalinism – that enemy of the free society of world socialism.
The future lies in a reorganization of the international movement of the oppressed of the world, in the re-establishment of a true socialist international based on the teachings and the spirit of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, those valiant, fighters against oppression, exploitation, war and poverty.
 



For the fifth time since the outbreak of the war, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill have met, together with their respective experts, to discuss the war and map out their strategy. The meeting of the heads of the two most powerful members of the United Nations comes on the heels of the current victory of Allied arms in the North African campaign.
The victory in North Africa undoubtedly marks a significant stage, if not a definite turning point in the war. For the first time since the war began, the initiative in the struggle has gone over to the Allies. It is Germany and Italy which are now on the defensive in the European theater. Moreover, while Axis strength remains stationary, and may even be declining, the military strength of the Allies is growing. Hitler is fighting a war on two fronts, something which he sought to avoid when the war began.
It seems quite apparent that Italy, for all decisive purposes, is knocked out of the war or will soon be eliminated as an important factor to be considered by the Allies.
 
End of War a Long Way Off
The victory in North Africa over German forces demonstrates that the German army is not the invincible horde it was pictured to be a year or two ago. The battles in Lybia [sic!], Tripoli and Tunisia have shown that, given manpower and the necessary weapons and supplies, the Germans can be fought to a standstill and defeated.
The sudden breakdown of the German defenses before Bizerte and Tunis his given rise to a wave of optimism that the war may be over very soon. Nothing of the sort is true! What is true is that the next stage of the conflict, an invasion of the European Continent, will bring the war to a higher and more intensive period.
The conclusion of the war is still a long way off. This is the main point in the statement of government officials and important press columnists. The serious writers are all agreed that the war, in the European theater at least, will not be over for another two or three years. Government authorities warn against the false optimism which sees the end of the war by next spring.
 
Where Are the Four Freedoms?
The Roosevelt-Churchill meeting is, without doubt, concerning itself with these military questions. To date, however, no information has been forthcoming about their deliberations. We do not, of course, expect any military information, that is, a disclosure of the strategy of their armed forces in the next stage of the war. But the question of war aims and post-war aims is of extreme importance for all the peoples of the world. On these important subjects, the conferees are totally silent.
This silence is in sharp contrast to the position taken by the state leaders of the United States and Great Britain when the latter was fighting a completely defensive war, and in the first months of America’s entry. The propaganda about the “people’s war” was spread far and wide. Promises about “the beautiful life” AFTER THE WAR were constantly on the lips of government officials – promises, of course, couched in the vaguest and most incomprehensible terms. All of this was culminated in the Roosevelt-Churchill meeting aboard a warship, where the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms were promulgated.
There was much ado about the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms for a long time. But since the upturn in the military fortunes of the United Nations, less and less emphasis has been placed upon these doctrines, which are poor repetitions of Wilsons’ Fourteen Points.
As a matter of fact, those who made these promises never took them seriously. Hardly had they been uttered than Churchill made it clear that they were not meant to apply to the British Empire – specifically India.
The Charter and the Four Freedoms are hardly mentioned at all now. In practice, especially in North Africa and India, they are violated. Witness the bowl of the liberal press and the liberal columnists and radio commentators. They blame the State Department. They claim that the actions of the State Department in North Africa, where political power was placed in the hands of reactionaries and semi-fascists, were committed without the knowledge of the President and in opposition to the policies of Churchill. This is the most extreme kind of nonsense. Roosevelt is responsible for North Africa.
The one factor these commentators completely overlook is that, as the power of the Allies mounts, as their military perspectives improve and the prospects for winning the war become stronger, they have less and less need to make promises to the peoples of the world, or to repeat the promises already made. Churchill and Roosevelt know why they are fighting this war; they know it has nothing to do with a “holy crusade” – that its purposes are hard-bitten and clear-headed imperialist considerations. They can’t very well tell the people that. Therein lies the explanation for the complete silence of Roosevelt-Churchill, either at their various conferences, or separately, on the question of war aims or post-war aims, except for increasingly vague generalizations.
 



The Office of Price Administration has announced a partial and piece-meal roll-back of prices. This fact alone is proof, if any proof was needed, that prices of the essential goods needed by the mass of people were away out of line with their wage standards. What the OPA has said in effect is that the high cost of living has risen beyond all their expectations, and beyond the ability of the people to live on their present wage levels.
On May 4, the United Press announced that “OPA officials; admitted that prices, particularly in the food line, are practically, out of control.”
What does this statement mean? It means that the OPA did not exercise control of prices. There were no real price ceilings. The profiteers, in the form of the big farmers, connected with big business, the big commission and wholesale concerns, the large food processors, the immense chain outfits, were having a price holiday at the expense of the overwhelming majority of the people!
Where was the OPA? Sitting on the sidelines watching the prices go up, and occasionally giving them a lift. The head of the OPA, Prentiss Brown, announced some months ago, that it was impossible to really control the prices of the most essential commodities, and that prices for these necessities of life would rise steadily month after month! Why, then, the sudden decision to roll back prices?
The answer is to be found in the heroic struggle of the United Mine Workers of America. It was the fight of the miners which called the attention of the whole country to the scandalous situation which exists on the price front. For this, the entire labor movement owes a debt of gratitude to the UMW. The miners’ union declared the cost of living had mounted so high in their areas that, unless their wage demands were met, starvation would be rampant throughout the coal fields. It is a matter of life and death.
The demands of the miners met a cold response on the part of the coal operators, who are profiting out of the war effort. The operators were playing a clever game. They knew that if they refused to negotiate a new contract with the miners the case would have to go to the War Labor Board, which operates under the infamous Little Steal formula. The formula of the WLB was a guarantee that the miners would get nothing from that body. It meant that the miners would have to go back to work under the same old conditions – unless they were prepared to stand up to the coal operators, the Administration, which was ready to beat the miners down with troops, and the miserable boss press, and tell them all that the miners were ready to strike for their demands.
From the press, one received the impression that it was not the miners who were making this glorious fight for existence – but an individual named John L. Lewis. Would it have been different if the president of the UMW was named Smith, or Jones, or Brown? Nonsense! The miners would have been vilified and abused in the same way no matter who their leader was. But the coal diggers of America are old campaigners. They saw through the whole scheme because it was an old scheme of divide and conquer. They knew that if their demands are won, the only group who would suffer would be the coal operators and the food, clothing and rent profiteers. That is, they knew the only one who would be hit by their demands are those who get the profits from their toil.
When the miners struck they brought the whole situation to a head. They not only acted in their own behalf, but for the whole of the laboring people of this country. This was reflected in the tremendous wave of support which the miners received throughout the organized labor movement. Because the conditions in the coal mining areas of the country are to be found in all other industrial centers.
It was only when the miners showed that they intended to strike that the OPA made the gesture of sending investigators into the coal fields to discover to what extent prices were violated. But instead of sending investigators secretly to these areas, the OPA announced the step publicly, thus making it possible for price violators to lower their prices. What was the net result of the OPA investigation?
They found that prices in the coal areas were “not out of line.” Prices averaged, said the OPA, “about five per cent above the ceiling prices.” This is their conclusion from a sample testing.
But if prices are “riot out of line,” why does the OPA decide to ATTEMPT to roll prices back to September 1942? Because the real truth is that the cost of living has risen far beyond any wage increases that the workers have received.
 
Why Have Prices Risen?
Why have prices risen? They have risen because the vested interests dealing in the commodities which the people need in order to live have been super-profiting under the special conditions created by the war. The capitalist-boss press lies when it says that prices have risen because the wages and salaries of the workers and the little people have advanced above the cost of living.
The best proof of that is to be found in the most recent action of the War Labor Board. The ink had hardly dried oh the presidential “hold the line” order, when the WLB asked Economic Stabilization Director James F. Byrne to restore its power to grant wage increases to eliminate gross inequities. The War Labor Board proves by its own experiences that those wages which were increased had no effect whatever upon prices. It cites the fact that “in only eight cases out of every 3,000” were prices affected by wage increases, and that on the whole these wage increases, nowhere comparable to the rise in the cost of living, have had only “a microscopic effect upon prices.”
But the workers do not need this kind of testimony from the WLB. They know by their living experience that the price situation in this country is a scandal, that there is no control of prices and the cost of living. They know that the only control exercised by the Administration has been control of wages, and an adherence to wage ceilings!
The OPA announces that it will roll back the pride of many foods ten per cent. This is merely appeasing the laboring masses. George Meaney, secretary-treasurer of the American Federation of Labor, declared that it is not enough for the OPA to roll back prices on SOME food articles, and then only by ten per cent. Meaney said:
“This will not begin to give the little people of America the relief they need. When basic foods have gone up 20, 25 and 30 cents per pound, it is not enough to snip off a penny here and two cents there. A reduction of ten per cent on seven items, when an increase of 100 per cent and more has taken place on dozens of items, is not enough.”
Price control is a misnomer. There has not been any price control. There has been an almost unlimited rise in prices and those who have had to pay for it have been the working people of the country!
 
How Control Prices?
We have already stated that one of the principal reasons why prices have risen is that there was no real attempt at price control by the Administration. When Prentiss Brown publicly stated that it was impossible to really control food prices, he merely gave the signal to the profiteers to go the whole hog. But another reason why prices have risen, with such disastrous effects upon the people is that the labor movement, cooperatives, fraternal organizations of the people and the consumers in general were not permitted to have a say about prices or help in their control. In other words, those who directly suffer from price increases had nothing to say about it and had no means of exercising any control.
How does the Administration propose to roll back prices now? Here is the real joker in the situation. The Administration proposes to roll back prices (some prices and only to a limited extent) by giving a subsidy to the food profiteers. Under such conditions, the food profiteers will gladly roll back prices, because their huge profits will be insured by a handout from the government.
 
FDR’s Subsidy Plan
Roosevelt’s order for a roll back of prices was accompanied with the directive that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation aid the price roll back by setting aside $300,000,000 to compensate the big farmers, the big commission houses, the merchants and the food processors for price reductions! This amount may be increased to $500,000,000 if more than a few food items are included in the roll back.
What is the net effect of this subsidy? It will still guarantee the profits of these gentlemen. It keeps as heavy a burden on the people because in the end taxes will have to make up for the handout given the gentlemen who trade in food and the necessities of life. The whole subsidy idea is a subterfuge!
The food merchants like the idea of a subsidy. It makes no difference to them if they get their extra profits directly from the people, or if the government hands it to them in the form of a subsidy – later to be regained from the people. In the New York Times of May 10, Seeman Brothers, Inc., owners of White Rose products, published a full page ad with a speech of Raymond Gram Swing in support of the Roosevelt subsidy plan. Workers must not be fooled by all this. They must stand up and say: We want a real reduction of prices and we want a RAISE IN WAGES so that we can meet the increased cost of living!
The workers must say: We don’t care about the profits of big business. You say that the war means equal sacrifice. For us it has meant real sacrifices – wage freezing, job freezing, higher taxes, higher prices. For the bosses it has meant greater profits. Let us see you eliminate the war profits of big business.
The situation in the country is fast coming to a head. The miners’ fight clarified the issues. All honor to them! The WLB was put on the spot, and the proof that the miners were right is that the WLB itself demands that it be given expanded rights in dealing with wage matters. The AFL and the CIO now threaten to resign from that body unless the Presidents order to “hold the line” is made more flexible so that the WLB can meet the demands of the workers faced with the high cost of living. The President himself is reported to be reconsidering the question of prices and wages – so unfair and unequal are the burdens which fall on the people.
The situation demands that, on the price front at least, labor and the consumers set up their controls. Nobody else can or will do it. But the labor movement and the consumer must have authority and power to exercise such control. If the control of prices remains lodged in the OPA and in individuals who represent big business, or are allied with them; or are influenced by them; the people of the country face the: dreadful prospect of a worsening price situation and a continued lowering of their living standards.
The miners pointed the way out – let it be a living example for the rest of labor!
 



A very important survey on post-war prospects of production and employment has just been completed by S. Morris Livingston, head of the Department of Commerce’s National Economic Unit. This survey forecasts mass unemployment at the end of the war, together with an increase in production. It is impossible to overestimate the importance of this for every worker in the country.
Right now there is very little unemployment. The war economy has absorbed most of the population. At the beginning of this year there were only one million unemployed! One million unemployed at the height of war production! But this is a low figure when one recalls that in 1940 there were still almost nine million unemployed!
The mass of workers realize that their present employment and wages, offset by the extremely high cost of living, cannot last beyond the war. They are opposed to the Roosevelt edict freezing wages, not only because it is unfair when compared to the enormous profits of big business, but because they realize that if they do not get a living wage now, they will be doomed as soon as the war is over.
This feeling of the worker, based on the experiences of the FIRST WORLD WAR, is not just a mystic belief. Every intelligent observer knows that the worker faces mass unerrtployment, and the heartaches of WPA and relief.
But Mr. Livingston, a government functionary, demonstrates that unemployment is not a mere possibility after the war, but a dead certainty. He writes that by 1946, IF the war is over by then, the capacity to produce with available manpower will be fifteen to twenty per cent greater than in 1940, and ACTUAL OUTPUT will be forty to fifty per cent greater than in 1940. When the war is over the majority of the goods now produced will no longer be required. That means that “the nation’s output after the war must substantially exceed the 1940 level if unemployment is to be held within reasonable bounds.”
Estimating a total labor force of approximately 59,500,000 in 1946, Mr. Livingston says that there will be a NORMAL army of unemployed of two million. But there has been vast technological progress, which is leading to a highly increased productivity. Mr. Livingston writes:
“Assuming only a continuation of the past trend, the output per man-hour in 1946 will be 13.5; per cent greater than in 1941 and twenty per cent greater than in 1940 ... Combining the potential increase in man-hours of employment and the projected increase in output per man-hour, the potential output of available manpower in 1946 would be twenty-five per cent greater than the actual output in 1941 and forty-six per cent above 1940.”
Speaking of a reduction of the unemployed army in 1943 to one million, he says that “it is better than we can hope for during a peacetime year.” All of which means that, once the war ends, the tremendous employment which exists now will end.
The conclusion is obvious, and is the essential point of the study made by Mr. Livingston: a mass army of unemployed. Workers on steady jobs today, earning relatively large wages, have nothing to show for their work. The high cost of living, already out of line with income, increased taxation and forced savings, drain everything the workers earn. They won’t have anything to lay over for a “rainy day.”
There are many reasons why the Roosevelt program should be rejected by the workers and their trade union organizations, but the prospect of mass unemployment and utter insecurity which will follow the close of the war, assuming that it will be over in 1946, is one of the best reasons why the workers must fight on now for their basic needs.
 



These are the days of the bandwagon jumpers. Since the turn in the war and the general improvement of the military position of the Allies, fascists, semi-fascists and hangers-on of the totalitarian regimes have suddenly blossomed forth as lovers of democracy.
Fighting a purely military war, which is the only kind of war the capitalist regimes of Britain and America are able to fight, they employ or make use, of every scoundrel, fascist or semi-fascist they can lay their hands on.
Thus Darlan became a useful person. France has his “merits,” The dictator Salazar of Portugal is enlisted in the “democratic” cause. King George of Greece and his fascist gang join this ”democratic” camp. And so do a host of other reactionaries, anti-Semites and totalitarians.
 
What Made Badoglio Jump?
This policy reached its full bloom in the enlistment of Marshal Badoglio on the side of the Allies.
Who is Badoglio? He is a “cousin of the King” and a general who earned his highest laurels under Mussolini’s regime. He had heretofore subscribed to all the murderous deeds of the fascist dictatorship, He became the leader of the war against Ethiopia and for some time commanded important sectors of the erstwhile Italian war front.
The steadily accumulating defeats of Italian arms, the worsening conditions at home ond the public opposition of the Italian masses led to the downfall of Mussolini, But Mussolini’s downfall gave Badoglio his great opportunity. Appointed by the King as the head of the new government, the marshal still sought to continue the war on the side of Germany. He jumped to the Allied cause only when it became clear that nothing could stop the Anglo-American invasion of Italy.
 
The “Democrat” at Work
Now the man who was appointed a marshal by Mussolini has blossomed into a “democrat,” according to an interview with the New York Times correspondent, Herbert L. Matthews. In this interview, Badoglio promised the restoration of democracy—after the war!
Yet, only a couple of weeks ago, he issued e statement justifying his dictatorial rule in Allied occupied Italy on the ground that the danger of communism was still great. Two liberals who attempted to issue a democratic newspaper were clamped into jail. There is still no sign that there is any real freedom for the people in that part of Italy which he has controlled since Italy’s declaration of war against Germany.
Faced with direct questions as to his intentions, the marshal announced that he will retire when the war ends and turn his tasks over to a “political body.” When asked what program he had in mind to bring about internal reform, Badoglio replied that he would be “violating precisely those democratic principles that were being established if he undertook a plan of reform that had not been submitted to a legislative body.” Nice trick, this one, since it avoided all discussion of how any legislative body will come into existence, or how soon free speech, free press, free organization and free elections will become a fact before such a legislative body is formed.
 
”Those Were Better Times”
Everything else in this interview was sham and evasion.
The marshal insisted on conveying to America and England that he had always wanted to fight on their side, and that the Italian people were always anti-German. It was all Mussolini’s fault—not the King’s, not his own, and not the Italian ruling class’s!
But he gave himself away, this gentleman did, when Matthews reminded him of their meeting during the war on Ethiopia. Here the marshal perked up and said “Those were better times for Italy!”
“Do you remember Termaber Pass,” he asked eagerly, “and those three days we waited while the road was being repaired and the Negus (Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia) fled?”
It must have warmed his democratic heart to think of how he led the slaughter of half-armed, spear-throwing native warriors in behalf of Italian imperialism. In this one reference, we have a picture of the real Badoglio—a blood-thirsty imperialist!
 
A Word About Territories
It was again revealed when he discussed the disposition of ”Italian territory.” Here the marshal acknowledged that Italy would have no claims on territories won from France, Yugoslavia and Greece. “These claims were a purely fascist conception.” (They are also allies of Britain and America.)
The marshall avoided mention of Albania, Ethiopia and the other African possessions. Were these perchance not the product of “purely fascist conception”? Or are they different because the marshal had a hand in the conquest of some of them?
Isn’t it clear that this leopard hasn’t changed a spot?
 



The meeting in Moscow of the foreign ministers of the United States, Great Britain and Russia came after a long period of uncertainty. It has been apparent for a considerable period of time that the relations between the three big powers of the Allies were deteriorating. Their differences extended from immediate military questions to political questions of post-war territorial divisions and the reorganization of Europe.
These differences continue to exist. The purpose of the Moscow meeting is to determine if it is possible to arrive at a common program, to resolve these differences by discussion.
If the meeting between the foreign ministers reaches a point of understanding, then, and only then, will Stalin agree to meet with Roosevelt and Churchill. His refusal to do so up to now is characteristic. He does not go in for “exploratory” conferences. This is enforced by the fact that none of the conferees, Hull, Eden or Molotov, is in a position to promise or grant anything. At most they can lay on the table some of their positions and smoke out each other.
Russia holds the center of interest at the conference and it is her demands which guide the course of discussions. In almost all respects she determined beforehand what would and what would not be subject to debate at the meeting. Stalin made it clear that he would not agree to a discussion of Russian borders any more than American could agree to discuss its borders (Texas, California, etc.). This was something which Russia would decide for herself.
While the deliberations in Moscow are still shrouded in mystery and reports continue to conflict, it is certain that Russia still demands the immediate opening of a second front.
This military demand has several political aspects to it: first, Russian objection to any major Allied front in the Balkans, which stems from her position that the Balkans is her sphere of operation and influence. Secondly, she is carrying the brunt of the war and wants relief – on the Western front. No other front is acceptable as a substitute. Even this “purely military” demand is important because the degree of post-war military strength of the individual powers will play an important and perhaps decisive role in the reorganization of Europe.
There are a number of equally important questions which divide the three powers. Russian demands in Eastern Europe are already made clear, and England and America are hardly in a position right now to do anything about them. Russia wants Southern Finland, the Baltic states, Eastern Poland, Bukovina, Bessarabia. She wants an outlet into the Mediterranean and has let hints drop about a base on the Bosphorous. Her demands in Asia are now clearer too. Iran, occupied by Russia and England, is a source of deep differences between the two countries. Stalin has let it be known that he wants an outlet to the Persian Gulf. Nor is that the end of his territorial desires. There are the Northern provinces of China, Sinkiang, and even Manchuria, to be reckoned with.
The United States and Great Britain are greatly disturbed for the simple reason that Russia is fighting the major war with Germany and is winning. They will either have to come to an agreement with Stalin, look on while Stalin takes what he wants, or resolve to war against him. This latter prospect is not an enviable one for either of the three countries after the present long years of fighting are over.
Russia, of course, looks on with great suspicion of the Anglo-American coalition. Stalin wants to dominate Europe, or at least to create sufficient barriers in the central part of the Continent to insure Russia against attack from the West.
America’s post-war needs will drive her on to seek domination of Europe, while England too would like to re-establish a balance of power on the Continent under her “benevolent” supervision and control.
Russia’s “Free German Committee” was at one and the same time a public announcement of her plans and a rejection of British-American aims to dismember the Third Reich and to destroy its industrial power. Thus the question of what .to do with Germany is crucial for the three powers. And here the differences are unmistakable.
The Moscow conference is a struggle for power, in essence no different from those of former years. Just as the conference itself is a form of compromise, so, too, its decisions, which will prepare the forthcoming meeting of the President, the Prime Minister and the Dictator, will be a compromise. The details are impossible to report, since none are given. But the above is at least, a summary of the issues which are now in, the discussion stage.
 



The New York newspaper, PM, which carries on a fight against all forms of racial discrimination, is now engaged in a campaign against anti-Semitism which, in our opinion, is extremely harmful.
The purpose of this campaign is to prove, in reply to the anti-Semites, that the Jews do not really control the world, or the United-States.
What device does PM employ in its campaign? It cites examples from business, government, the movies, writers, industry, the labor movement and political organizations, to show that the Jews are an extremely small minority, in business, industry, politics and culture. Thus, argues PM, the Jews cannot possibly control these things.
Obviously, the Jews, so small a minority all over the world and in this country, do not and are not likely to control life in this or any other country. But the thing which stands, out in the PM campaign is its cowardly retreat before the attacks of the anti-Semites in high places and in low ones.
 
What The PM Policy Means
It is the kind of argument which, drawn to its logical conclusion, would mean that if the Jews did make up the majority in one field of enterprise or another, in one field of culture or another, that would be a bad thing. It is one form of the argument that the Jews must remain in their place, and should not be represented at any time by a percentage greater than their population.
It is easy to see what this can lead to a witchhunt of Jews, a movement to deprive them of their democratic, political and economic rights. It would have nothing to do with ability, experience, education or welfare. It would be a simple arithmetical judgment which is a form of race or national prejudice, because it would soon be followed in respect to other nationalities and races, and finally to people of different religious faiths.
The Anti-Semites do not want the Jews represented by “proper percentages.” They want a total elimination of the Jews from all forms of social activity. They want to disfranchise the Jews altogether, they want to reduce the Jews. to the position of the Negro in the South and to deprive them of all social, political and economic equality.
The most important thing to understand about anti-Semitism is that it is a social, political and economic movement of reaction and that it serves anti-labor purposes!
 
What the Bosses Want
When an industrialist refuses to give a wage increase to his workers it is not because the workers are Jews, Irish, Italians or Slovaks. He refuses to give a wage increase to all who work for him, regardless of nationality, or religion, or color, because he makes profits from those in his employ, as workers. When workers resist the boss, it is not because he has a certain color, or religion, or is of a certain nationality.
They resist him as a boss because he wants to reduce their level of existence, and make more profit from them.
As socialists, it makes no difference to us who the capitalist is, what his color, religion or nationality may be. We oppose him because he is an oppressor of labor and profits from the sweat of the workers. This is true, whether the boss is a native American, Irishman, Englishman, German or Jew. And it is true, whether he is a Protestant, Catholic, or Mohammedan.
PM cannot understand this point of view because it is essentially a capitalist newspaper – even though a liberal one – interested in upholding the profit system and defending the “right” of the capitalist to exploit workers and profit from their toil.
 
The Socialist Viewpoint
We do not, of course, deny that race, religious and national prejudices exist, and that they are deep-rooted. But we know that much of it is induced from above by leaders of “society,” whose interests are served by such divisions among the workers.
Much of it is artificially maintained by the agitation of politicians, newspapers and the pulpit. Neither Congress, the press, nor the church, and, in this case, especially the Catholic hierarchy, has spoken out forthrightly on this question. Put the reason for if is that these forces are essentially on the side of the capitalists and against labor.
The way to fight this thing we are talking about is by a clear and militant opposition, without retreating one inch, not the way PM is doing. This is essentially labor’s battle. The future of labor depends upon its unity against all forms of reaction. The way to labor’s defeat is through disunity, by swallowing all the prejudices which make it the easy prey of a capitalist class whose well-being rests upon a divided working class.
 







The following is a chapter taken from the pamphlet, Incentive Pay – the Speed-Up, New Style, by Albert Gates. It is the answer of the Workers Party to the newly inspired campaign of big business to pat over the piecework speed-up system against which the labor movement has fought for so many years.



*
By far the most dangerous element in this situation is the Stalinist Communist Party and the unions it controls. These wreckers of the union movement concern themselves primarily with the second front and other questions of interest to Stalin’s foreign policy. Keeping labor docile and tied to the war machine and to the production of profits for big business is the chief activity of unions under Stalinist leadership. The vital issues which concern the welfare of the American working class are cast aside because they conflict with the interests of the Russian bureaucracy.
Earl Browder, leader of the American Stalinists, is the outstanding propagandist for the bosses on the incentive pay issue. When he intervened directly in the UAW dispute on, this subject he was soundly rebuked by that organization for his union-wrecking role.
Browder argues that incentive pay will increase the wages of the workers and that only the bosses are opposed to the scheme. Knowing full well what incentive pay really means, but pretending that big business is opposed to it because it might have to pay a little more for a great deal more profit, Browder says it is the duty of the workers “to force better profits on unwilling employers.” One would think that the employers have only to wait for word from Browder that the pickings on the incentive pay scheme are good. But really, they are not so shy as Browder would have the workers believe – and, it goes without saying, a thousands times more honest than this new lackey of Wall Street!
Why, then, do the Stalinists fight so vigorously for incentive pay? Are they concerned with the desire of the workers to get more money? This is nonsense. The American Stalinists, acting for the Kremlin tyranny, are Russian nationalist agents. Their sole interest is the preservation of the rule of Stalin and the new bureaucratic class which lives off the exploitation of the Russian workers. When Stalin was allied with Hitler, Browder and his cohorts were on the side of the Axis in the war. They were not in the least concerned with production. On the contrary, they were interested in keeping production at a minimum. Incentive pay was farthest from the minds of these American representatives of Stalin.
But when the two dictators broke their friendship, when Hitler’s legions invaded Russia and that country became the ally of England and later of the United States, the American Stalinists became super-patriots. Now, nothing that the workers do is enough. No sacrifice of American labor is great enough.
Are American workers producing vast quantities of goods? It is not enough. Is the American ruling class sending more aid to Stalin? No matter, it must send more.
Are Browder and his party concerned with the lot of the American workers? Not at all. According to their views, the American working class and the working class of the entire world must sacrifice everything for Stalin’s rule over Russia.
Doesn’t this sound contradictory? Not at all. What Browder demands of the American workers, Stalin takes from the Russian. Russia, under Stalin, has become a vast prison for the Russian working class.
The Russian workers have lost their independence, their free trade unions, their other organizations, and their rights. They are driven like a herd under a vicious speed-up system, There have been no wage increases for them since the war broke out, and they work a twelve-hour day seven days a week. Stalin has borrowed the worst from the American efficiency experts and applied it to the Russian workers.
Russia has its own variation of the piecework system and incentive pay. It is called “Stakhanovism.” Those participating are “Stakhanovites.” They are special workers who set the pace for all other workers. They are the finks in the factories, the type of men whom American workers would drive out of the shops and the unions.
Even so friendly an observer of Russian affairs as Wendell L. Willkie was compelled to write, on his return from a visit to Russia:
“The Stakhanovites, strange as it may seem to us, are actually pieceworkers, paid at a progressively increasing rate on a speed-up system which is like an accelerated Bedaux system. The Russian industrial system is a strange paradox to an American. The method of employing and paying labor would satisfy our most unsocial industrialist.”
 



The Allied policy toward colonial and subject peoples – not the words they utter about freedom, but their real, practical policies – is covered with hypocrisy. This is clearly revealed by the recent events in Lebanon.
The story is a simple one (see the article in this issue fully analyzing the history of the British-French struggle over that country). The Lebanese Parliament declared its independence.
With amazing swiftness, the French Committee of “National Liberation” (note the title), under the leadership of General Charles de Gaulle, declared martial law, arrested the Lebanese officials and proceeded to rule the country with the gun and the saber.
 
Why the Attack on de Gaulle
With equal swiftness, the British denounced the actions of the French, demanding the immediate release of the native president and his officials. The United States joined the British in denouncing the action of de Gaulle. Back of the British action was the fear of the whole Arab world, most of which is under the domination of British imperialism.
The French were quick to rescind their actions. De Gaulle charged that his delegate-general in Lebanon, M. Helleu, acted on his own when he instituted a reign of terror in the country.
But even more fundamental than the reaction that might have taken place in the Arab countries (and there were plenty of indications that they were furious about the whole event), is the British determination to dominate all the countries which surround their oil possessions in the Middle East. They got American support, because American oil companies also have large possessions in that area. They want the French out of the Middle East.
 
World-Telegram Gets Indignant
But listen to the New York World-Telegram, which speaks more or less in the same way as the rest of the capitalist press. On November 23 it wrote:
“The British and American governments should agree to no face-saving device whereby General de Gaulle perpetuates his dictatorship of Lebanon by releasing native officials for some sort of puppet role ... It would leave smoldering the Arab revolt that threatens Syrian and Lebanese bases essential to the Allied war effort, as well as the Iraq oil supply and the entire Near East. The best proof of the depth of native feeling against the French dictatorship is that the usually hostile races and religions have united in their fight for freedom.”
The editorial goes on to say:
“To weaken Vichy-Berlin control of Lebanon, de Gaulle’s commanding general in the summer of 1941 pledged Lebanese independence ... But as soon as de Gaulle got control he tried to prevent independence, which he finally proclaimed only under severe British, American and native pressure ... Unless he is willing to live up to his independence pledges to the Lebanese and to his obligation to co-operate fairly with Britain and the United States, he should no longer expect Anglo-American support.”
 
Dictatorship – and Dictatorship
But the choice of words in the World-Telegram editorial is indeed interesting. It speaks of the French “dictatorship” and “independence for Lebanon. But this hypocritical newspaper, reflecting the hypocritical policy of the Allies, is silent about other colonial countries.
There is no mention of “independence” for India, nor is there a call for an end to the British “dictatorship” in India. India is the most important example, but India is not alone. There is the whole British Empire, on which “the sun never sets.” There is the Dutch Empire, which robbed and exploited the East Indies for a hundred years or more, until the Japanese army took it over and continued this robbery and exploitation in behalf of its own capitalist class.
There is the French Empire, the Belgian Empire and also there is our own Puerto Rico. Of their independence, the World-Telegram says not a word. Of the dictatorships over these lands the World-Telegram, in its smug and pious denunciation of de Gaulle, is equally silent.
It goes without saying that we are for the independence of all colonial countries and subject peoples. We haven’t the slightest brief for de Gaulle or his gang. But neither are we much interested in editorials of the World-Telegram, or the hypocritical policy of the British Foreign Office. The latter might have some right to speak if it took itself out of India and relinquished its death-like grip on that country.
For our money, they are all in the same camp of imperialist brigands, exploiting the colonials for profit.
 



(Continued from last issue)
The class, taken by itself, is only material for exploitation. The proletariat assumes an independent role only at that moment when from a social class in itself it becomes a political class for itself. This cannot take place otherwise than through the medium of a party. The party is that historical organ by means of which the class becomes class-conscious. (Trotsky, What Next?)
In this brief statement Trotsky summarizes the key to the dispute on the national question. The revolutionary stature of the proletariat, its will to struggle, its consciousness, its education and experience, and, conversely, its “impotence,” are finally determined by the existence or non-existence of the revolutionary vanguard socialist party. Many of the other questions discussed, which are unrelated to this primary question, are totally beside the point. It is Johnson’s inability to comprehend the implications of the above quotation that leads him to write the really fabulous things which appear in his reply.
In the first part of my answer to him I tried to describe the state of the working class movement in Europe which is epitomized by the absence of any revolutionary socialist party on the whole continent. There should really be no difficulty in assessing the concrete position of the European proletariat from the viewpoint of its political organization, for organization is something tangible. You can point it out and describe it; you can determine the scope of a living movement, its strength and activity. But the most amazing thing about Johnson’s contribution is that, beyond his references to the many underground movements, he is unable to supply any concrete evidence whatever on the presence of absence of the revolutionary socialist party except to say, in general, that the working class movement in Europe today is stronger than it was before the war! Moreover, in the many writings he has published there is little that shows that he is even vitally interested in this master-key to the European, and therefore, the world situation.
Actually, the existence of mass revolutionary socialist parties in Europe would be a subjective factor of such magnitude as to change the whole relationship of forces between the bourgeoisie in all countries and the proletariat in all countries, and thus create a new objective situation.
If the working class on the Continent was politically organized, if it was as Johnson says, socialistically conscious, and “more determined than ever before in its history to struggle for socialism,” we would also have an entirely different situation in Europe. Certainly, the victory of Hitler in Germany and the trend toward reaction throughout the whole period prior to the outbreak of the war would have had a different result than the present relationship of class forces, and Europe would now be faced with a different kind of struggle than the national struggle. But we are led into a blind alley on the basis of Johnson’s views. It is impossible to adhere to them and really understand the European situation. Despite Johnson, the fact remains that the working class did suffer a crushing and paralyzing defeat. Its organizations, all of them, political parties, unions, cooperatives and, yes, fraternal organizations, were destroyed.
The unfortunate fact is that the revolutionary vanguard must begin again – not entirely anew, it is true, for we start with an accumulated experience of many decades – to reconstruct the workers’ movement and its vanguard organizations. It is necessary to add, at this point, that the revolutionary socialist party is the single indispensable requirement for a socialist victory and all talk of the socialist revolution without such parties is really self-agitation and breast-beating.
There is, in addition, another fundamental approach involved. Johnson has presented an “idealized” picture of an imminent European revolution for socialism which has no reference to the existence of the party of socialism – or to the realities in Europe. The most striking element in his “system” is the concept of “spontaneity.” The sweeping generalizations he makes about the character of the present epoch and the nature of capitalist perfidy are necessary to his “system.” There is no other way in which he can substantiate his views except bv painting the utter collapse of capitalism, its dismal future. The drawing of such a picture, without understanding the rôle and nature of the subjective factor in the class struggle, creates the illusion of the automatic collapse of capitalism and the spontaneous character of the rise of working class consciousness and the working class struggle, not merely against capitalism as such, but, above all, for such a conscious goal as socialism.
 
Spontaneity versus the Party
In the opinion of this writer, the present state of political development in Europe poses once more the Leninist concept (the party) of the socialist victory in contradistinction to the variety of notions which are properly described as the theory of “spontaneity,” or are expressed by the words “spontaneous revolution,” “spontaneous struggle,” or the “spontaneous development of the revolutionary party.”
Without a party, the working class cannot develop beyond trade-union consciousness. Without a party, the working class cannot become a socialist class, for “the history of all countries shows that the working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade union consciousness” (Lenin). For the development of socialist consciousness, a party is necessary because “this consciousness could only be brought to them [the workers] from without” (Lenin). While emphasizing that we are not starting all over again in Europe, we must remember that in striving to revive the political movement of the continental working class, we are dealing with a class that has not yet learned the most important lessons of its uninterrupted defeats, and remember also that after more than four decades of existence the European proletariat finds itself politically and economically unorganized.
Thus, in one sense at least, our job is more difficult. We have now to demonstrate to the working class not merely the superiority of our program and organization, but also to overcome the great damage done by the Second and Third Internationals. My own views on the national question and the prospects of the socialist victory in Europe and their relation to the revolutionary party are as clear as they are simple: without the formation of the revolutionary socialist parties throughout the Continent, all talk of the victory of socialism, the Socialist United States of Europe, “nearer, not further away,” becomes mere sectarian prattle required to bolster a faltering optimism.
Revolutionary socialists need to know the truth about an objective situation. The Marxian movement is not well served by false analyses, misrepresentation, or subjectivity in the field of politics, nor by ideas which manifestly reflect the influence of newspaper headlines and the pap of ignorant, but alarmist columnists. Nor is the movement served by taking too seriously the “radical” writings of the bourgeois demagogues who produce the underground papers which flood the metropolitan centers of America and England. To me, the national movements offer a way for the reconstruction of the revolutionary parties, and the national struggle itself becomes an avenue in which to carry on the fight for socialism, i.e., creates the possibility of raising the national struggle to a higher plane.
 
Substituting Fantasy for Reality
What Johnson has been trying to say, though not too directly, is that he advocates a revolutionary point of view while the resolution of the NC does not; that he sees revolutionary developments in Europe while the resolution does not. It goes without saying that what he attributes to the resolution is wholly false. It is not an honest interpretation of the resolution, as one can readily see by reading the section on the dual power which makes up, not a piece of the resolution, as Johnson says, but one of its most important sections.
Subjectivity completely dominates Johnson’s views, since what he presents as a picture of the European situation just does not exist except in his own mind. The following quotation, which is the key to his whole position, reveals that it is completely baseless in fact and purely the product of belief. He writes:
The NC resolution believes that Inasmuch as the proletariat is compelled to take upon itself the national defense against a foreign power it thereby becomes less class-conscious, less concerned with socialism, less concerned with socialism, less militantly determined to achieve the socialist revolution, I state unequivocally that exactly the opposite is the case, that inasmuch as the proletariat, particularly in France and Poland, now has to take upon itself the national defense in place of the bankrupt bourgeoisie, it is more class-conscious, it is more socialistic, and more determined than ever before in its history to achieve the socialist revolution. (Emphasis in the original)
This argumentation, like everything else Johnson treats “concretely,” is in the realm of religious faith, and not Marxism.
In the first place, Johnson is guilty of a ... misunderstanding. Anyone interested in the truth will easily see that the Workers Party resolution does not “believe” what Johnson attributes to it, namely, that the working class, when it takes upon itself “the national defense against a foreign power, it thereby becomes less class-conscious, less concerned with socialism, less militantly determined to achieve the socialist revolution ...”
The resolution of the party does not “think” in the terms attributed to it by its opponent. The resolution proceeds from the view that the national struggles in Europe propel masses in motion against the existing order of things; that this struggle by the masses lays the groundwork to agitate for socialist demands and the socialist society as the way out; but more important than this general condition that it would create, the struggle makes possible the reestablishment of the revolutionary socialist parties without which the struggle for socialism is mere parlor debate.
But with Johnson it is obviously different. He regards the working class now as a socialist working class, “more determined than ever before in its history (its whole history, mind you!) to achieve the socialist revolution.”
 
Revisionism – New Style
This single quotation, I believe, reveals the essential nature of the differences with Johnson. His early articles, which presumably established his agreement on the main agitation slogan, were filled with argument against it. Of what other significance was his insistence that the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe is “nearer, not further away,” that to “moderate the slogan ... is completely false. The only meaning of this is that it must be the main slogan! Exactly the opposite must be done.”
Or, what does Johnson mean when he says: “... the living truth is that the slogan [the Socialist United States of Europe] is now more concrete than at any other time since loss”? If it is more concrete, if “exactly the opposite must be done,” it should be the main political slogan now. Furthermore, if what he says is true – mind, you he is not speaking of the vanguard of the working class, i.e., the revolutionary socialist party, but of the whole working class, all over Europe! – then, placing the struggle for national independence to the forefront is a negation of the struggle for socialism, and if it is such a negation, it must be opposed by the conscious socialist elements. Yet Johnson insists he is for the slogan of national liberation as the main agitational slogan to be used in Europe today!
What Johnson is saying is this: after the victory of Hitler, after the victory of Franco, after the working class defeat in France, after the beginning of the present war which was not prevented by an organized, educated and powerful working class, after the decapitation of the proletarian movement and all its organizations, the workers, on the basis of these defeats and in the absence of a vanguard socialist party, have become “more class conscious, more socialistic, and more determined than ever before in its history to achieve the socialist revolution.” If the working class of Europe has been able to achieve this tremendous stage of development in the last year or two, after terrific defeats, without the aid of the vanguard socialist party, then Johnson has proved the position of the theorists of “spontaneity” and has destroyed Lenin’s position that the working class needs a revolutionary party to educate it beyond its “economic struggles” to give it socialist consciousness and to struggle for power!
Fortunately, Johnson hasn’t proved a thing. I say fortunately, because if his views became widespread, and the theory of the “spontaneous revolution” of the masses received wide support, the working class would be doomed to another series of defeats.
 
On the Role of the Party
Despite the thesis of Johnson, the position of the European working class is really easy to determine: there is not one serious revolutionary Marxist party in Europe. If this is today the single indispensable requirement for the socialist victory, and it does not yet exist, what then is required? Listen again to what Trotsky wrote about this question:
The proletariat assumes an independent rifle only at that moment when from a social class in itself it becomes a political class for itself. This cannot take place otherwise than through the medium of a party. The party is that historical organ by means of which the class becomes class conscious.”
All of this is so simple for Johnson that he does not even concern himself with the problem as the main problem in Europe. His sole answer is that capitalism organizes the working class in the factories. Ipso facto, the party is guaranteed! So simple! But listen to another ABC from Trotsky:
The progress of a class toward class consciousness, that is, the building of a revolutionary party which leads the proletariat, is a complex and contradictory process.
And further:
The task of the party consists in learning, from experience derived from the struggle, how to demonstrate to the proletariat Its right to leadership.
Isn’t this the problem in Europe today – the building ot party, the need for it to prove in practice its right to leadership of the working class, to accumulate experiences in the struggle, to win confidence? But to Johnson – as Trotsky wrote:
The historical problem that must be solved b decreed as solved already. The confidence yet to be won is announced at won already.
Is there anything in Johnson’s article that shows that he understands this question?
Because he does not understand this question, Johnson twists my assertion of the need to reestablish the working class organizations and above all, the revolutionary party, to mean that “you must even build a fraternal organization.” Sometimes called ... demagogy. The trouble with our r-r-r-revolutionary friend is that he makes his revolutions in his head and then concretizes them – with a pen and paper.
 
A New Twist on Democratic Demands
Consider again the national slogan. It is not put forth in that bare form alone. Revolutionists give ... flesh and blood by the addition of other democratic demands, demands which can set the masses into motion because they reflect their keenest desires. Such democratic slogans are: the right to free press, free speech, free organization, the right to free elections. Revolutionary socialists advocate and support such demands because they are the most consistent democrats and because the achievement of these demands, especially in the context of given European situations, enhances the struggle for socialism.
How does Johnson treat this question? Listen:
Johnson presumably does not know that in a fascist country, in general, you must use democratic slogans. Right to organize and a program of economic demands to educate the workers, that is what preoccupies the NC resolution which Gates so stoutly defends. The truth is, that, in occupied Europe today, given the fierce hatred of the invader which characterizes the masses of the people, their feeling that the foreign government is not theirs and cannot last; such slogans push the masses back. When used by a revolutionary organization as the main slogans after the slogan of national liberation they are thoroughly reactionary and place those who use them, for whatever, purpose, at the tail of the national movement. The slogan to emphasize after national liberation is the power of the workers in a workers’ government. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
What a fantastic muddle, indeed. In a fascist country, where the workers live in a state of complete subjugation, under a police regime, its organizations destroyed, its vanguard decapitated or incarcerated, and the masses more or less passive, there Johnson would raise the democratic slogans! In the occupied countries, however, where there is a vast movement of the masses, as he so eloquently proves, there the democratic slogans are reactionary! If Johnson has not turned this matter on its head, it is only because he is himself standing on his head.
The democratic slogans are a most important auxiliary to the slogan for national independence. They should and must be used simultaneously. It is the democratic slogans which give life and substance to the national slogan, which takes it from under ground and “throws it in the streets.”
Why are they reactionary? Johnson admits that the fight for national independence in the conquered countries is progressive. Are the democratic slogans reactionary because they retard this fight? Was it democratic slogans which prevented Italy from achieving national independence and from experiencing a rebirth of the mass movement of labor?
Johnson simply does not learn from the Italian situation or the Italian workers, whose instincts and demands are a thousand times superior to his schematic pedantry. The Italian masses demanded the right to organize, to free press and free speech! They demanded free elections now! Their very demands made the rotten regime tremble and resist granting these demands. Only the turn in the war saved Savoy and his Marshal. But the whole lesson of these events passed by our critic.
 
Some Evidence of Muddle-headedness
Let us cite more examples of his utter muddle-headedness. He writes:
In June 1941 he [Hitler] attacks Russia. The moment he does so the European proletariat stirs itself ... His dramatic failure in front of Moscow lifts the European proletariat still higher. So does the entry of America. The unexpected and superb defense by Russia during 1941 has a tremendous cumulative influence on the revolutionary development of the European proletariat. In this war every month is equal to a year. (Emphasis in the original – A.G.)
Johnson needs something, if not facts, then at least flamboyance, to bolster his views. What, in a concrete sense, does the above mean? First of all, in what way did the proletariat stir on Hitler’s invasion of Russia? By demonstrations, meetings, slogans, actions in the streets for power, the establishment of its class organizations?
Secondly, in what way did Hitler’s failure in front of Moscow life the proletariat “still higher”? I am willing to grant that the workers felt much better at Hitler’s defeats. But as a Marxist, I want to know what its concrete manifestations were so that 1 can determine the significance of the stir and what it meant to the revolutionary movement.
Thirdly, I want to know how the entry of America lifted “still higher” the European proletariat. Unless ... unless what Johnson is trying to say is that the defeats of Hitler, and the subsequent entry of the United States into the war, gave joy and hope to millions in Europe that their national emancipation was closer. Yes, that makes some sense. But Johnson is far off the track if he believes that in the above views he is presenting proof of the socialist elevation of the European working class.
Says Johnson: “Today, not a year after the NC resolution, all occupied Europe is poised for revolution.” Here again Johnson spins rhetoric. He agitates himself too much. Europe is poised for revolution! This is phrase-mongering. The whole question, the only question, is this: What kind of revolution? If Johnson knew what he meant he could tell us whether he means a national, a proletarian, a “democratic” or a socialist revolution. If he means a socialist revolution, then he must tell us how it will take place, who will lead it and under what slogans this poised revolution operates.
Johnson will find it difficult, indeed, to answer questions in the concrete. But as he does so often, he presents his view in such a contrast to the position of the Workers Party as to distort the position of the latter. Let me repeat: “Today, not a year after the NC resolution ...” What does Johnson imply by this construction? That the NC resolution does not foresee revolutionary developments? That this resolution sees no revolutionary perspective, or visualizes a peaceful achievement of national liberation and a peaceful period thereafter? Either Johnson has not read the resolution or he is guilty of willful ... misunderstanding.
Extending his thoughts, he says that “the danger for a revolutionary grouping is not that it will ignore national liberation. The danger is exactly the opposite.” Johnson sees everything backwards. The danger happens not to be the one Johnson cites. “The danger is exactly the opposite,” namely, that revolutionary groupings in the name of the revolution, with a capital R, turn their backs to the national movement, even as Johnson actually does in all his argumentation. How many revolutionary groupings does Johnson know which have rallied to the struggle for national independence? One? Perhaps two? Certainly not more. Yet in his completely distorted view he sees the danger exactly in the wrong place.
Johnson obviously is in a hopeless dilemma. He has engaged in self-agitation and in his fervor has lost himself. We cannot leave him at this point without recalling Lenin’s polemic with Piatakov on the national question. Piatakov, in answering Lenin’s position on this problem, always talked (like Johnson) about the “revolutionary epoch.” And Lenin remarked that Piatakov’s phrase-mongering always reminded him of Alexinsky (an Old Bolshevik). Lenin wrote:
Even at the London Congress in 1907, the Bolsheviks turned away from Alexinsky when, in reply to theoretical arguments, he assumed the pose of an agitator declaiming high-sounding phrases against some form or other of exploitation and oppression, totally irrelevant to the subject. “The squealing has started,” our delegates used to say, when he held forth. And this squealing did Alexinsky no good.
What failed to do Alexinsky any good will not help Johnson, either.
 
Summary Remarks – Advice from Lenin
The resolution of the Workers Party is based upon the recognition of the existence of a mass desire, and an active popular revolutionary movement in the oppressed countries for national independence. There is not only this desire, but there are in existence numerous underground, revolutionary movements fighting now against the oppressor. It is in these “all-class” movements that the proletariat is once more entering the field of struggle. These movements are as yet, by and large, dominated by a petty bourgeois ideology.
The revolutionists must be in these movements because they are progressive movements. The struggle for and realization of national independence for these countries will hasten the process of the revolutionary organization of the working class in the fight for socialism. This fight is as inevitable as the inability of the rotten ruling classes of Europe to solve in any fundamental way the social problems which confront them.
These national movements are the first important evidence in the war of a recrudescence of the proletariat. They offer the basis for the reconstruction of the independent labor movement and the revolutionary socialist parties. The achievement of national independence will not solve the social problems of the day, but will pose them only more sharply, pitting the fighting proletarian ranks against the returning bankrupt old ruling class.
The determining factor in this situation is the reconstruction of the labor movement and the revolutionary socialist parties, without which the proletariat is doomed to another defeat. The task of the Marxists is to participate in these national movements with their own class program, to be with their class, to educate it, to organize it, to lead it. Without that, it will be impossible to rebuild again. The revolutionary parties which will arise in the soil of the coming struggles must by their activity not only win the confidence and support of the overwhelming majority of the population, but the party itself must train and educate itself in the process of the struggle.
The whole situation is favorable for such a reorganization of the revolutionary socialist movement, provided it shuns sectarian ideas, rejects the theory of spontaneity of masses, of the “automatic” character of the socialist revolution. Lenin warned us so many times: there is no final collapse of capitalism, no final bankruptcy – no hopeless situation for the bourgeoisie. Without the lever of the revolutionary party, without the conscious intervention of the socialist masses, capitalism has found a way out before and can find a way out again – at the expense of the masses.
Our teacher, Lenin, never tired of warning against the things Johnson is so guilty of. Sobriety and objectivity are indispensable qualities for a revolutionist. They are a bulwark against self-intoxication and exaggeration, which always lead to disastrous results. Lenin wrote:
... The greatest danger, perhaps the only danger, that confronts a genuine revolutionary is exaggeration of revolutionariness, forgetting the limits and conditions in which revolutionary methods are appropriate and can he successfully employed. Genuine revolutionaries have most often broken their necks when they began to write “revolution” with a capital R, to elevate “revolution” to something almost divine, to lose their heads, to lose the ability in the coolest and most sober manner to reflect, weigh up and ascertain at what moment, under what circumstances and in which sphere of action it is necessary to act in a revolutionary manner and when it is necessary to adopt reformist action. Genuine revolutionaries will perish (not that they will be defeated from outside, but that their internal affairs will collapse) only if – and they certainly will, if they do – they lost their sobriety of outlook and take into their heads that “the great victorious world” revolution can and must solve all problems in a revolutionary manner under all circumstances and in all spheres of action. (Lenin, The Importance of Gold, November 1921)
What Johnson does is muddle together three different things and considers them as one: a revolutionary situation, a revolutionary uprising; and a socialist revolution. The difference between these three related situations is decisively important. The development of one situation into another and the realization of socialist power depends, in the final analysis, upon only one factor in our time: the revolutionary socialist party. In Johnson’s scheme of things, it plays no rôle.
 



Allied victories, plus the increasing military strength of the “democratic” powers, which has apparently doomed Germany, have given rise to all sorts of plans for that country in the post-war period. Although no decisions were reported, there is no doubt that the recent Moscow conference spent many hours discussing this problem and trying to resolve a united policy, if that is at all possible.
There is the proposal of the Englishman, Vansittart, who wants to chop up Germany into a number of small states. Other proposals call for re-educating the German youth and children by trained instructors from the Allied countries; still others for sterilizing large sections of the male population.
 
Fear of “Disorders”
What really worries the leaders of the Allied powers is how to “reorganize” Germany and prevent “disorder.” By disorder, of course, they mean the actions of millions of workers and poor peasants, who would rise up and change the whole bloody system of imperialist capitalism in that country. They are the real sufferers from fascism – not German big business, which has so many friends in the big business world of the Allied countries.
Raymond Moley, in a recent issue of Newsweek, has looked around and discovered the forces in Germany who could reconstruct the country. What did the Honorable Mr. Moley find? Only what he was looking for.
Moley writes in the logical style of a professor. After Germany’s inevitable military defeat, who will be left to rule the country? asks Moley. There is no King and no Badoglio. We don’t know whether Moley is saddened by this fact. He discovers “forces” just as bad, but they are obviously to the liking of the associate editor of Newsweek.
Moley lists six groups which are in a position to come out openly after Germany’s defeat. They are: the Catholic Church, the Protestant Church, the German farm bloc, the “Economic Council of the Reich” (organized in 1919), the anti-Hitler army leaders and, finally, lumped into one group, the political and union organizations of the working class.
 
Moley’s Six Groupings
Excluding the political and union organizations of the workers, all the other five groupings which are counted upon to reorganize German society are precisely those forces which did little or nothing to prevent Hitler’s victory. Where the Catholics did not support Hitler into power, they were pretty silent about his movement. Their fight against Hitler began only when Hitler decided to exercise control over the church and to take over the “education” of German youth.
The some is true of the Protestant church. Its fight with Hitler began several years after he took power.
In the beginning both churches were rather silent over the persecution of the Jews, the destruction of the labor movement and persecution of the workers. It was only when the interests of the church were threatened that their fight against Hitler began. Their fight with Hitler, however, is not a fight against fascism, but rather a struggle for church rights.
Moley’s next group, the farm bloc, is a notoriously reactionary and backward element in German society. They, too, were supporters of Hitlerism, in the hope that Hitler seriously meant his propaganda about dividing the landlords’ big estates and giving land to the peasants.
The “Economic Council of the Reich” is an organization of German industrialists counted among Hitler’s best friends and really one of the forces that helped him into power. It was a source of financial support to the Brown Shirts. The army, too, even the so-called “anti-Hitler” elements, went along with the fascists because they too wanted war and a German Empire.
 
Here Is the Real Force
The one element which could reorganize German society on a solid foundation, that is, on a socialist basis – the German working class and the poor and exploited peasants – these are a minor element in the thinking and planning of the “democratic” capitalists in whose interests Moley speaks.
This element, the overwhelming majority of the German population, is the one that the powers fear. They want a reorganized Germany based on groups of the old ruling class because they fear the workers. And they fear the workers because they are afraid that the workers may rise to overthrow the capitalists in Germany, establish a workers’ government and reorganize the country to build socialism.
The Allies are not alone in their fear of this kind of prospect. Stalin, too, fears a socialist Germany.
 



If there was any doubt where Roosevelt stood in relation to the all-important question which confronts all the workers in the country – their wage and living standards – this was completely dispelled by the President’s order freezing wages and prices, and halting the movement of workers from one job to another. The President’s order was brief enough. In his statement, he declared:
“To hold the line we cannot tolerate further increases in prices affecting the cost of living or further increases in general wage or salary rates except where clearly necessary to correct substandard living conditions. The only way to hold the line is to stop trying to find justifications for not holding it here or not holding it there ... There are to be no further increases in wage rates or salary scales beyond the Little Steel formula except where clearly necessary to correct substandards of living. Reclassifications and promotions must not be permitted to affect the general level of production costs or to justify price increases or to forestall price reductions ...”
Immediately upon signing this order, the President directed Food Administrator Chester C. Davis and Price Administrator Prentiss Brown to place ceilings on all commodities “affecting the cost of living and reduce those excessively high.” We shall return to this subject of price control and price ceilings for the purpose of showing that the President’s order will not materially alter present exorbitant price levels. It is supposed to sooth the feelings of the workers, for the real situation finds that there has been no real price control or ceilings. The National War Labor Board, the Bureau of Internal Revenue and similar agencies having to do with control over wages and salaries were instructed to permit no further increases. At the same time, the War Manpower Commission was charged with the task of preventing job transferences by workers seeking higher wages. These most important measures of the presidential edict, totalitarian in content and aim, were placed under the general supervision of James F. Byrnes, Economic Stabilization Director.
 
Profits, Prices and Wages
The President thereafter explained his order in an address in which he constructed a four-legged stool, insisting that every part of his order must be carried out lest the stool fall and the nation face a widening spiral of inflation. The most significant feature of the order, however, is the absence of a single reference to the question of the huge profits siphoned off by America’s industrial and financial ruling class. In his statement on the Debt Act, he did make reference to his attempt to set a ceiling on salaries at $85,000. Congress, in passing the Public Debt Act of 1943, permitting an increase of the national debt from 195 to 210 billion dollars, attached a rider to its resolution forbidding any salary limitation, especially as proposed by Roosevelt. Congress questioned the constitutional right of the President to set any limitations on salaries – it does not question his right to limit wages! On the question of workers’ wages, anything goes!
How did Roosevelt respond to this congressional action? He permitted the Act to become a law without his signature, for to veto the Act because it had attached to it the congressional rider on salary limitations, might have “seriously retarded” the Treasury’s “war financing plans.”
Why, one might ask, did the President go out of his way to attack Congress for the rider which cancelled out his plan for salary limitation of a net $25,000 a year? Since Roosevelt’s proposal on salary limitation had nothing to do with the fundamental question of the war profits earned by big business, his statement can have only a political and class significance. Salary limitation on America’s ruling class would not in the least affect its war profits, nor its class position, its existent riches and resources which sets it poles apart from the toiling people of the nation. Roosevelt had hoped that the passage of the $25,000 net salary limit would make it easier for the Administration to carry through its wage-cutting program against the American workers and thus effect the drastic reduction in the American standard of living with a minimum of “class disturbance.”
 
“Equality of Sacrifice”
Salary limitation on the bourgeoisie would no more create “equality of sacrifice in wartime” than it would at any other time. Nor would such a salary limit impair, in any way, the standard of living of the ruling class. As we have so often pointed out, equality of sacrifice is possible only under conditions of a common economic and class position. In a social order of economic, political and social inequality, no equality of any kind is possible, equality of sacrifice or equality of enrichment. We are certain that the President is as fully aware of this singular fact as we. But, we repeat, his object had a class political meaning and it was upset, for the time being, at least, by an obdurate, reactionary and revengeful Congress, which disputes Roosevelt’s “conciliatory” approach to the most important problems confronting the bourgeoisie in its class rule during the war. The bourgeoisie is in an offensive mood; a large section of this feels that it can utilize the war as a means of destroying a powerful American working class and it does not propose to permit the concepts and practices of New Dealism to intervene, especially when it believes that a decisive victory over the workers is immediately possible.
It is necessary to bear in mind in this discussion, however important the differences between Roosevelt and the reactionary Congress may be, there is no conflict between them on the Fundamental question of wage control and the destruction of the living standards of the overwhelming majority of the American people. The important aspects of the Rooseveltian war program have been adopted without much dispute. On those issues which separated the President from Congress in recent months, the latter has usually won. The victory over the farm bloc is not a victory of the workers and poor farmers over the rich landlords and plantation owners, but a victory of industrial and financial capitalism over the protesting agricultural rulers. And this struggle is by no means over. There are strong ties between urban capitalism and the farm “bourgeoisie” and compromises to their mutual benefit and profit have occurred and are likely to occur often again to the detriment of the workers and the mass of poor farmers.
 
The Role of Organized Labor
The third element in the present situation is the organized labor movement. Its organizational division is a source of weakness in the struggle against the bosses’ offensive. It lacks political perspective and maturity. Unorganized politically, the labor movement has been the dupe of the capitalist political parties. Too many of its leaders are tied hand and glove with the politicians of the bourgeois parties. But more important than the above is the fact that the first-line leaders of the labor movement have surrendered everything to the Administration – their will to struggle, their independence of thought and action and, above all, the best interests of the workers they presumably represent.
Almost from the very beginning, the strike weapon of the workers was surrendered. This was to show good faith and a readiness to accept the burdens of the war on the basis of ... equality with the American bourgeoisie! For this gratuitous gift of the labor leaders to American capitalism, the workers were repaid with successive blows which have sharply reduced their living standards. The labor fakers cravenly accepted the Little Steel formula of the War Labor Board in an exchange for a promise that there would be a limitation on salaries. Murray and Green needed this concession in order to make more palatable to the workers an actual wage cut.
How have these gentlemen responded to the latest Roosevelt edict? In the same supinely craven manner! The CIO and AFL officialdoms at first rushed into print to declare that they accepted, albeit with reservations and dissatisfaction, the new order. Only a few weeks ago they were busily engaged denouncing the Little Steel formula. The AFL and CIO representatives on the WLB demanded a revision of the basic wage principle upon which the board operated. They demanded the reopening of the packinghouse and aircraft cases. They demanded speedy action and decision on the thousands of cases which were before the board. And now?
At a closed conference of delegates of the CIO of New York and New Jersey, Lee Pressman, Stalinist fellow-traveler and general counsel of the CIO, reported on the policy of the CIO’s leadership in the manner of the Daily Worker:
The executive order is in no way a step backward. It is a step forward. Let us not fall in with anyone who threatens the War Labor Board (WLB) and the national economic stabilization program. That is impeding the war effort. Only by putting our strength behind the WLB and our Commander-in-Chief are we taking concrete steps toward winning the war.
In his statement of the official position of the labor leaders, Pressman announced their abject acceptance of the latest decree. But all is not so simple in the camp of labor. The workers are thoroughly dissatisfied with their lot, with the position in which their leaders have placed them. The right to strike to enforce their demands was surrendered without their consultation or vote. They were bludgeoned into accepting, without alternative choices, the Little Steel formula, which resulted in a static wage level completely out of line with the cost of living. As a result of the position taken by Murray and Green, the workers have produced more under worsened conditions of labor and have toiled longer hours for less wages than they would ordinarily accept. They have taken blow after blow from big business without fighting back – because their leaders advised them Roosevelt would represent their interests.
Consequently, there have been sitdowns, walkouts and wildcat strikes. Such limited actions were usually unorganized and spontaneous, taken in spite of directives from the officialdoms. The workers find it impossible to live under present conditions. The problem is simple, it is one of food, clothing and shelter. The paradox is easy to see: while the war economy has virtually eliminated unemployment, increased payrolls and created “steady” work, the living condition of the working class have sharply worsened.
 
What Is Lewis Fighting For?
Of all the labor organizations and labor leaders, only the United Mine Workers and John L. Lewis understand, not merely the objective situation itself, but the need to fight for a general improvement of the position of the workers. Is Lewis more radical than the other labor leaders? Is he more devoted to the interests of the mine workers? In some respects, yes. Recalling the last war and the post-war period, he is fully aware that unless the labor movement fights for its rights, unless the conditions of the workers are improved now, in the midst of the war, the reactionary ruling class, with the aid of the government, will smash militant unions, especially industrial unionism.
Lewis’ fighting instincts and his courageous struggle against the Administration in the face of a concentrated barrage of abuse from it, the Congress, the venal press and the other labor leaders, have done much to strengthen the hand of the labor movement in general. His demand for a two-dollars-a-day increase for the coal miners has galvanized the fighting spirit not only of the mine mine workers, but it has also stiffened the attitude of the workers in other union organizations and industries. We have no doubt that Lewis’ struggle has brought fear to the hearts of Murray and Green – fear that his conduct may win him the support of the overwhelming mar jority of the workers in the CIO and AFL. They look to the Administration to defend them against Lewis. In what way? By defeating Lewis’ efforts to win a two-dollar-a-day guaranteed increase for the coal miners!
Thus it is correct to say that, in at least one way, Roosevelt’s order was an aid to these labor fakers. There is no doubt that Roosevelt took this occasion, the miners’ struggle, to issue his “hold-the-line” order. Let no one be fooled, however, into thinking that this was the only, or the main, reason for Roosevelt’s action. On the contrary, the order was in the making for some time. Roosevelt had intended its issuance long ago and he was being pushed to make this statement by the bourgeoisie and its press for many weeks. Only in the sense of timing can it be said that Roosevelt intended this as a blow against Lewis. To believe otherwise would reduce analysis of the economic and political policy of the administration to an absurdity.
Naturally, the Roosevelt action has compelled Lewis to alter his course and to prepare for a variety of compromises. He is prepared to forego his wage demand for a six-day week guarantee which would result in a $2.25 daily increase for the miners. This proposal, made by Secretary of Labor Perkins, was swiftly rejected by the mine operators. Lewis’ demand for a portal-to-portal pay was likewise rejected by them. Then Lewis proposed a government subsidy to the mine operators in order to help them meet the miners’ demands. More recently, Lewis has made overtures to the reactionary farm bloc for a joint struggle against the Roosevelt order. In all of this he exhibits a fundamentally conservative political outlook, a lack of class and political consciousness. He has a bourgeois mentality. For this reason all of Lewis’ struggles are confused, contradictory and misleading. His “guts” and manner of posing labor problems, however, have the effect of concentrating the attention of all the classes on the burning needs of the labor movement. And that is to the good!
 
CIO Is for Incentive Pay
Getting back to the CIO, we find confusion worse confounded. In the aforementioned conference, the Resolutions Committee, which endorsed the Pressman statement, found it necessary to incorporate “reservations.” These are not positive reservations, threatening labor action unless they were met. They are “advisory” reservations which declare that the Roosevelt program will work only if: existing prices on food and other commodities are rolled back to prices in effect on September 15, 1942; if a tax program is adopted “that will take the profits out of war and which is based on the principles of ability to pay and equality of sacrifice,” and there is limitation of high salaries.
But the President’s order, “one of the greatest contributions which could be made to the war effort” (Pressman), strikes directly at the heart of the workers. The workers know this; so do the labor leaders. And so the sycophantic leadership of the CIO proposes that the workers seek wage increases through job reclassification and incentive payments. The first method is a long, tedious, unavailing avenue to seek wage increases. It is filled with deception and delay; it has meaning only under the conditions of an active and militant union leadership. The second method, incentive pay, is a time-honored weapon of the bosses to intensify the exploitation of the workers, to get more out of them for less pay. The trade union movement for years has fought incentive pay because it is a substitute for the living wage, because it creates competition among the workers, because it has the main purpose of increasing the profits of the bosses at the expense of a more intensely exploited working class. This bosses’ weapon has now been adopted by the labor fakers with the aid of the reactionary Stalinist machine in the labor movement.
What is the net class effect of the present conduct of the labor officialdom? It strengthens the power of big business; it strengthens the power of the bosses’ offensive! All other matters, important as they may be, are secondary when related to the foregoing. In supinely accepting the Roosevelt order, as they have accepted every Administration action relating to labor, in retreating before every blow delivered against it, the labor officialdom does not merely signify its friendship for the Administration, does not merely attempt to strengthen the Administration’s position but, above all, it fortifies the hand of the reactionaries engaged in a campaign of destroying trade unionism. The more abject is the conduct of the labor leaders, the more they surrender, the weaker become their organizations and their fighting power, and the easier becomes the task of big business and its allies. We are not interested in the possibility that these labor leaders may lose their positions, their sinecures as labor leaders. We are concerned only with the fact that their conduct has an adverse effect upon the position of the American working class.
We have said that all is not so simple in the camp of labor. Torn by the contradiction of supporting the Administration in its main endeavors and placating a restless and militant rank and file, the labor leaders themselves engage in contradictory actions. At the time of this writing there appears to be a sharp division of opinion among the labor bureaucrats. The closing sentence of the President’s order was no sooner uttered than the WLB announced that no wage increases would be granted other than permitted by the Little Steel formula and, without defining its meaning, for substandard wages. It has held firmly to this position in relation to the thousands of cases now before it.
The AFL members of the WLB, in concurring in one wage award, denounced the President’s order as a violation of the no-strike agreement, and as being fundamentally “unsound.” The CIO members of the board, separately from the AFL members, have made their disagreement known to Economic Stabilization Director Byrnes. Sharp protests have come from the UAW, and many other unions have protested the Roosevelt edict to their international boards.
The dissatisfactions and the protests at the top and bottom of the labor movement are not unified. They occur against the background of the labor officialdom’s indicated subservience to the Administration and with a promise, based on past experience, that in the end they will seek out some rotten compromise in order first, to control the ranks of the unions and second, to maintain their “alliance” with Roosevelt.
The picture, at this moment, is neither finished nor clear – almost everything depends on the ranks of the labor movement. But to date the international executives of the AFL and CIO have remained silent.
 
Summarizing Roosevelt’s Order
The Roosevelt wage order is a blow against labor; it is a blow strengthened by the position held by the labor officialdom. One-third of the nation lives under substandard conditions and substandard wages. The wages of the overwhelming majority of the workers are far below the minimum requirements established by the Department of Labor ($2,500 a year). The economic conditions of the workers, their housing conditions, their ability to buy food and clothing have all suffered during the past two years of the war economy; this deterioration of their living standards is made more conclusive by the Roosevelt edict.
But will not this situation be remedied by price control and the rolling back of prices? Utter nonsense. There will be no satisfactory (for the workers) adjustment of prices. Prices have exceeded all ceilings. An economist for the Labor Department discloses that prices have increased by thirty-one per cent more than the official figures of that same department. The cost of living has risen anywhere between twenty-one and thirty-six per cent. Yet the President demands adherence to the Little Steel formula which grants increases up to fifteen per cent!
Does the Administration intend to roll back prices by fifteen to twenty per cent? There is hardly a person who does not know that the thought of it alone is ludicrous. It is not even the aim of the Administration. Prentiss Brown, OPA director, has already admitted that prices actually cannot be controlled. The experiences of the past year are sufficient proof that the OPA director knew whereof he spoke!
It is not merely enough to say that prices must be controlled. The more important question is how they shall be controlled and who shall control them. And so long as price control remains in the hands of the Administration and big business, price control will remain the joke that it is. The labor officials first demand, and then plead, with the President that they be given rights and authority to help keep prices down. But they are as blithely ignored by the President on this as they have been on all other questions of authority and control.
There will be no substantial improvement in the price level. Negotiations to lower prices will go on for months. The administrative bodies of the government will be negotiating for a long, long time. In the meantime, the position of the workers will have been materially worsened from the present low levels. Congress disputes the President’s legal right to set a limitation on the salaries of big business. It gives him the right to put a ceiling on wages. The President makes his holiday attack on Congress, but the provision on wages stands. Leon Henderson’s forecast that the living standards of the American masses will be reduced to the level of 1932 is becoming a reality more swiftly than most people believed possible. Unless the workers fight back, unless they succeed in shifting the burden of this war on the backs of the American capitalist class, where it rightfully belongs, it will take a long time in reviving. One of the first steps in this direction is a struggle against the misleaders who stand at the head of the great labor organizations.
 

ms: Small Business in Descent (March 1943)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Sam Adams
Small Business in Descent
More Facts on a Major Phenomenon
(March 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 3, March 1943, pp. 75–76.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


Small businesses, especially those engaged in non-war production, were fated for extinction the moment American economy began seriously to convert industrial plant and conserve raw materials for war production. The total nature of this war and the fact that American industry must supply the material war needs of all the members of the United Nations makes it impossible to view the problem of small business and non-essential manufacturers on the basis of the experience of World War I. The present problem is basically different, because the demands of the present war are of such character and magnitude that currents and tendencies of 1914–18 are no longer a barometer for measuring probable developments in industry in this war.
For all the protestations of the liberals and the helpless pleas of the little business men and manufacturers are in vain. The bourgeois war economy would be strangulated if it endeavored to throw any substantial crumbs, in the form of war contracts, to the multitude of small enterprises which exist in this country. Small industry cannot possibly compete with the huge monopolies which have received the bulk of the billions of dollars’ worth of war contracts issued from Washington. Moreover, it is no accident that the control in the issuance of these contracts is in the hands of the big corporations – without them, the war Administration could not possibly extend the conversion of production into a complete war economy. They are indispensable; the small businesses and manufacturers are, from the point of view of the war, a dispensable luxury.
Several weeks ago, William J. Enright, in a review of a Dun & Bradstreet report (New York Times, February 28), wrote: “Despite a sharp decline in bankruptcies this year, the death rate of business concerns is exceeding births by a wide margin and a net loss in establishments far in excess of 100,000 was forecast for 1945 by business executives last week.”
Formation of new firms, dissolution of old ones constantly take place under the most normal economic conditions. Even now, in the midst of the war, many new firms are organized to capitalize on contracts arising from war needs. In a large number of instances, these new firms are merely subsidiaries and auxiliaries of already existent enterprises. But often they are new, representing a shift of business men engaged in non-war industries to raw material and manufacturing industries directly or indirectly related to the new production.
The present rate of business births and deaths is in no way normal; as a matter of fact, it is extremely abnormal. While the formation of new firms to take advantage of the gravy dished out with war contracts are usually war-duration enterprises, the dissolution of thousands and thousands of old firms has a permanent character. Their elimination only fortifies the position of the monopolist firms which absorb the machinery, plant and raw materials of the old firms. Once eliminated from the economic scene, these old firms will find it exceedingly difficult to return in the event the war is successfully terminated for American capitalism. The monopoly combines will have made certain that these difficulties will become almost insurmountable.
According to the figures of Dun & Bradstreet (they vary slightly from official figures and those of other agencies) there were, at the end of January, 1942, 2,194,100 establishments in existence. At the end of January, 1943, this total had dropped to 2,106,000, or a net loss of 87,500 concerns. Since there were only 9,400 bankruptcies in this same period, companies which went out of business on such grounds were only about ten per cent of the total number of business failures.
For the past ten years, or mid-way in the existence of the New Deal, the organization of new companies exceeded the expiration of existing businesses. This trend was sharply reversed in 1942 and for the first time in this ten-year period the death of business enterprises exceeded the creation of new ones. The total number of failures over new firms for each two-month period in 1942 ran between 15,000 and 18,000 firms. The 254,021 new companies which were formed during the past year were more than offset by the death of 312,604 old companies.
An interesting aspect of this trend is that the percentage of dying companies in excess of new enterprises, increased. Thus, for the two-month period of December (1942)-January (1943), 28,700 new firms were organized, but 46,800 concerns went out of business. On the basis of this development, the death of small enterprises threatens to reach a new high in 1943. During this year, the completion of the war economy will be witnessed with a general tightening up of the loose ends, a more categoric organization of raw materials, manpower and production for the war. The estimate of the Department of Commerce that about 300,000 firms would go out of business during 1943 is considered conservative by Enright. It will be closer to 400,000. This means that the “obliterations” of old firms in excess of new formations will be far larger than 100,000 and probably closer to 200,000.
Exceedingly significant social implications will follow this tendency, which results in a strengthening of monopoly capitalism and a weakening of economic strength of a large section of the middle class. Many of the latter will find themselves reduced to the ranks of the proletariat, to become fully absorbed by it. Others will find their way toward complete reaction. Whatever the political ramifications of this economic development may be, the immediate effect of this change is to sharpen the division between the classes. For a more extended discussion of this problem, we refer our readers to the article, The Middle Class in Crisis, contained in the October 1942 issue of The New International.
 

urder as a Political Weapon (March 1943)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Murder as a Political Weapon
(March 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 3, March 1943, pp. 69–70.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


The Stalinist crimes against the international labor movement have not ceased with Hitler’s invasion of Russia. Nor has preoccupation with the greatest war in Russian history eliminated murder as a political weapon in the labor movement by the infamous regime of Cain Stalin. This was once more brought to light with the announcement, a few weeks ago, that Henryk Ehrlich and Victor Alter, leaders of the Jewish Workers Party of Poland, seized by the GPU when the Red Army invaded Poland, were secretly executed as agents of Hitler’s Gestapo!
The mystery of this case was cleared up when William Green, president of the American Federation of Labor, announced to the press that, in response to his inquiries over an extended period of time, he was informed by the Russian Ambassador, Litvinov, of the execution of the two Jewish socialists. Green had, on the “advice” of the State Department, kept this information to himself. War exigencies, don’t you know!
Following Green’s announcement, many things were disclosed, all of them pointing to the utter perfidiousness of the Kremlin regime. A mere chronological detailing of the circumstances following the arrests are sufficient to properly assess the nature of this latest Stalinist frameup.
Ehrlich and Alter were seized four years ago. Their arrest undoubtedly was one of the results of the Hitler-Stalin pact. They were “left” social-democrats who, throughout their lives, retained adherence to the general principles of Marxism. They were confused centrists rather than revolutionary internationalists. But, guided by their own concepts of the socialist struggle, they were in direct conflict with Stalinism and all that its reactionary nationalist doctrines signify. Ehrlich’s and Alter’s attempt to organize resistance in Warsaw to the German invader and their general anti-fascist activity in that particular period, led to their incarceration by the GPU. Furthermore, they were arrested as part of Stalin’s policy to destroy the whole pre-war Polish labor movement as inimical to his interests.
The announcement that Ehrlich, a member of the Labor and Socialist International, and Alter, a member of the executive committee of the Trade Union Congress, were arrested by Stalin, led to the formation of many international committees to seek their release. In this country, a committee headed by William Green, Philip Murray, Dr. Albert Einstein and Raymond Gram Swing, repeatedly intervened without result. Wendell Willkie, while in Moscow, pleaded in vain with Russian officials for their freedom. The intervention of Eleanor Roosevelt and countless other personages brought not the slightest concession from Stalin’s hangmen.
Material aid was sent to Ehrlich and Alter, but there was no visible evidence that the food and money ever reached their proper destination. It was quite possible that they were already executed when this aid was sent. Certainly they were already dead while many pleas for their release were made. But the Kremlin, by calculated silence, gave no sign as to the fate of its prisoners.
The first release which announced the execution of Ehrlich and Alter stated that they were murdered more than a year ago. This was later denied by Litvinov, who volunteered the information that they were executed only four months previous to the information given in a letter to William Green. No one will really know exactly when the deed was done. But that can only shed light on the cynicism of the murderous regime as it is reflected in this particular case. The thing to be remembered is the deed itself.
The execution of Ehrlich and Alter followed the typical GPU pattern. According to Szmul Zygielbojm, one of the leaders of the Jewish Workers Party of Poland, and a member of the Polish National Council, they were kept in prison for nearly two years without formal charge and with no apparent disposition of their case. In July 1941, six weeks after the German invasion of Russia, they were court-martialed under the charge of “working for the forces of international fascist reaction.” It was under this charge that they were first sentenced to death. While awaiting execution in the death cells of Moscow and Saratov, they were informed that their death sentence had been commuted to ten years’ penal servitude.
But, in September 1941, following the signing of the Polish-Russian pact, they were released with the apologies of the government. A terrible mistake had been made, said the agents of the GPU. The charges against them were false! Ehrlich himself had described what happened following their release. They were given residence “in the best hotel in Moscow and a complete set of clothes, and were placed under medical care. Most important of all, we were assured that the action taken against us was a mistake and that our collaboration in the fight against Hitlerism is a necessity both with regard to the interests of the USSR and to those of the Jewish nation and Poland.”
Following their release and the apology, the Kremlin sought their services. A Colonel Wolkowsky of the Commissariat of the Interior, proposed to them that they should organize in Russia a Jewish committee to fight Hitlerism on a world scale. Ehrlich and Alter agreed to this since, in general, they found themselves sympathetic to the Russian war against Germany.
According to their agreement with the government, Ehrlich was to act as chairman of this committee. Alter as secretary, and a Russian artist named Nichoels as vice-chairman. The head of the GPU, Beria, invited Ehrlich and Alter to a special conference at which they discussed the work of this committee. The latter were then invited to send their material and proposals to Stalin, which they did. It was necessary to do this, they were advised, in order to get official sanction from the “good father” in the Kremlin.
But, according to Stalin, it was after their release that they began agitating for a peace with Hitler! – at the very time they were being wined and dined in Moscow and in the midst of the organization of the previously mentioned Jewish committee to fight Hitlerism! And at the very time that they were presumably agitating for this peace, they were evacuated, together with all other government officials and workers, to the temporary capital at Kuibyshev.
Last December, according to the latest evidence, they were called to pay a visit to the Commissariat of the Interior. They never came back!
Why then were Ehrlich and Alter murdered? The reasons are several, although it is impossible to know all the facts at this time. Stalin was taking revenge on two anti-Stalinist socialists! Stalin is preparing the seizure of Poland if the United Nations are victorious in the war. Ehrlich and Alter, by their past, are committed tp an “independent Poland,” which, whatever its character, Stalin is determined to prevent. Their murder was, therefore, insurance for the future. It was a political murder.
In an effort to make the execution more palatable, it is necessary for Stalin to besmirch these men, to create an amalgam. Thus, Ehrlich and Alter, two Jewish labor and social-democratic leaders, are linked to Hitler and the German Gestapo! The Daily Worker, following the lead of its GPU master, called them “pro-Nazis.” One can expect almost any day that the “intuitionist” ex-Ambassador Davies, as William Henry Chamberlain called him, will include this incident in a revised edition of Mission to Moscow and in the motion picture version of the book. To complete the “realism” of this charge, he might even show that Ehrlich and Alter received money from the Gestapo in a synagogue. This is all that is needed to complete the Stalinist frameup against these two men.
Ehrlich and Alter, leaders of a movement and a people which have been butchered by the Nazi barbarians, opponents of fascism to their last days, were murdered by Stalin on the charge that they were German agents. Need anything more be said?
 



In our series of articles dealing with the problems which confront the largest union in the world, we have thus far concerned ourselves with some of the main issues which are of the deepest significance for the rank and file. There are an additional number of such problems which will be the subject of our examination in succeeding articles, but the factional division in the union and the struggle which is now fought between them require immediate comment.
It would appear on the surface that the big dispute in the UAW is between the Reuther-Leonard and the Addes-Frankensteen factions, with Thomas holding himself aloof from this fight. This is true to a considerable extent, but it would be extremely superficial to think that this is the whole struggle, or that the issues which divide the leadership are devoid of any relationship to the ranks of the union and the pressures which they exert on the divided bureaucracy.
The industrial and mass character of the UAW has made it possible, no matter how powerful the leaderships have been, for the rank and file to express itself on important problems of the union and to exert heavy pressure on the top layers.
It is with deep pride that one points to the UAW and its membership. The union has often been referred to as a militant and turbulent union. All important issues found the membership deeply involved. True, they did not always win the union to their views, but there are many causes for that. In any event, the intervention of the rank and file has held the leadership in line on many questions and has, for example, prevented such outright sell-outs as are to be observed in the unions under Stalinist control.
 
The UAW and Other Unions
Compare the struggle of the UAW for wages, conditions of work, union rights, against incentive pay, for independent political action of labor, against the WLB, against the increase of dues and salaries of officials, the agitation on the no-strike pledge and the support given to the brave fight of the coal miners, with the supine, boss-collaborationist policies of the United Electrical and Radio Workers under Stalinist leadership and control.
Compare the UAW with the National Maritime Union under Curran, or Harry Bridges’ union, or the Transport Workers under Quill, the Office Workers under Merrill and the whole New York City Industrial Union Council under the control and leadership of Stalinists and their fellow-travelers.
The latter unions are mainly occupied with demanding a second front. In this they are merely carrying out the dictates of Stalin and his American agency under Earl Browder. They champion incentive pay as a new form of the enslavement of the worker. They oppose any struggle that would improve the wages and working conditions of labor. They demand a more binding no-strike pledge which would cause the union movement to be even more helpless against the union-busting drive of big business.
The Stalinist unions have one occupation now: support Roosevelt for a fourth term, fight against an Independent Labor Party, and hogtie the labor movement to the corrupt and rotten political machines of the boss-dominated Democratic Party. In this they have the aid of Murray and Hillman.
The union bureaucracies have sacrificed the best interests of the working class to unite with the bosses on the war, on the right of big: business to its profits, on incentive pay, and a host of other issues which can result in nothing but harm for the labor movement. The Stalinists work with Murray and Hillman, because they all stand with Roosevelt and the policy of his Administration, the former because they are the disciples of Stalin in this country, and the latter because they are the lackeys of capitalist politicians and capitalist policies.
The importance of citing this differentiation in the union movement between the officialdoms, the Stalinists and the rank and file is necessary because it will enable one to understand something of the struggle now going on in the UAW. The Reuther-Leonard and the Addes-Frankensteen groups reflect the sharp divergences in the CIO and the wide road which separates the leaderships from the rank and file.
Behind the struggle in the UAW is the whole situation in the country. When the war broke out, the labor movement was asked to devote itself completely to the war effort. The workers were asked to sacrifice the conditions they had won after many years of struggle. They were asked to work longer hours, forego shop conditions, forget grievances, ignore wage scales.
The workers were asked to do these things because the President had promised them that this time – unlike 1917-18 – there would be “equality of sacrifice,” the bosses would not be permitted, to make war profits, there would be no repetition of a new class of war millionaires, taxes would be equalized, the burden placed upon those able to afford them, inflation would be prevented by equality in rationing, prohibiting the black market, and control of prices to keep down the cost of living.
Only a fool or a misleader of labor would contend that these promises have been kept. There is hardly a worker who does not know that exactly the opposite has occurred. Yes, the workers have made their sacrifice. But, on the other side of the ledger, we find big business making the greatest profits in history, despite higher taxes. War profiteering is the rule rather than the exception. The black market does flourish. Heavy taxes have been put on the backs of the workers. Price control has been a tremendous farce and the cost of living has mounted way beyond the ability of the workers to meet it.
These are the conditions which have driven the rank and file of the union movement, and especially the brave and devoted automobile workers, to fight the restrictions which have been placed on them by the Administration and their officials, and to demand their economic and political rights.
 
Promises and Reality
At past conventions the leadership was able to placate the rank and file by a basketful of promises. The UAW membership was told, time and time again, that if it held tight and carried through their pledges – even if big business enriched itself by their pledges – good old President Roosevelt would come to their aid! Support the President, said the officials, otherwise even worse might befall you from the Republican Party.
But the Chicago convention showed signs that the ranks were getting sick and tired of the run-around they were getting from Washingtoa, the auto magnates and their own officials. There were plenty of Signs at that convention that the membership wanted more than speeches from its leadership. Thomas ought well remember that convention before he runs off to Washington once more to kneel before the President and return to Detroit, as usual, empty-handed.
 
Rise of Rank and File Movements
Since Chicago, the ranks have given vent to their deep dissatisfaction by organizing a great number of local slates, groups and platforms, which, while not always clear or complete, indicate the road they want to travel.
It is possible and necessary to point out that the auto workers are sick and tired of the no-strike pledge. This is exactly the thing which the big corporations have utilized to break down collective bargaining, negotiations, upgrading, wage rates, conditions of work, equalization of pay, etc.
The workers are opposed to incentive pay. They want wage increases and improvement of their working conditions and the means of compelling the auto bosses to fulfill their contractual obligations!
The platforms of the slates reveal these sentiments. Some stand for rescinding the no-strike pledge, for higher wage rates, for equalization of wages, for independent political action, for limitation of profits, for a post-war contingent wage for auto workers, and all of them are against incentive, pay. Others raise the question of nationalization of the auto industry, post-war conversion problems, and so on.
It is these sentiments which are reflected, in part only, by the Reuther-Leonard group. And it is in this sense that they are more closely aware of the sentiments of the membership. The group is opposed to incentive pay, and it is for equalization of pay, for wage increases, and has a fair record in the struggle against some sections of the auto bosses. But Reuther at the same time, however qualified, opposed the revocation of the no-strike pledge. He has also opposed the organization of a Labor Party.
 
The Two Factions
The differences between this group and the Addes-Frankensteen group are not always clear. Their attitude toward the war is the same; they both support Roosevelt and are committed to the fourth term. But the Addes-Frankensteen group is for incentive pay. It is the most vigorous opponent of a Labor Party. Addes has been closely aligned with the Stalinists for many years. Frankensteen championed the incentive pay proposal at the general executive board.
The struggle between these groups has been sharpened by the nomination of Leonard for Addes’ post of secretary-treasurer of the union and the outright bid made by Reuther for the leadership of the UAW. But this is exactly in conflict with what Addes and Frankensteen want. Reuther is apparently willing for Thomas to remain, under his (Reuther’s) control of the GEB, but he insists on the ouster of the Stalinists and their fellow travelers, among whom they count George Addes.
The Stalinists have intervened in this situation with a somewhat changed line which cannot but be confusing to many members in the UAW. Everyone knows the close association between them and Addes-Frankensteen. Yet, in a policy article in the Daily Worker, written by the Stalinist trade union expert, Roy Hudson, they are critical of both factions.
 
What the Stalinists Want
The Stalinist program in the union is simple: support for the three presidents, Roosevelt, Murray and Thomas; against factionalism in the union; for unity of the two groups with Thomas. Thus it sounds strange that the most cynical and destructive factional grouping in the labor movement now champions unity and the end of factions.
The main reason for this is the fear that the Stalinists have of a Reuther-Leonard victory. But they are also worried about Addes-Frankensteen, since the latter have the support of many reactionaries. Moreover, by their dealings with Frankensteen, they know him to be a blatant opportunist and careerist. The Stalinists have been losing strength in the union and find themselves assailed in many quarters for their own avowed opportunism, sell-out policies and union-wrecking activities.
Their hope lies in a compromise between the two main factions, with Thomas presiding over them as the impartial president. This kind of a conclusion to the present fight would best serve the Stalinists in fighting for their power and anti-working class program in the union.
 
For a National Progressive Group
The danger in this situation is that the struggle between the Reuther-Leonard and Addes-Frankensteen groups will overshadow the more important questions confronting the ranks of the union. While it is true that in some respects the former is a more progressive group than Addes-Frankensteen, that it has in its ranks many genuine progressives and in other respects reflects the pressure of these progressives, the real need of the union is the establishment of a genuine, national progressive group. This does not exist in the UAW. There are many local groups which could qualify for such distinction. But as yet these groups have not been fully crystallized and solidified, nor have their programs been fully clarified.
A national progressive group would have to stand on a program somewhat as follows: for rescinding the no-strike pledge; against incentive pay; for a Labor Party; no increase in dues; no increase in salaries of the officials; for equalization of wage rates; against differentials in pay; for organization of the unorganized in the industry; for post-war contingent wages; for wage increases; against the wage free; against the job freeze; against the WLB.
In addition, a genuinely progressive group would have to take a positive position in favor of nationalization of the auto industry under workers’ control. It would have to consider the matter of post-war conversion of the industry to prevent such a dislocation as will result in mass unemployment of the auto. workers and the consequent hardships which would follow.
Here, then, are some of the genuine problems which confront the union.
So far the Addes-Frankensteen group has been silent on most of them. On others it has taken an equivocal position. On still others, a reactionary one.
The Stalinists have only a simple program, as we have already indicated: Support the three presidents and incentive pay; support the war and the Administration, at the complete expense of the position of the working class.
Reuther and Leonard have made a start on a few progressive issues; on the other important questions their position is not unlike the others. Or else, they have kept silent, too.
It is clear, however, that a real national progressive group built around a militant pro-labor program has yet to be erected. This is the prime task of the auto workers!
 



The wage freeze inaugurated under the auspices of President Roosevelt and the actions of the WLB in refusing to grant the demands of workers for pay increases under the hold-the-line order, have only intensified the campaign from some quarters for the adoption by the unions of incentive pay schemes.
Incentive pay, which is only another name for piecework and speed-up schemes, is nothing new to the auto workers, even though the name may be new. It is merely another way of describing a more intense exploitation of workers, getting more production out of them for little or no cost.
Interestingly enough, the idea of incentive pay and the campaign which has developed for it, originated with big business and its representatives in Washington. They first presented the plan to Washington, where it received endorsement. Big business said: Since it is impossible for the workers to get wage increases, we can promise them a few cents more if they increase their individual and collective productivity.
This wasn’t the ordinary piecework and speed-up system. This was something more scientific, said these moguls of wealth. Under the old system, reward for greater production was individual; it depended on how much the worker produced. Whatever increase in production was achieved by the worker, he was paid individually.
The old piecework system, however, led to a vicious situation in the shops. Individual workers went the whole hog in trying to increase their pay by greater production. It meant driving themselves to no end. But the real nature of the piecework system was that as the individual worker increased his production, the new increase was regarded as normal and the worker, in relation to his productivity, suffered a continual wage cut.
The boss used the piecework system to create a back-breaking competition between workers in the shop. It led to conflicts between the workers. The net result of this was that the bosses obtained great productivity out of labor, which enormously increased their profits.
At the end of it all, the worker had nothing to show for his intense labor except a “broken back.” He found that he gave his best to the boss and then found himself out of work because he could no longer keep up the pace he set by his endeavor to get more wages through the piecework system.
 
Bosses to Gain
The aim of incentive pay is to create the basis for a group or collective speed-up ” to reward the workers for increased production on a group basis. The essential features of the piecework, speed-up system remain the same. But faster workers, under the new system, will be counted upon to drag up to their level the slower workers. After a given period, if the group fails to reach a standard set by the boss, they will get no increase of pay.
However, if the group does meet the standard, then not only does the group gain a slight increase, but the bosses, who have nothing at all to do with such production gains, would share in the increases obtained by the speed-up. Thus the scheme is another means of increasing the incomes and wealth of business.
The whole scheme is a conscious fraud on the part of big business, because increased productivity means greater profits! In the end, the workers get no further than they were in the beginning. This is borne out by the fact that for some years now, especially during the war, the workers have increased productivity at a high-rate. But, as the AFL pointed out, the workers have not shared in this great increase in productivity. The bosses have taken all the gravy out of this increased production in the form of greater profits. They now want to build this system up in a big way”the bigger and more universal its application, the bigger its profits will be.
The campaign for incentive pay, however, has struck a snag in the auto industry. There is hardly an auto worker, who does not know the meaning of piecework and speed-up.
He had his fill of it in the pre-union days at Ford. He knows that the auto industry was known as a “young man’s industry” because of the back-breaking speed-up instituted by the auto magnates. He knows that he was regarded as an old man long before his time; that he was thrown out of work in the prime of life and could not get a job. And he knows that after all the work and production he contributed to enrich the bosses, he had nothing to show for his labor.
The great achievement of the UAW was that it busted up the speed-up system and the piecework system. The union understood that these were nothing but a clever means of robbing the workers even more than they are normally robbed by profit-hungry industrialists. That is why the ranks and many leaders of the union are now fighting all attempts to introduce this vicious scheme to enrich the bosses in the auto industry. But the fight is becoming more difficult because of the forces now supporting the bosses.
 
The Role of the Stalinists
Next to big business, the outstanding supporters of incentive pay are the Stalinists. They have done everything in their power to put over this boss scheme on the workers, and nowhere have they been so active as in the UAW, especially in Detroit.
The big chief of the Communist Party, Earl Browder, made it a point to intervene from the outside to try to force incentive pay on the UAW. The Communist Party members in the union and their cohorts followed up this campaign.
These enemies of the best interests of labor now argue that it is necessary that the bosses get their profits! After all, the bosses might sabotage the war effort if they are not permitted to get all they can off the backs of the workers!
But the real interests of the Stalinists, of course, is Stalin and his regime in Russia. They cry for more production, not because they give a damn about anyone or anything else. They are only concerned with more and more production in order to increase war supplies for Stalin. What happens to the workers in the meantime is none of their concern. And that is understandable. Those who support the slavery of the Russian workers have no objections to the enslavement of the American workers.
 
Frankensteen’s Position
The most prominent leader within the union to champion incentive pay is Richard Frankensteen. But there is a reason, even if not a good one, behind his madness. Frankensteen is in charge of organization of the aircraft industry. This industry is notorious for its low wage scales and high rate of profit.
Organization of the aircraft workers depends in a large measure on the matter of wage scales. Specifically, it means carrying on a fight against the wage freeze and the hold-the-line order which keeps these workers underpaid. It means fighting against wage differentials and for equalization of wages”bringing up the wages of aircraft workers to the minimum basic wage in the auto industry.
Since Frankensteen is not committed to a militant struggle around these issues, he seeks to overcome his problem in aircraft by championing incentive pay. By adopting the newly named and glorified scheme for the old piecework and speed-up systems, he hopes to meet the most important problem in the organization of the aircraft workers.
Such a policy is an illusory one. Production in aircraft is at an extremely high rate, as is evidenced by the great number of planes produced. The workers in this industry, as in all other industries, have never shared in the enormous production for which they are responsible. Yet Frankensteen’s proposal would result in an even greater speed-up for them and a proportionately lesser share in the product of their toil.
As a matter of fact, no one has dared to criticize the American workers for their failure to produce. There is hardly a person who is not amazed with the tremendous efficiency and productivity of the American worker. Only the Stalinists have systematically spread the poison that the workers are “cheating on the job” and that incentive pay should be introduced to increase production!
 
Danger Ahead
There is, however, one grave danger in the present situation. The wage freeze and the hold-the-line order is making life unbearable for hundreds of thousands of workers whose wages in no way meet their needs under the constantly rising cost of living.
The conspiracy of big business, the Administration and even some labor leaders against pay increases has created a situation where the only way left open for such increases is through some form of the incentive pay schemes.
President Philip Murray of the CIO, who spends most of his time getting rebukes from the President and the Administration, already has signified his acceptance of one form or another of incentive pay.
By this action Murray is conveying to the rest of the CIO that he wants it to accept the same situation.
This is a grave danger to the union movement. For, in addition to the fact that it is a vicious piecework and speed-up system calculated to enrich the bosses, it is also an instrument designed to bust the union movement by breaking down the wage scales and working conditions of labor that have been, won after many years of heroic struggle.
The fight against incentive pay and against all those who advocate it is, above all, a struggle for the union movement, for the victories it has won and for the workers whom it represents.
 
Fight for the Union
There is only one genuine working class and union road open to the labor movement. Reject any and all schemes for incentive pay! Not incentive pay, but wage increases!
The hypocrisy of the Administration is revealed in its support of incentive pay schemes. Its opposition to wage increases is based on the grounds that consumer goods are not fully available and wage increases would only aggravate this condition. It would be inflationary. But incentive pay is supported on the ground that it would be based on increased production.
What the Administration fails to add is that such increased production is not in the consumer field, therefore no changes would take place. There would be no increase in consumer goods.
The Administration hopes the workers will overlook this little discrepancy behind the scheme to increase profits.
The workers are not getting anything for nothing. They are grossly underpaid.
The great wealth produced by its intense labors’ goes into the hands of the bosses and industry. The great increase in their productivity has been usurped by big business.
The auto workers, by rejecting incentive pay at their convention and by adopting a program of struggle for wage increases, will be giving the greatest service not only to all the workers in the industry but to all American workers. They will be safeguarding the union movement and the great gains made by it! Rejection of incentive pay is a defense of unionism and the workers against big business and its servants. Whether they be capitalist politicians, labor leaders or the Stalinist Communist Party!
 



The anti-labor Smith-Connolly bill to outlaw strikes is once more in the headlines of the boss press. It appears now that this bill has not accomplished its purpose because, under its provisions, strike votes have been taken and in all such voting the workers overwhelmingly favored a walkout.
The question now asked is why the framers of this bill included a provision permitting a strike vote to be taken after the legal thirty-day notice? Certainly the Southern Bourbons who authored the bill had no intention of permitting workers to strike for their legitimate grievances and wage demands.
Intoxicated with their own vicious propaganda that strikes were the product of some malicious union leaders, the anti-labor elements in Congress actually began to believe it themselves;
Completely divorced from the people and opposed to the best interests of the workers, they were certain that the passage of the Smith-Connolly bill was enough to fight for their rights, there were ers nevertheless continued to fight for their rights, there were always the courts and the jails to take care of that. [sic]
The clause on the strike vote was merely a “democratic” cover; to the real intentions of the framers of the bill.
How wrong these gentlemen have been! How little they understand American workers!
How completely uninterested they are in the well-being of those who toil!
Workers do not go out on strike just for fun. When workers strike they do so because they have grievances which need redress. It is the only means they have to assert their rights in a situation where big business, the Administration, Congress and all the politicians, the press – the whole reactionary camp – run the show.
There is hardly an industry where the workers do not have grievances. And why not?
Their wages have been frozen. Under the hold-the-line order, the WLB has served as a wastebasket in which are deposited the wage demands of the workers.
Conditions of labor have worsened with the lengthening of hours and the tremendous speed-up created by war production, To top this off, big business has organized a vicious campaign to destroy the trade union movement. Taking advantage of the no-strike pledge, they have left no stone unturned to smash unionism permanently and take away the gains made by the workers in recent years.
But workers are quick to see through this reactionary game. The NLRB, since the passage of the Smith-Connally bill, has held thirteen strike votes with the infamous and provocative question asked of the workers, if they wished to “permit an interruption of production in wartime as a result of this dispute.”
In each of the thirteen instances, the workers, by majorities of sixty to a hundred per cent, voted to strike.
Why? The answer is simple. The workers cannot meet the high cost of living. The decline in their standard of living has become unbearable. They are tired of the run-around they get from the WLB, from the Administration, from Washington, and they are more than sick and tired of the advantage which the bosses are taking of them because of the no-strike pledge.
If industry does not get its big profits, it threatens not to produce. If a company produces bad war materials which endanger the lives of soldiers: it gets a small fine and big praise from the press and judges attesting to its honesty! If a conscientious inspector discovers fraud committed by some officials of a large corporation, the corporation denounces the government agency involved and demands that it keep hands off, otherwise the company cannot function!
The OPA declares that it cannot really control prices and makes no real effort to do so. The food interests and the big farm interests demand no price control and they get the necessary cooperation in Washington.
But when labor demands a limitation of profits it gets a wage freeze and a hold-the-line order.
Labor demands wage increases, and it gets an incentive pay proposal designed to intensify the exploitation of the workers and to increase the profits of the bosses.
These are some of, the reasons why workers strike. They know what is happening in the country. They see reaction riding high in Washington. They see the enrichment of the capitalist through the war effort, that is, through the sweat and toil of their labor. They see every demand made by them to improve their conditions rejected in Washington.
Is it any wonder that the workers vote to strike?
These thirteen strike votes resulted in a new campaign to revise this provision of the Smith-Connally bill. It was Roosevelt who first denounced the provision and demanded its elimination. Through his alliance with the labor bureaucrats, he understood better than his Southern party comrades what are the real sentiments of labor. He was told by Green and Murray how impossible it has become to hold the dissatisfied workers in line. And he knew that if the bill permitted a strike vote, labor would vote to strike.
The next session of Congress, therefore, will see a new drive on to revise, the Smith-Connally bill and to eliminate this provision.
The Administration, the anti-labor leaders of both parties, the press and the bosses will get together to make sure that no way is left open for the workers to assert their rights! The Smith-Connally bill, apparently, did not go far enough to suit them. These gentlemen now propose to “improve’’ it, And woe to labor when they finish their job.
Labor, on guard! The totalitarian are on the march. Fight now against any further measures which aim to keep labor in its present unbearable position and seek the ultimate destruction of the labor movement.

Fight for the repeal of the Smith-Connally bill!
 
Fight to rescind the no-strike pledge!
 
Fight for your democratic rights!
 
Fight for wage increases and against a further destruction of your standard of living!
 
Defend your union organizations against all union-busters!
 
Build an independent political party of labor against the boss parties!

 



The big drive to put over the piecework-speed-up system known as “incentive pay” was launched some time ago. Behind the new scheme of cheating the American workers was a combination made up of the Administration, big business, some misleaders of labor and the Stalinists. The ranks of the labor movement, however, having more than enough experience with such plans for increasing the profits of the bosses, voiced their determined opposition to this ingenious system which originated in the ranks of big business.
But on Sunday, September 5, a new attempt to popularize and convince a skeptical working class of the benefits of incentive pay was made by two persons of seemingly divergent views, who are, however, really close friends these days.
On that day, the Worker, organ of the Stalinist Communist Party of America, carried a long article by its leader, Earl Browder, entitled Incentive Wage – Key to War Labor Problems. Simultaneously, the New York Times published a featured letter by one Albert Ramond on Incentive Pay Viewed as One Solution of War Effort.”
Earl Browder needs no introduction, for the labor movement is fairly well acquainted with this leader of the union-wreckers. But Mr. Ramond is not so publicly well known. But he should be. Since 1937 he has been the acting head of the Bedaux Company, an agency devoted to devising ways and means of speeding up workers to increase profits, but politely referred to as “industrial engineers.”
The Bedaux Company earned the deep hatred of the labor movement not only for the vicious speed-up and piecework systems it introduced into industry, but also for its blatant anti-union activity. This hatred was not confined to the “company,” but was directed especially against Charles E. Bedaux, its founder and sponsor.
When the Duke of Windsor planned to tour the United States for the purpose of studying plant management and production, he announced that his associate and companion would be the same Mr. Bedaux, who left the country in 1937. But the protests of the labor movement, the personal denunciations by Green, Lewis and a host of other labor leaders was so sharp and indignant that the Duke gave up the idea of bringing with him this notorious slave-driver.
The real meaning of incentive pay, however, is illustrated by the fact that Albert Ramond, present head of the Badeaux Company, is one of its loudest and most persistent advocates.
Labor Action has described the operation of incentive pay on many occasions. The real key to the problem is to be found in the manner in which Browder and Bedaux, in advocating its adoption, are compelled to plead for the scheme and to explain “past irregularities.”
What are these “irregularities”? They are simply that, under such schemes, the increased productivity of the workers was “rewarded” with proportional declines in wage rates so that at the end, in relation to total production, the workers actually suffered wage cuts. On the other hand, the benefits of increased productivity, realized in enormous profits for the bosses, went into their hands, and their hands alone.
 
Beautifying Incentive Pay
Both Browder and Ramond admit that this past history of such schemes as incentive pay do not make it easy to put it over on the workers this time. Ramond excuses his class of exploiters by saying that it wasn’t true of all businesses, only some of them. Browder says that “This tendency of the manufacturers to cut rates arbitrarily destroys, of course, the very foundation of the incentive system.” To make it work now, they mustn’t do this – the leopard should change its spots!
Browder lies. The foundation of incentive pay is precisely what big business says and does with it. Big business did not invent this scheme in order to improve the wages and standard of living of the workers. It introduced it for the specific and sole purpose of increasing the productivity of the worker while actually cutting his wage rates and, in effect, reducing his standard of living, but increasing profits at the same time.
This is borne out by the fact that since the turn of the century the productivity of the American worker has gone up and up and up. But the worker’s share in this productivity has steadily declined!
Another aspect of this campaign by Browder and the Bedaux Company is the inference they make that the workers have been stalling on the job. Ramond states that incentive pay would give a “badly needed stimulus to production in war industries.”
 
What Labor Has Contributed
These gentlemen malign labor. Anyone with half an eye can see how vast has been the production of war materials. The skill and productivity of the American worker is unequalled anywhere in the world. Moreover, this has always been true. But it is especially true in this war. As a matter of fact, the Administration^ and; a number of big business leaders have expressed their astonishment at the productivity of labor in the modern American industries.
It is also admitted that war production in many fields has surpassed original plans and heeds (tanks, shells, etc.). President Murray of the CIO has even publicly warned against the danger of unemployment in a number of war industries.
What, then, is behind this boss-inspired campaign for incentive pay? More profits! Not satisfied with the greatest profits in history, American’ capitalists and their underlings, agents arid new-found friends, in the shape of the Stalinists, have devised this scheme to defraud the American workers even more than at present.
Browder is behind this campaign because, agent of Stalin, ally of England and America, he supports the Roosevelt Administration. He is fully aware of the deep dissatisfaction of the workers with the wage freeze and the hold-the-line order. He knows that the workers are getting the wrong end of the stick and that they are stirring with resentment at the fact that the war is enriching the already rich capitalist class, while they have had to make every sacrifice.
The workers are fed up with the “high cost of living, the enormous taxes which overburden them, the farce of price control, and with the thousand and one ways in which they are cheated. And they see through the farce of “equality of sacrifice” which has meant only sacrifice by them, while big business wallows in the wealth produced by their toil.
The Stalinists stand four-square behind the Roosevelt program, especially its domestic policies. To forestall the resentment of the workers, Browder offfers incentive pay as the only means open to an increase of workers’ wages.
Thus the Browder aim is to quiet the protest of the workers and mobilize mass support for Roosevelt’s fourth term campaign. It is this scheme which coincides with the big business plan for increased profits.
 
Jumping a Hurdle
The Administration, big business and the Stalinists have argued against wage increases on the ground that they would produce inflation. They are ready to grant wage increases on the basis of the incentive plan. But this would apply primarily to the war industries producing war goods. Obviously this production would not increase the amount of consumer goods in circulation. How, then, do they square their opposition to wage increases with their willingness to grant them such increases under the incentive plan? The answer is, that they do not square it, for they cannot. And this alone serves to expose the whole game.
One needs only to glance over the list of sponsors of incentive pay to see what it really is. It is not at all accidental that Browder and Ramond chose the same day to make their pleas. But it would have been more in keeping with events to have printed Ramond’s letter in the Sunday Worker and Browder’s article in the New York Times.
 



Some weeks ago the Senate’s Truman Committee made public the results of its investigation of the Curtiss-Wright subsidiary, the Wright Aeronautical Corporation of Lockland, Ohio. The committee found that this company had been selling the government “defective and substandard plane engines by falsifying tests, forgiving inspection reports, and by eight other practices designed to by-pass Army specifications.”
The New York newspaper PM called the Truman Committee revelations “The Most Shameful Story of the War.” This was a mild characterization, as the Truman Committee’s presentation of its bill of particulars demonstrates. The company, in “producing and causing the government to accept defective and substandard material,” employed the following “good business” tricks:
Falsified tests, destroyed records, improperly recorded results of tests, forged inspection reports, failure to segregate substandard and defective material, failure to destroy or mutilate such defective and substandard materials, changed tolerances, and skipped inspection operations.
In its original report, the committee stated that the situation was far worse than it had disclosed, but in high regard for the morale of the nation is purposely toned down its revelations.
 
Press and Patterson Defend Company
At that time, Under Secretary of War Patterson tried to come to the defense of the company. Together with the big business press, which either played down the report or criticized it altogether, the Under Secretary announced that the facts were not nearly as sensational as Senator Truman would make it appear to be. But Senator Truman came right back, saying that the report was “the most favorable and the least critical that the committee (could) render and at the same time fulfill its duty ...”
As it turned out, the War Department had to go along with the Truman Committee. It acknowledged the facts in the case and proceeded to “rectify” the bad situation at the Wright plant. The big business press thought it the better part of valor to fay off the case.
Not so with the New York Times, that pretentious, lying sheet which carries its own halo in its hands and editorial columns. It was determined to get back at the Truman Committee for exposing a large advertiser and, therefore, a source of lucrative income. That is only part of the story. The Times, as a big business, ran to the defense of another big business. These outfits stick together to defend their common interests – profits! And it doesn’t make much difference HOW profits are made.
It sent one Turner Catledge to Lockland to do a series on the Wright Aeronautical Corporation and to determine why there had been a slump in production. This Mr. Catledge soon discovered the reason. It was the “false” report of the Truman Committee! This report hurt the morale of the company, and it just could not do its best under the circumstances.
The tenor of Mr. Catledge’s report was followed up in an editorial of the Times, which, while it praised congressional committees, and even put in a good wqrd for Senator Truman, made sure to add that his committee was more interested in headlines and sensations than in real facts. Proof? The report on Curtiss-Wright.
 
Senator Truman Replies to the Times
But Senator Truman retorted:
“The facts are that they were turning out phony engines and I have no doubt a lot of kids in training planes have been killed as a result. The committee was conservative in its report, in order to prevent too much alarm over the situation. But if I had my way some of the people responsible would be stood up and shot.
“If the Times would rather see boys killed than to see the engines turned out properly, I’m certainly surprised at its attitude. I don’t belong to that class. The committee has no axe to grind except to get efficient production, and we don’t sell advertising to the Curtiss-Wright Corporation.”
As for an explanation of why production took such a sharp drop at the plant, Truman denied that it was fear on the part of the company that it might be pounced on by a congressional committee.
In this specific case, the Wright Corporation had six months in which to alter its murderous methods.
“How much time do they want?” asked Senator Truman. “Curtiss-Wright had six months. If the Times wants faulty planes and faulty materials, I can’t help that ... the Times is just talking for its advertisers.”
He charged the company with responsibility for the decline in production, stating that its purpose was to discredit the Truman Committee and thus cause its report to be looked upon with suspicion.
It should be added that the Truman Committee merely investigated the company. It has no powers of prosecution or indictment. That is in the hands of the Attorney General (Mr. Riddle). But to date there has been no sign or information that anything will be done to Curtiss-Wright. After all, this monopoly is not like the young Baltimore welder who, for one error or another, received an eighteen-month prison term. It was not suspended, either, as in the case of the Anaconda Company of Indiana.
 



There was a time when the American labor movement celebrated May 1 as the holiday of all who toil. May Day was a tradition of labor struggle. It emphasized the fact that the American working class had to fight for its right to organize and for all the gains it had won in wages, hours and conditions of work.
It was to counteract the militant working class spirit of its marching legions on May Day that the government, acting jointly with big business and reactionary labor leaders, set aside the first Monday in September as a labor holiday.
Thus Labor Day has become a traditional “day of rest.” But more important than that, it has become a symbol of labor docility, of collaboration with the bosses, of everything that weakens and hurts the working class.
It is the day when government officials pat labor on the back and then warn the workers to be good slaves, not to fight profits, not to resist their bosses, not to demand higher wages, shorter hours or better working conditions.
It is a day when reactionary bosses and hard-fisted industrialists say hello to the men in overalls and thank them for their labors, cautioning them to be good slaves and to resist any desire to change their conditions of existence.
It is a day when reactionary labor leaders plead with the workers not to be trouble-makers by fighting for their rights, and thus upsetting the “good” relations which exist between “capital and labor.”
The whole atmosphere of Labor Day is repugnant. It is against the best traditions and the best interests of labor. It is the perpetuation of a lie that the workers can improve their lot by being quiet, agreeable mules.
Since the war broke out, labor has received one blow after another.
Wages have been frozen.
Jobs have been frozen.
More than half of the working class exists on a wage of under thirty dollars a week!
Hours of work have been lengthened. Conditions of labor have worsened to the point where industrial accidents far exceed war casualties.
The cost of living is far beyond the ability of the workers to meet it.
Price control and price rollbacks have become a bitter joke!
On the other side of the ledger we find war profiteering without a let-up.
We find the growth of new war millionaires.
We find cost-plus contracts which further enrich the rich. There are no real limits to profits. There are no limits to salaries!
In addition to the frightful situation on the home front, there is the war – a wasteful, destructive and purposeless feature of a decaying capitalist system.
Labor Day 1943 brings home the point: There is need for a change of our society. Socialism is a necessity.
It would destroy the capitalist system wherein one class is enriched by exploiting the majority.
We need socialism because the means of life, the factories, mines, mills and land would belong to the people!
We need socialism because production of the necessities of life would be for the use of the people instead of the profit of a few.
 



One of the most important questions now before the locals of the UAW and one which will undoubtedly come before the eighth annual convention in Buffalo on October 4 is the issue of the no-strike pledge In the opening article of this series We pointed out that the no-strike pledge was obtained from the labor movement en the basis of a series of PROMISES made by President Roosevelt, none of which has been carried out. The labor officialdoms readily assented to the President’s request without prior consultation or vote of the rank and file unionists.
In some cases, only after the labor leaders had already given their word to the President that they would adhere to his request did the matter come before any local unions. But then it was not so much a matter of bringing the issue before the membership as it was to obtain RATIFICATION by the rank and file to an action already accepted by the leadership.
In the UAW, the rank and file was immediately suspicious of this proposal made by Roosevelt. It took a great deal of persuasion to convince the membership to accept the no-strike pledge. As matters have turned out, the sentiments of the rank and file were correct, because the, no-strike pledge has turned out to be a noose around the neck of the whole labor movement, and especially of the automobile workers. It has served as the wedge by which the basses have sought to open the way for a destruction of unionism in the auto industry.
 
Who Gave Up What?
In return for the no-strike pledge, President Roosevelt promised many things: no lockouts by the bosses, limitation of profits, no war profiteering, no war millionaires, control and ceilings on prices, maintenance of collective bargaining, no union busting campaign by the bosses and control of the cost of living.
In each case, however, these have turned out to be empty promises.
While the workers have really given up something, the bosses have surrendered nothing.
Someone might object and say: Haven’t the bosses agreed not to lock out the workers? The answer to this objection contains the key to the whole problem.
The bosses, that is to say, industry, monopolistic big business and all the lesser lights who fatten on their crumbs, are making a. good thing out of this war. Every worker knows that the boss is in this game for only one thing: PROFIT. He profits off the labor of his workers!
War contracts keep industry going at a steady pace every day in the week and every week in the year. If the boss were to lock out his workers that would mean a loss of his income and profits.
Why, then, should big business, in this period, when it is overstuffed with war contracts on a cost-plus basis, i.e., WITH GUARANTEED PROFITS, lock out workers, under any conceivable circumstances. No, its interest is to keep labor working all the time.
 
The Workers Have Sacrificed
The boss is willing to forego the lockout, because it means giving up nothing in order to keep the worker’s nose to the grindstone: If this were a period of economic crisis and the boss agreed to keep; the worker on the job, that might be called a “sacrifice.” Even then, the worker would only be getting his just due.
Or, if the boss agreed to pay the worker an additional sum as a post-war “contingent wage,” that might be construed as a sacrifice, although then too he would be giving the worker only what was produced by his labor. But to intimate that the boss has sacrificed something in giving up the lockout is a grim joke indeed.
It is quite otherwise when the worker agrees to give up his strike weapon. Why? Because that is the only real weapon which the worker has to fight for his needs and to defend what he has. If he gives up the strike he has no other weapon by which to fight for wages, conditions and hours, and he has no way to defend what he has won after long years of struggle. Without the strike weapon, he must rely on “aid” from some other source – in this case, the President.
But the lesson of the past couple of years is that labor can get nothing substantial and important in that way. On the contrary, all that the worker received from that source is the Wage freeze, the Little Steel formula, the job freeze, threats of induction into the Army, and the notorious WLB.
The strength of the worker, however, lies in his organization, his program and his will to struggle unitedly with his brothers against a common enemy.
Equally as important, however, is that the bosses see in the no-strike pledge a means to break the power of the union movement, especially industrial unionism.
 
A Blow at Unionism
Armed with the knowledge that the labor leaders were enforcing the no-strike pledge and that the President had insisted upon its loyal execution, no matter what provocations faced the workers, the bosses have done everything in their power to violate agreements, hinder collective bargaining, harass the shop steward system, uphold down-grading reclassifications, stall on rate increases, and a hundred and one other grievances which the unions have.
Their aim is to “provoke” the unions into what they call “drastic” actions in order to proceed with their plans to weaken the unions now, and lay the basis for their destruction in the period ahead.
The fact that the no-strike pledge has weakened the labor movement, held it back from organizing the unorganized, retarded its growth, handicapped its struggle for wages, hours and conditions of work, has forced the ranks to fight for rescinding what is clearly a straightjacket built to order for big business.
 
Big Business Wins – Workers Lose
In addition to the fact that the no-strike pledge has strengthened the hand of the reactionary industrialists, it had laid the basis for the following situation:
Big business has made a good thing out of the war. Its profits are enormous and even the high tax bills have in no way affected the enrichment of monopoly industry. Not only are the companies being enriched by the war (government orders on a cost-plus basis), but the individual bosses, the officials of the great monopolies have jacked up their salaries by tens of thousands of dollars.
War profiteering is the rule and it is accompanied by the growth of a crop of new war millionaires!
The price situation is truly a great but tragic joke to millions of workers. The President insists upon an absolute application of his hold-the-line order on wages, but prices mount higher, with no prospect that they will cease their climb or be controlled. Every worker knows that there has been no genuine price control.
The high cost of living has outstripped the incomes of the American workers. It is true that some workers in manufacturing industries have-increased their earnings, but that has come primarily because of their increased work day and longer week. But so far as the workers as a whole are concerned, the cost of living has passed beyond the point where their earnings suffice for their livelihood.
The fact of the matter is that the standard of living of the American workers, and this every auto worker knows, has dropped considerably.
In addition to the rise in the cost of living, the absence of price control and freezing of wages, the quality of goods has greatly deteriorated. Thus, in still another way, the enrichment of big business takes place.
 
Meaning of the Miners’ Fight
The first union organization to face the facts squarely was the United Mine Workers. They broke the no-strike pledge and made a real fight against the reactionary band of profiteering coal operators. It is true that the miners faced not only the operators, but also the Administration and the attacks of stupid labor leaders who, instead of allying themselves with the workers, joined hands with the operators and the Administration.
Everybody was arrayed against the miners. But, in fact, the miners were carrying on the fight for all the workers in the country. And the miners are now getting some of their demands and will get more. The only reason for this is that they stood up on their feet ready to slug it out with anyone who dared try to keep them in their poverty.
But it isn’t only the miners who have awakened to the real meaning of the no-strike pledge. Thousands of rank and file auto workers who have themselves experienced the real meaning of this suicidal pledge have denounced the pledge and call for its abandonment,
The issue came up at the Michigan state convention of the CIO. It is before every local union now electing delegates, A large number of local slates have demanded rescinding the no-strike pledge (rank and file slate in Hudson Local 154 and rank and file of Dodge Local 3, for example). Even those who, while they agree with these unionists, are not ready to go so far for a variety of reasons, have demanded certain guarantees in exchange for continuing the pledge.
The issue cannot be postponed. Rescinding the no-strike pledge is a life and death question for the auto-workers, as it is for every other union in the country. Certainly, the Administration is for it. Certainly, the bosses are for it. Certainly, the yellow press, the bosses’ organizations, their lickspittles in Congress and their conscious and unconscious spokesmen are for it. Certainly the labor leaders, who spend their time getting a run-around in Washington, are for it.
But all of that should only point to how harmful this pledge is to the labor movement and the working class in general.
One of the first steps to an improvement of the position of labor, its standards and its organized existence, is rescinding the no-strike pledge.
 



President Roosevelt’s latest order to the National War Labor Board is a culminating point in the Administration-big business coalition against American labor. It calls for “sanctions” against unions and workers who refuse to accept rulings of the WLB or who strike as a last resort to obtain their just grievances and demands.
The yellow capitalist press fully understood the true significance of the President’s executive order when it heralded his letter to Chairman Davis of the WLB as “sanctions fixed against strikers.” This is interesting, because the letter presumably ordered “action” too against companies which refused to carry out any decision by the same board.
But the New York Times remarked aptly enough that “less drastic sanctions” were authorized in respect to business. The order authorized “control of war contracts, of essential materials and of transportation and fuel,” whatever that may mean, provided it did not impede the war effort.
That is the whole point! Up to now big business gets away with almost anything and everything, because action against big business “might impede the war effort.”
Not so with labor. Against the workers, anything goes.
The President has given the board power to withhold in escrow union dues collected under union agreements where plants have been seized by the government because of a strike.
But the most drastic and dangerous aspect of the President’s order is the authorization given to the Selective Service System to cancel draft deferments of “recalcitrant” workers, i.e., militant workers, who strike in an effort to win their demands from a rapacious, profit-mad boss class.
One WLB official described the order as giving his agency “a lower set of teeth.”
These “sanctions” ordered by the President are in line with the anti-labor provisions of the Smith-Connally Bill, which has now become law. They only add to the penalties against labor provided for in that infamous act.
Thus Roosevelt has put his fine touch to a series of anti-labor actions emanation from Congress and his Administration. These are all in line with wage freezing, job freezing, anti-strike legislation, absence of price control and the unbridled run-away cost of living.
It is in line, too, with the enormous growth in profits of American industry, with the sky-high salaries of the big business men, with the rights which the bosses have to enrich themselves out of the War effort at the expense of the millions of workers in this country.
The first reaction of the labor officials have been in keeping with their craven attitude on labor problems. Some of the labor press, seeking to minimize the effect of Roosevelt’s order, sought to emphasize the fact that it is directed at the bosses, too. But they overlook the fact that the bosses do not have to struggle against the high cost of living, for better wages, for shorter hours, or for better working conditions. That is the lot of the workers.
There is an important political lesson to be gained from the recent Roosevelt action: Labor can have no trust in the parties of big business, no matter who their standard-bearers are!
The WLB has become the graveyard of labor demands. Labor must quit this board.
 



On October 4, in the city of Buffalo, the United Automobile Workers will hold its eighth annual convention. In many respects this is the most important convention of the union, for it is confronted with issues of such a crucial nature that the very life of the organization is dependent upon a positive, militant solution of them – in the best tradition of the UAW.
The United Automobile Workers is the largest union in the country and stands near the very top of the honor roll of labor action and achievement. It was born out of struggle, it grew in struggle and its future depends upon the same spirit which gave it birth.
Before this country became a participant in the war, the United Automobile Workers was dominated by a more or less consistent aim: to build the union, to make it the largest union in the world, to make it the most democratic union, the most militant union, and a model of working class struggle and devotion to the cause of all the toilers in America and the world over.
 
Union Grew by Militancy
To a considerable extent, the union met its test by resolutely carrying out its main tasks. In order to build the union, the militant automobile workers had to break with the conservative, do-nothing unions of the AFL. Having rid itself of this head hand, which stood in the way of building a mass union in the auto industry, the UAW developed with giant strides. But it did so by its struggle against a band of rapacious, monopolistic automobile magnates who had, prior to that time, built a mass industry and “earned” enormous profits off the toil of an unorganized and severely exploited automobile workers, who suffered the most vicious speed-ups and “incentive” schemes invented by these same auto bourbons.
The wave of sit-downs and strikes let the world of labor know that here was a mass of workers, sick and tired of the old game, ready to organize themselves to defend their very life’s interest. The union won its fight and it grew to mass proportions. But every rank and file automobile worker knows that the union grew, not because it compromised itself or flinched before the terror of the auto plutocracy and its hired agents, but because it fought back hard and resisted, by its own organization and program, the organized forces of reaction.
It not only got recognition for its union, but it recorded tremendous gains for the auto workers.
 
The Effects of the War
With America’s entry into the war, the UAW faced a new situation and a series of new problems which affected the entire labor movement.
The conversion of the auto industry to war production, and the placing of the whole country on a war footing, exacted its toll of the labor movement in the same proportion that it enriched industry and the profit-bloated bosses.
What, then, are the main issues which confront the auto workers; as they prepare for their annual convention. They are several and they relate to the tasks of the union in relation to the industry, and the problems inside the union itself. As we see it, they are the following:
 
What the No-Strike Pledge Has Meant
1. Upon the insistence of Roosevelt, the labor unions, through their officials, and without consulting the rank and file, adopted the no-strike pledge. In the UAW this proposal was adopted, but only after a bitter fight made by the militant rank and file and on the basis of the following: The workers were PROMISED that in exchange for their cooperation, the Administration would give labor a “square deal.” Industry would not take advantage of the surrender of the strike weapon; it would conform to its agreements; collective bargaining would remain in force.
Moreover, the President PROMISED that there would be no war profiteering and no new war millionaires. He added that while the workers could not hope to take advantage of the war for nation-wide wage increases, he promised that the cost of living would be kept down mainly by preventing an uncontrolled rise in prices.
What has actually happened? Industry, that is to say, the bosses, gave up nothing. On the contrary, big business has enriched itself as never before as a result of the war economy. This is especially true of the auto industry.
Prices have not been controlled; the cost of living has risen steadily for the past three years. Wages have been frozen under the President’s hold-the-line order. Some workers have received wage increases, but in the main increased payrolls have come as a result of long hours of work, the increased length of the work week.
In addition, the bosses have taken advantage of the no-strike pledge to badger the unions and hinder collective bargaining. They have stalled on re-classifications, upgrading, and wage increases. They have sought under the conditions created by the war and the way the union movement has been hamstrung by its leaderships, to destroy the unions. This, then, is the greatest danger which faces the working class in general, and the auto workers in particular.
While the leadership of the union and the present leaders of the various factions in the union have joined in a common chorus of denunciation of John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers, it was the miners’ union which, by its militant action showed the way for all workers in this country. Little wonder, then, that the rank and file auto worker instinctively felt solidarity with the miners. He knew that the fight of the coal miners was his fight. And he was ready to give it support.
 
On Whom Should Workers Rely?
But the leaders of the union, as of the CIO, at the same time that they fear the actions of the rank and file, have little or no faith in the organized and independent strength of the workers. Thus, from Murray down, they have placed the fate of the union movement on their reliance on a hand-out from the president. On any pretext at all, they run to the White House to see the President. And Roosevelt, in turn, will, sometimes see them, and as many times not. Whether they cool their heels in his ante-chambers or stand with hat in hand before his desk, the net result is the same: nothing ever happens. They leave empty-handed and announce that the President has promised to do something for the workers.
It is obvious that the hope of the worker lies not in his reliance on a crumb from Washington but upon the united might and will to struggle for his union, upon a rejection of the no-strike pledge which has become a straightjacket on labor.
The question of rescinding the no-strike pledge is a life and death question for the union movement, especially for the UAW. It is not merely a matter of safeguarding the immediate interests of the American working class. There are far larger perspectives involved: the maintenance and strengthening of the existing union movement in the post-war period.
Make no mistake about it, fellow workers, the no-strike pledge has become a weapon of tremendous power in the hands of the bosses to render the trade unions helpless, in the hope that they can eventually be destroyed.
 
Organization and Equal Pay
2. Another decisive issue before the convention is the extension of the UAW to the unorganized fields, to bring into its ranks thousands of Workers qualified to belong to it. This is especially true of aircraft, where the workers are the victims of low wages while the bosses are having a profit-jag on, aided by the fact that the government has built for their use hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of plants, which guarantee them profits through the contractual system of cost-plus.
In connection with the need for an extended organization drive, there is the necessity for establishing and winning “equal pay for equal work.” Unless this is effective, the bosses will use it as a wedge to divide the union and the workers. And this would be in accord with their aim of destroying the UAW.
The auto worker must remember, too, that his industry is now on a total war footing. In the post-war period, in the economic dislocation which will certainly come, and with the additional employment problems created by reconversion, the future of the auto worker is bleak enough.
The unorganized workers will be used as a wedge by the bosses to destroy the standards won by the UAW. This would make it mandatory, if only as a measure of self-defense, for the UAW to organize the whole industry, including aircraft.
But, with the acceptance of the no-strike pledge, such organization has been made doubly difficult. In addition, adherence to the President’s hold-the-line order makes it difficult for the union to employ its most attractive feature – the auto workers’ wage scale. This is one of the main reasons why some of the leaders of the union are pushing incentive pay. Having failed to stand up for the rights of the union movement and having accepted the hold-the-line order, there is nothing left for them but to embrace incentive pay as a means of getting a little more for the men. This is most dangerous for the UAW, as we shall soon point out.
 
Wage Increases and Prices
3. Therefore, the union must take a clear-cut stand for wage increases and for the abolition of the hold-the-line order and the WLB which enforces an order admittedly unfair to labor. The hold-the-line order has worked effectively in keeping wages down.
In contrast, however, nothing seriously has been done to control prices, to establish genuine price ceilings or to roll back prices. Nothing has been done to limit salaries and tax all war profits and salaries. The interests opposed to increasing wages, to establishing price ceilings and to rolling back prices are dominant.
Washington has been flooded with dollar-a-year men, i.e., big business or its hirelings, and it is they who run the war economy for their own benefit and at the expense of the workers. All the promises made to the workers up to now have not been worth the paper they were written on. All the promises made now that this time, “seriously,” there will be a roll back of prices can be taken at the same value as all previous promises.
For on the meantime, during the past three years, the workers having been paying through the nose, they have borne the burden of the war economy not only through low wages but through taxes and a hundred other ways. They will continue to bear it so long as big business runs the show.
 
Beware Incentive Pay
[4.] To offset the legitimate demands of the workers for wage increases, big business has begun a campaign for the widespread introduction of incentive pay into industry and thus reintroduce their glorified speed-up and piecework system which the workers succeeded, after heroic struggle, in defeating.
Behind the campaign of the bosses stands the Administration. Helping it is the Communist Party. These considerations alone should make the proposal for incentive pay suspect. But already leading labor leaders, including Murray, have joined in the movement for incentive pay. So far as they are concerned, it offers them a way out of their own impasse, their failure to fight for higher wages and their complete subservience to the Administration.
The cry that incentive pay would increase production and by increasing production raise wages is the biggest lie of all. The workers have increased production ENORMOUSLY in the past three years. The fact is that they have not shared in the wealth they have produced. Only the bosses have profited from the skill and enterprise of the workers. And only they will or can profit from the introduction of this new speed-up and piecework system called incentive pay.
Another invention to win workers to this monstrous fraud is that such wage increases would not be inflationary, since it would merely mean that the workers would get more pay for increased production, providing there is no increase in the costs of production. But since the production could not and would not mean an increase in the production of consumers’ goods. There would still be the lack or low level of production in consumers’ good.
The answer to the problem of consumers’ goods is to demand complete workers’ control of production and union control of rationing! Take it out of the hands of big business! And take the OPA out of the hands of big business!
But, by all means, the UAW must defeat incentive pay proposals. Otherwise, the struggles of the auto workers over the past years against speed-up and piecework will have been in vain. Once the bosses succeed in introducing incentive pay, the struggle to abolish it again will be all the more difficult.
 
The Factional Struggle
[5.] The auto workers’ convention faces a deep internal struggle for leadership. It is not merely a struggle for leadership, however. Involved in the present fight is the matter of program, and the question of program is crucial for the union.
In following articles we will analyze the programs of these groups, especially the Reuther-Leonard and the Addes-Frankensteen (which the Stalinists support) factions and show not only how limited they are, but how they fail to respond to the essential interests of the auto workers.
 
Stalinism – Threat to Labor
6. Finally, the auto workers face the problem of the Stalinist cancer in their union. This is a well organized, wholly conscious group whose interests lie, not with the American working class and the auto workers, but with the Stalin regime in Russia. The principle which dominates their program and conduct is: we shall do whatever is necessary for the good of Stalin and his rulings group in Russia.
On the face of it, this element in the union can do the UAW the greatest harm. It is the Stalinists who champion incentive pay. It is they who paralyze the workers and seek to prevent a struggle for their most elementary rights. It is they who oppose independent political action of labor. It is they who would destroy union democracy and make a shambles of the UAW. Given half a chance, they would introduce totalitarian methods, for which they are so notorious in Russia and the world over, into the union.
 
For a Labor Party
7. Despite the efforts of the CIO and AFL officialdoms to head off the growing movement for independent political action of the workers, the former by setting up a committee whose principal task is to prevent the formation of a political party of the workers, and the latter by adherence to its age-old and dangerous policy of “rewarding your friends and punishing your enemies,” the need of a Labor Party is being felt by increasing thousands of workers.
The American workers know how they stand insofar as their bosses are concerned. That is, they understand economic action. They are now learning, through actual experience, that the workers cannot have the slightest interests in the Republican and Democratic Parties, since these are both parties of the bosses.
The lessons of the past several years show clearly that if the working class and the labor movement continue to rely upon the “good wishes” and “friendliness” of the professional political servants of big business, they will get it in the neck.
The present Congress, one of the most reactionary in history, can best be described as a viciously anti-labor body. The passage of the Connally-Smith bill is the best evidence, if any were needed, of this fact. Those labor leaders who argue that this bill was passed because of the magnificent fight of the United Mine Workers and John L. Lewis are not merely misleading the workers, but are helping to paralyze the whole union movement to boot.
This bill was in the making for several years. It would have been passed whether or not there was a coal strike. To say that the coal strike brought on the bill is the same thing as saying that the working class should not fight for its rights, which in the present period means fighting for its very life, because reaction might step on it. It means that the workers must do nothing except look to some non-existent Messiah.
The Smith-Connally bill was not a bill designed merely to halt strikes in this period it is a weapon aimed at destroying the union movement. Who passed the bill? Congress! Who was behind the bill? The whole boss class through its organizations, the National Association of Manufacturers and the United States Chamber of Commerce, its congressmen, its press and all its allies in and out of the Administration, and the dominant forces in the Republican and Democratic Parties.
 
The Union Can Do It
What should such a situation dictate? The organization of an independent party of the workers, a wide-awake Labor Party!
Does the union movement have the strength to build such a party? It is the easiest thing to do it. It has a mass base for such a party in the union movement of 13,000,000 workers. It has tremendous allies in millions of others, unorganized workers, agricultural laborers, middle classes and the youth.
Such a party, embracing and representing the interests of the overwhelming majority of the people, would go a long way in defending and extending the interests of all who toil. More than that, it would strike fear in the heart of all reaction.
This too is of the deepest interest to the auto workers and the workers in general. But in this case, if the auto workers took the lead with a clear-cut demand for the formation of a Labor Party and then proceeded with the initial steps, the whole union movement would be dragged in its wake. It could not be otherwise.
In taking the lead in the organization of a Labor Party, the United Auto Workers would render the greatest possible service to the American working class – just as it was the spark to the organization of the CIO through its mass sit-downs and strikes which broke the resistance of the auto bosses.
On a number of these most important issues which face the convention, the rank and file has already indicated what are its views. At the Michigan State CIO convention the gulf that separated the militants from their leadership was wide indeed. We are certain that so far as the membership of the UAW is concerned, if unhindered by the union bureaucracies, it would have no trouble finding its way to a correct, union-building, pro-working class program. We shall return to this question of program in succeeding articles.
 



Italy stands poised on a knife’s edge. It is almost a month since the “Sawdust Caesar” resigned. In this period, Marshal Badoglio was made Premier. The new Italian government was first asked by Roosevelt and Churchill to surrender unconditionally. Then General Eisenhower offered “honorable peace terms” for surrender.
The new government rejected both offers. But it is a most insecure government. At its back stand the armed legions of Hitler. In front of it is a mounting wave of Allied arms which threatens to overrun the entire country. All around it is the rising tide of the working class – the most important element in the whole situation.
The masses have taken to the streets. From the first day of the collapse of the fascist regime they made known their demands: Peace! Freedom! Elections! But the regime of Victor Emanuel and his Marshal cannot satisfy the needs and demands of the Italian Workers and peasants, and surely this ruling clique cannot last.
The latest news from Italy is that the workers have gone out on a general strike! The demands of the general strike are a ringing cry of the workers’ determination to be free. They want:

The immediate liberation of all political prisoners.
 
The complete liquidation of the monarchy and monarchistic institutions.
 
Cessation of the war and an appeal to public opinion of the Anglo-Saxon countries for respect of the rights of the Italian people.
 
Freedom of press and organization.

Gaetano Salvemini, well known anti-fascist, has charged that: “Mr. Churchill and Mr. Roosevelt are waging, in Italy, two simultaneous wars. One is aimed at achieving ‘unconditional surrender’; the other is aimed at preventing revolution.”
And this is the fact: The Allies are interested above all in preventing the Italian masses from asserting their wishes and their rights. When Churchill speaks of preventing “anarchy and chaos” in Italy, he means to keep in power the “authority” of the rotten, incompetent and murderous ruling class. He means to prevent the people from taking matters into their own hands. And when Roosevelt endorses Churchill’s remarks it is for the same reason.
“Anarchy and-chaos,” indeed! What kind of a regime was Mussolini’s? And what kind of a regime is that of Badoglio?
Is the murderous regime of fascism an “orderly” regime? And are the.craven, profit-mad Italian big business men the representatives of “order”? They may be to Churchill. But to the Italian masses they represent everything that is rotten, disorderly and chaotic in our civilization.
We must say: Hands off the Italian masses. They will deal with their corrupt-rulers. They want peace and, they alone can achieve it. They want order, but by order they understand freedom – free speech, free press, and the right to organization. That is the only kind of order worth anything. They do not want the order of the police regime of fascism. They do not want order imposed by guns. They want an end to the old life! Nothing must stand in their way.
The American working class must solidarize itself with the Italian masses in their struggle for freedom. Greetings are not enough. Papers are not enough. Money is not enough. American labor must say:
Italian workers and poor peasants: Go to it. Get rid of your exploiters. Destroy the old system of exploitation, poverty, insecurity and murder. Build anew. Build the Workers’ Republic of peace, freedom and security. We are with you with all our hearts.
And it must add to all who stand in the way: Hands off the Italian workers and peasants!
 



The sudden collapse of Benito Mussolini’s fascist regime in Italy has brought forth a flood, of happy comments and editorials in the American press about the virtues of democracy and the evils of fascism. If one wants to be charitable about it, one could say that this expression of the mouthpieces of American big business is all to the good. But their present comments are suspect!
It is a matter of record that for many years the leading newspapers in this country were extremely sympathetic to Mussolini and the fascist regime. This is especially true of the New York Times, which went out of its way to praise the Italian dictator and his murderous gang.
 
Business Behind Mussolini
It is also a matter of record that American finances (chiefly through the House of Morgan, as the spokesman for Wall Street) were poured into Italy for the express purpose of saving Benito’s tottering regime during the early years of its formation.
First, American sympathies for Great Britain and then actual entry into the war brought about a change in the attitude of big business and its press. But it was not really a change in ideas or program; it was merely the pressure of the war which caused them to speak but cautiously against Mussolini and Hitler. And, insofar as Mussolini was concerned, the argument went something like this:
“You were all right up until the time you joined with Hitler. If you had stayed out of the war, or if you had joined with us your regime would have been okay with us. We would have found nothing wrong with your ‘brand’ of fascism. We could have gone on loving you as before.”
But since Mussolini became a war “enemy,” the big business friends of fascism and Mussolini’s sympathetic press in this country were compelled to speak but against him.
 
The Capitalists and Fascism
What was their real attitude? Fascism was all right for Italy. It was efficient; it permitted no waste; trains ran on time; there was no unemployment; and, most important of all, Mussolini liquidated internal strife.
Reading the press we see the recent arguments to the effect that fascism is bad only because it is based on one-party .rule, stifles criticism, and rests on a one-man dictatorship.
The argument about the efficiency of fascism is a phony. Fascism is not a new society, as some picture it. It is a dictatorship of big business. The chief aim of this regime is to destroy the labor movement, and all the aims of fascism, no matter under what name they go, are calculated to effect this dictatorship of big business.
What does the efficiency of fascism consist of? Trains running on time? That is nonsense! When the capitalist press speaks of efficiency, it is not at all concerned with trains. The efficiency of fascism which it admires is the destruction of the labor movement, the dissolution of the trade unions, workers’ political organizations, fraternal societies, cooperatives, a free press and the right to meet and organize. These movements represent the power and organization of labor.
Through such organizations the workers are able to fight for their economic and political rights. They are able to defend themselves against profit-mad and profit-hungry big business. They are able to fight and defend themselves against low wages, poor working conditions, excessively long hours of work and against labor-baiters.
Through their organizations the workers are able to fight for the democratic rights of workers, for higher wages, better working conditions and shorter hours. Through its organizations the working class is able to fight for the rights of the unemployed.
When big business and its press lauds the efficiency of fascism it is because fascism destroys the economic and political labor movement. We have no doubt that these are a nuisance, to big business and all bosses. And we have no doubt that the existence of the labor movement is a sign of inefficiency to them. It interferes with their lust for profit. Thus, when they speak of efficiency they mean the destruction of labor.
 
Fascism Solves Unemployment
Mussolini and Hitler solved unemployment! Yes, they certainly did. Mussolini forced the unemployed to fill swamps, dig ditches and build public works. For this the workers were paid a miserable wage merely to keep them alive.
Hitler solved the unemployment problem by tying the whole working class to the war machine. We have no doubt that big business would like this efficiency. They would like to force labor to work for low wages, long hours, under any conditions.
No wonder they loved fascism – it was so efficient for their purposes!
What fascism really accomplished in Italy, as in Germany, was this: Having destroyed the labor movement, it guaranteed a labor force for its boss, big business. By this, it guaranteed big profits for the capitalists of both countries. It banished internal strife by organizing hooligan gangs against the workers to beat back any signs of resistance by labor.
 
A Sign of Sickness
Fascism was loved by the capitalists of all countries. And don’t kid yourself about it, American capitalists, if they had the power to do so, would like such a regime in this country. There are many fascists and fascist organizations in America working to bring about what Hitler and Mussolini did in Germany.
If fascism is a one-man dictatorship, if it means one-party rule, it is because the nature of its work in destroying the labor movement requires it to be anti-democratic.
There are many other features of fascism, but the above is its most important: it saves a tottering capitalist system for the bosses by physical assaults on the working class and its organizations, thus maintaining and guaranteeing profits for big business.
The real tip-off on fascism is that Italy, after twenty years under that system, had the lowest standard, of, living of any important European country!
 



Ever since the rise of capitalism there has been a sharp struggle between the bosses and the workers over wages. From the early days of this system, when machine production was still in its infancy, production and profits have depended on the direct exploitation of labor.
Profits of the capitalist class were based on the long working day, the seven-day week and the intense physical exploitation of men, women and children. To keep wages as low as possible – just enough to permit the working man and his family to live and reproduce in kind – meant high profits. Wage increases would lower profits. Since the capitalist is in business only for profit – he does not care whether his product is useful or not – he has ever sought to keep wages as low as possible.
The capitalist and the worker, throughout the existence of capitalism, have fought over wages and the conditions of labor. If the former kept wages low, hours long, without investing money to improve the conditions of work, he did well and had a profitable business. It mattered not to him if the workers suffered severely under this brutal system.
The development of technology, which permitted a tremendous rise in production and a corresponding rise in the productivity of the individual worker, saw a gradual rise in wages, a gradual-reduction of the work-day and work-week, and a gradual improvement of working conditions.
It is a fact of economic history that while the capitalist profited from every improvement in production, while his wealth mounted, his living standards rose higher and higher, his leisure increased manifoldly, and his general security was strengthened, the conditions of the working man remained, on the whole, far below what was warranted by industrial progress. It is also a fact of economic history that, for every improvement in the lot of the worker, he had to engage in heroic and violent struggles against his profiteering boss. The capitalist never gave anything to the worker voluntarily. Everything the worker has gained – higher wages, shorter hours of work and improved conditions of labor – was the result of intense struggle by the working class.
The bosses have always resisted wage increases because the granting of higher wages would come out of their profits. Usually they overcame this by increased production or increased prices and new markets. In the end, the capitalist saw to it that he lost nothing even in granting wage increases; he was always compensated for any concession which the workers wrung from him by sharp struggles.
But most important of all, wages have always lagged behind profits. They never rise simultaneously or in the same proportion as profits. It is only after the workers observe the increase in profits and life becomes increasingly unbearable that they are, willy-nilly, driven to fight for a greater share of the wealth produced by themselves.
For example, between 1924 and 1929, in the very midst of the prosperity period in which big business “earned” enormous profits, wages, that is money wages and real wages (what they will actually buy of the necessities of life) remained stationary. As a matter of fact, wages in this period were below the rates of 1920!
Lewis Corey, in his Decline of American Capitalism, vividly describes this situation when he says:
“Thus, in 1929, relative wages fell to the lowest point in American history in the midst of an extraordinary rise in the productivity of labor, surplus value, and profits.”
What are called high wages are in reality low when compared to the productivity of labor, and they are low in terms of the possibility of still higher wages.
High wages, so-called, are also low wages in terms of what they can provide in minimum requirements for living in a society where millions live in poverty on sub-standard wages.
Wages have always lagged behind dividends, interest and the salaries of officials of companies. As an example, between the years 1921 and 1932, wages declined by, twenty-five per cent while dividends and interest rose by fifty-five per cent.
In this discussion of wages and their relation to incentive pay, it must be borne in mind that even when wages’ rise, they fall in relation to profits; that profits are increased by forcing wages down and that profits represent “surplus value, unpaid labor.”
It is possible to say that, as a rule, during periods of prosperity, wages rise, but profits rise much faster, and the so-called “high wages” are low compared to the productivity of labor. During crises, profits may fall and do fall, but wages fall much lower, and for millions of workers they cease altogether.
In such periods, the bosses may not get so much, but all workers get still less, and many get nothing. It is the worker who becomes unemployed, who is found on the breadline, and who needs relief in order to live. The boss merely retires to his estates to live on his accumulated wealth, produced by labor but appropriated by the capitalists.
 



One of the interesting and explosive products of the upturn in the military fortunes of the Allies is not merely the sharpening relations between the Anglo-American coalition of the United Nations and their partner, Russia. That deep differences exist between these powers on military and political questions, particularly those which concern domination of the European Continent, is now a matter of public knowledge.
But that is only half the story. It has now become clearer than ever that almost as sharp a conflict exists between Great Britain and the United States. While the competition between these two powers has always existed; their antagonisms in this war have usually been subordinated to their main aim of achieving a military victory over the Axis.
Now, however, the deep differences between Great Britain and the United States have come out into the open, and the opinions expressed by spokesmen for both countries have been extremely sharp.
What are these differences about? Economic interests, that is to say, the hunt for profits!
 
American Business Winning
The war enabled American big business to deliver some heavy blows against their British capitalist competitors. British participation in the war for two years before this country became a belligerent and the heavy demands made on British industry by the war effort, enabled American business to drive her business out of the South American market. And it took over a large share of British business in other parts of the world.
The heavy British losses in shipping have been compensated for by the tremendous construction program laid out by Washington. But while the early losses have been replaced and many new ships added to the total Allied merchant marine, these new ships have merely given the United States the greatest merchant fleet in the world. Thus, Great Britain has been replaced as the leading maritime nation in the world.
This has meant that most shipping now carried on is by American boats.
America has likewise “leased” a number of British bases throughout this hemisphere. The British are deeply concerned whether they will be returned and how soon, after the war; whether the United States really means to keep these bases after the war.
 
“We Intend to Stay”
British business interests are gravely worried over whether American capitalists will permit them to participate in the economic life of Latin America, from which they have been forced to retire since the war.
Rear Admiral Vickery (speaking for the Administration) told the British, on the question of the merchant marine:
“Yes, and I told them we intend to become a maritime nation and intend to stay one. I said we would do it by cooperation, but if they didn’t want to cooperate we’d stay one anyhow.”
That’s only another way of saying: British rule of the sea – military and commercial – is over. From now on, this role belongs to the United States. The United States will take over the lion’s share of the rich international trade. Such a shipping tonnage which America now has will not only enable her to handle the biggest share of trade, but it will make it much easier to penetrate new areas not previously within her “sphere of influence.”
What the business interests are doing – and shipping is a key need in this affair – is preparing for post-war world domination of Europe, Asia, Africa and South America.
Such post-war world domination would not merely mean that Britain will play second fiddle – for that is the instrument she now plays – but it would be devastating to the future existence of the British Empire.
 
A Plea for Cooperation
The British have recognized this all along. From the very beginning of lend-lease, they objected to the restrictions placed on her trade, which she sought to continue, because a vast supply of lend-lease material reached her shores. They asked that assurances be given that once the war is over British business can continue where it left off. Needless to say, no such assurances were given to her.
Her shipping monopoly is obviously gone. South America is now a “colony” of the United States. The United States has begun its penetration of Asia (Indian independence is very popular in this country precisely because it will enable American business to bust the British monopoly there) and aims to play the first role there. That is why the British yell so much for post-war cooperation. They will fare better thai way!
Each new stage in the war reveals that behind the nice phrases is the reality: a struggle for trade, territory, resources, all of which can be summed up in one word – PROFIT!
 



The current myth, zealously pursued in some political quarters, is that the United States has no foreign policy. In recent months, two books have appeared devoted to this problem. It would be correct to say, however, that Wendell Willkie’s book, One World (Simon & Schuster, publishers; 86 pages, $1.00), complains not so much against the absence of a foreign policy as it does against the specific policy of the Roosevelt Administration, or the lack of a forthright statement of its policy. Walter Lippmann, in his U.S. Foreign Policy, does make the direct charge that “for nearly fifty years the nation has not had a settled and generally accepted foreign policy.”
In the case of Wendell Willkie, we are presented with a political statement on foreign policy which is in the nature of an electoral campaign against the incumbent President. Willkie is a politician in his purpose. Lippmann, on the other hand, offers himself as a politically disinterested student of the world needs of American imperialism.
Although Willkie’s book has enjoyed an unprecedented sale and circulation, resulting in an enormous influence for his views, Lippmann’s contribution is equally as important a treatise on the specific question of foreign policy since he has published the views of a stronger group of the American bourgeoisie, a more openly imperialist wing. We shall return to Lippman in another article.
In a manner of speaking, the former presidential candidate wrote a political Gulliver’s Travels, which is pedestrian in style and superficial in content. But this is all minor, for the essence of the report on his travels is to propose in general, and in the most indefinite way, a new orientation (not policy) in foreign relations.
The simplicity of Willkie’s ideas may reflect his “Hoosier” background, as some have explained, but the fact is that what he has to say can be said simply. Moreover, as a politician, he has sought to make his views widely known and easily understood by millions of Americans, for he intends to pursue the subject in the next big political campaign.
Aside from a light and interesting description of the significance of the airplane in modern travel, and an interesting, though unimportant, description of the personalities he met, the main theme in the book stands out clearly.
Willkie describes world state relations in the following way: The war with the Axis is a great war for freedom and for our “way of life.” It is necessary to defeat Germany, Italy and Japan in order to save democracy and capitalism. In this struggle we are allied to three great powers, Great Britain, Russia and China. The alliance, while undebatably necessary, is wrongly weighted. It is too deliberately controlled by the United States and Great Britain. Russia and China have been relegated to minor seats in this alliance, the results of which cannot but be disastrous.
There follows a rather sharp criticism of British imperialism, the imperialism of the “flame and the sword.” Willkie prefers the benevolent type, the imperialism of “capital and the dollar.” He regards the “flame and the sword” as an unnecessarily expensive and dangerous weapon. And he points out that “imperialism” (the British method) has resulted in the growth of a world-wide and vigorous anti-imperialist movement of the colonial peoples which will hereafter make it impossible to pursue profitably the “direct” (or the British) method of exploitation of these peoples (as if American imperialism did not pursue the same aims and methods as the occasion required).
He has erected a simple edifice. Repeating what has now been accepted by the whole bourgeois world, he points out that the economic world is a completely interdependent whole, ruling out economic nationalism. As a bourgeois he desires to reconcile the internationalization of capitalist economy with its national base. As a representative of American capitalism, however, he is anxious to produce such a relationship between the powers as will “accord” each a fair share of the world’s markets and resources and yet give to the United States, as the outstanding economic power, its predominant share, based, of course, upon its greater needs in the fields of exports and imports (in the first case, capital and finished goods and, in the second place, raw materials).
It is Willkie’s thesis that Great Britain is a subordinate economic and political power. Its world possessions and influence, however, are far in excess of its real needs, that is to say, far more than a thriving American capitalism can afford to let her have. He wants to reduce her share of the world market and world resources. To accomplish this economic feat (one that is on the way to being accomplished in the course of the war) the aspirant to the American presidency is compelled to wage what he considers a crusade against “imperialism” in defense of the colonial peoples.
He feels that in this way, America can summon the assistance of these peoples (China, India, the Dutch East Indies) in the “cold” process of economically subordinating England and destroying her empire base Thus he feigns shock at Churchill’s declaration, “We mean to hold what we have.” And he becomes particularly furious when this “bricklayer” added that he did not become the King’s Prime Minister to “preside over the liquidation of the British Empire.”
This fundamental position of British policy, as enunciated by Churchill, he found prevalent among the high officers of the British Navy. He describes a dinner at the Alexandria home of Admiral Harwood, commander of the British Eastern Mediterranean force. There were present ten persons in the naval, diplomatic and consular service. This is how Willkie reports the discussion:
We discussed the war in the detached, almost impersonal way in which the war is discussed all over the world by officers engaged in fighting it, and then the conversation turned to politics. I tried to draw out these men, all of them experienced and able administrators of the British Empire, on what they saw in the future, and especially in the future of the colonial system and of our joint relations with the many peoples of the East.
What I got was Rudyard Kipling, untainted even with the liberalism of Cecil Rhodes. I knew that informed Englishmen in London and all over the British Commonwealth were working hard on these problems, that many of them, for example, were trying to find a formula which will go farther toward self-government than the older concept of “trusteeship.” But these men, executing the policies made in London, had no idea that the world was changing. The British colonial system was not perfect In their eyes; It seemed to me simply that no one of them had ever thought of it as anything that might possibly be changed or modified in any way. The Atlantic Charter most of them had read about. That it might affect their careers or their thinking had never occurred to any of them. That evening started in my mind a conviction which was to grow strong in the days that followed it in the Middle East; that brilliant victories in the field will not win for us this war now going on in the far reaches of the world, that only new ideas in the machinery of our relations with the peoples of the East can win the victory without which any peace will be only another armistice. – (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
It should be clear that these men, “executing the policies made in London,” were doing their jobs. For, fundamentally, there has been no change in London; the capital is reflected in its servants throughout the Empire. Does Willkie understand this? The whole book shows that he does.
He regards Asia as the next great area of economic exploitation, especially China. Willkie is anything but stupid, and he was quick to see that there is a change in the peoples of that part of the world, i.e., he observed the growing determination of the colonial world to fight imperialism and obtain national independence. He supports national “independence” because he believes that economic imperialism can gain its objectives by a universal application of the “good neighbor” policy, a policy generally pursued by American imperialism, under Roosevelt, to such good advantage.
He found a “new spirit” in Turkey, in the Middle East as a whole, in Russia, in China and in India. Even though he was requested by the President to by-pass India, Mr. Gulliver made sure to include India in his ambulations. The peoples in that part of the world hate British imperialism; they regard the United States differently. That the latter is partially true is explained by the specific direction of American foreign expansion. These people have not been visited by American imperialism and therefore believe that “American business enterprise does not necessarily lead to attempts at political control.”
That they are intransigent in opposition to British imperialism, a force which confronts them in their daily life, in great and small things, is obvious from the nature of British ownership, control and supervision of these areas. But it is precisely this hatred of British imperialism in Asia and Near Asia which Willkie desires to capitalize on for the purpose of advancing American economic interests.
He believes it can be done by “democratic” means, by benevolence, by persuasion, and above all by the overwhelming power of American production. He foresees great vistas of economic prosperity in the hundreds of millions of peoples of the oldest continent, in the enormous wealth of its scarcely tapped resources. But to “develop” Asia, it is first necessary to smash the British Empire and its hold on India.
The proper exploitation of Asia requires peace! It cannot be done in a period of war, unstable relations with the Asiatic countries, especially if they will resist foreign economic penetration; or, on the basis of sharp internal class relations. Thus, Willkie is a staunch bourgeois democrat at home, a “benevolent” economic imperialist abroad. He believes American wealth and its productive apparatus are rich enough to pay for such a policy and he believes its returns will make this investment quite cheap. This, and not remorse of his Commonwealth & Southern past, as one writer believes, is the source of Willkie’s “liberalism.”
Precisely because he understands the nature of the world, Willkie is aware that to put Britain in its place, it will be necessary to acquire “allies.” He sees those allies in the form of China and Russia. They are indispensable links in Asia and Europe to hold the British lion at bay. If such links can be forged, then the future of American imperialism will, in his opinion, be secure for many generations.
There may be objections that this thesis is vague; it lacks the specificity to permit further and deeper analysis. But the extremely general nature of the Willkie policy is not accidental. It is the first public presentation of an orientation that quite probably has not been detailed by its advocates. And its advocates are many, for Willkie is not a lone wolf in this situation. He speaks for a powerful and growing section of the American bourgeoisie whose views are publicly set forth by the Time-Life-Fortune group. Willkie is the outstanding political representative of these forces. For this reason alone his views are infinitely more important than the fact that his book lacks a scholarly investigation of foreign policy or is not at this time charted out in detail.
 



The fourth convention of the United Automobile Workers, the most important since it was founded, will gather in Buffalo on October 4. This is an event of tremendous importance to the entire American labor movement, for the UAW is the largest single union in the country and one of the most militant in the world. Its decisions, whatever they may be, will have a powerful influence upon the whole future of the labor movement. By the adoption of a militant, progressive program, the auto workers’ convention would be in a position to advance a thousandfold the cause of labor.
As a socialist newspaper interested in the establishment of a free society and the abolition of all forms of exploitation, and for the reason cited above, Labor Action is greatly interested in the convention of the UAW.
Since America’s entry into the war, the labor movement has been dealt a series of blows. This is not merely the result of the impact of new conditions, but in large measure is due to the policies and practices which the labor officialdom has adopted at the behest of Roosevelt and his administration.
Under the program of “national unity” and the guise of “equality of sacrifice,” the union movement has surrendered the weapons which guaranteed its existence, its health and its growth. In a recent article on the convention of the UAW, we wrote:
“With America’s entry into the war, the UAW faced a new situation and a series of new problems which affected labor.
“The conversion of the auto industry to war production, and the placing of the whole country on a war footing, exacted its toll of the labor movement in the same proportion that it enriched industry and the profit-bloated bosses.”
Capitulating to threats from the President, the union officialdom gave a no-strike pledge, accepted the Administration’s domestic program, which froze wages, established the WLB operating under the Little Steel formula, upset the struggle for equal wages, strengthened wage differentials, and in general so tied down the unions that big business has enjoyed a veritable holiday of anti-unionism.
In return for these concessions by labor, the President promised that no advantage would be taken of the unions and they would have “maintenance of membership.” Moreover, out of respect for their sacrifices, Roosevelt promised control of profits, barring of new war millionaires, holding down the cost of living, price control and rationing to guarantee equality in the distribution of consumer goods.
After nearly two years of war, it is clear that the domestic program of the Roosevelt Administration has become a program against labor’s best interests.
The no-strike pledge has given the bosses the weapon they have long been looking for. Under it they have sought to break union contracts, the shop steward system, grievance committee functions, and many other instruments for improving the conditions of the workers which the labor movement had won after years of hard struggle.
In turn, the no-strike pledge has been a noose around the neck of the unions. It has prevented them from fighting back effectively.
The wage freeze and the hold-the-line order, coming on top of the absence of consumer goods and deterioration in quality of goods, has lowered the living standards of the people. In seeking to overcome this situation by demanding wage increases, the unions have run up against the wall of the; infamous War Labor Board.
 
Campaign for Incentive Pay
In opposition to the demands of the workers for wage increases, big business, the WLB, the WPB, the Administration, some labor leaders and the Stalinist union-busters have proposed the nation-wide adoption of incentive pay. Thus, the unions face the danger of the reintroduction of the old-time piecework speed-up schemes which can result only in an increase in the profits of the bosses. These are some of the main questions which have agitated the mass of the rank and file of the union movement.
The dissatisfaction of the rank and file in the UAW has been especially acute. They have seen how the Roosevelt program, adopted by the union bureaucracy, has had one important result: it has enriched big business at the expense of the workers. It has given monopoly greater control of labor; it has weakened the union movement.
Only these conditions can explain the rapid growth of rank and file groups into the auto workers’ union, each of them fighting for one or more progressive measures.
Thus, for example, groups in local unions have gone on record against the no-strike pledge, against the WLB, the Little Steel formula, for recall of labor members on the WLB, against the wage freeze, for wage increases, and almost all have announced their opposition to incentive pay. Michigan Progressives
At the Michigan State CIO convention, a high point was reached in adopting a progressive union program. The decision adopted there, while not everything necessary to a fully organized and conscious progressive program, went a long way in that direction by its unmistakable opposition to Roosevelt’s domestic program. It even took a strong step forward in the direction of independent political action of labor as a means of fighting the boss political parties and the reactionary anti-labor Congress.
So acute are the issues which confront the general union movement and the UAW that the existence of two leadership factions, the Reuther-Leonard and the Addes-Frankensteen groups, reflects, even though partially, the struggle within the union for a militant program. An examination of the program of these two power-caucuses reveals several important things. The Reuther-Leonard faction, except for its, position on incentive pay, could hardly be said to have a progressive program. But most progressives now find themselves in or supporting this group and give it better union character. On all other major questions it is not greatly different from the Stalinist-backed Addes-Frankensteen group. But the latter does not even have the one progressive plank of the former. It follows the Stalinist sell-out political line on all major questions, and the biggest danger emanating from this group is the fact that, if it wins a majority of the convention, it will enforce its reactionary program and increase the power of the worst enemies of militant and progressive unionism, the Stalinists.
The pleas against factionalism now spouted by the Stalinists are merely camouflage. They fear the victory of the Reuther-Leonard group because it is an anti-Stalinist group. They are against factionalism out of fear that the struggle may impair their chances of capturing or dominating the UAW.
On the other hand, it is certain that a victory for the Addes group will give it a better field of operation. That is why, while it speaks against factionalism and calls for unity, it slyly asks for support to the Addes-Frankensteen faction.
[Line of text missing] will give the union what it needs most: a militant and progressive program. And yet that remains the biggest problem before the UAW, as well as the whole labor movement. The rank and file groups, and the mass of the membership, have indicated what kind of program they want. Summarized, this program reads as follows:


For rescinding the no-strike pledge.
 
For wage increases, against the wage freeze and the WLB.
 
Against incentive pay.
 
For organization of the unorganized.
 
For equal wages; against wage differentials.
 
For post-war guarantees to labor; the establishing of a post-war wage fund for all auto workers.
 
For independent political action; for a Labor Party.


This is the kind of program that would revitalize the union movement, guard its strength and prepare it for the post-war period. It would be the means for combating the anti-union campaign of the auto bosses.
But such a program requires the organization of a national progressive group in the UAW. All the elements for such an organization exist in the numerous rank and file groups and in the militant sentiments of the membership of the union.
[Line of text missing] progressive group should begin at the convention and should continue after the convention. We believe that this is the most important task before the auto workers: the establishment of a national progressive group around the above-indicated program.
While the progressives are not well organized at this convention, it would be good tactics for them to ally themselves with any forces on the basis of agreement on one or more of the important issues which will come up before the meeting.
The struggle for control of the convention will be sharply fought. It is to the interest of the UAW to prevent, above all, the victory of the Stalinists, or any group under their influence. This means that the defeat of the Addes-Frankensteen group is a necessary step in the struggle for the national progressive group and a progressive union.
This means support of Reuther-Leonard in a contest with Addes-Frankensteen and the Stalinists. But such support can only be given to them with open eyes and criticism. It means the progressives can support Reuther against Addes in full consciousness that the former is not running on a progressive platform.
The genuine progressive group has yet to be created, and a progressive program has yet to be won for the union. The extent to which the convention proceedings contribute to this development will mark the extent of its success.
 



Johnson’s rejoinder to my criticism of his article, The Way Out for Europe, is a polemical fantasy. There is no attempt at a debate of the issues, a reply to criticisms by marshalling data in support of avowed generalizations, or even to defend assertions made in an original presentation of views. Johnson’s current contribution to the discussion of the national question can best be characterized as evasive. Now the old errors are proclaimed in an entirely new way. The methodology, however, remains the same.
In place of answers to concrete questions, we have the same kind of sweeping generalizations, the reassertion (with intense fervor) of a non-existent situation, and the same journalistic, impressionistic and dogmatic evaluation of the objective condition of capitalism in Europe and the state of class relations. It is of the “I believe” and “I assert” school.
He has again demonstrated what I proved by my June article, namely, that he does not understand the problem of the revolutionary vanguard party, the immediate need for its organization on a continental scale, and the necessity for such parties to develop on the basis of struggle. Without this factor, a discussion of the prospect of the socialist revolution is utterly meaningless.
What Johnson does is to substitute pre-conceived and pre-determined idealistic observations for scientific examination and dialectical analysis.
In his generalizations, there are, of course, many things which are true. These general truths (capitalism is in a state of decay, capitalism organizes the working class, the bourgeoisie is no longer capable of progressive existence, the masses are dissatisfied, etc.) are not enough for arriving at a position on the concrete questions, or the immediate tasks of the revolutionary socialists in Europe. His generalizations are an evasion of the real problems. In his writings one can find almost everything, in general, and yet little specifically. It is like gelatine that has not hardened; it cannot be held. It slips through the fingers. You can defend and oppose almost anything with such ideas. The half-truths of his position enable him to reject any criticisms because he has always “mentioned” the point criticized. The fact that it has no relation to previous argumentation and position does not at all disturb him.
Thus, my criticism of his article, The Way Out for Europe, which appeared in the June issue of The New International, serves as a reply to his present article. Were it not for the additional new errors contained in Johnson’s contribution it would not even to necessary to answer it, since it is manifestly impossible to reply to an article or a document which is replete with error in every paragraph.
Before treating these questions, it is necessary to correct Johnson’s utterly erroneous interpretation of the Lenin quotation which has figured in the discussion. This is important, because in revealing Johnson’s errors at this point we find a key to the false thinking which guides him throughout on the national question.
 
The Lenin Quotation – and Its Distortion
In June, I quoted from the 1915 article by Lenin, in which he poses several conditions which might reintroduce the national question in Europe. The reference to the authority of Lenin was not made as a substitute for argument, as my article so obviously makes dear. Lenin, however, is the greatest Marxist authority on the national question, and his views, based upon experience, observation and polemics with other leaders of the revolutionary movement, are exceedingly important for the present generation of Marxists.
Lenin described a situation which could recur in Europe. His historical reference to Napoleon was made to describe the kind of situation he had in mind. What Lenin meant and what he said can hardly be misinterpreted by anyone acquainted with the disputes between Lenin-Bukharin-Pyatakov and between Lenin and Luxemburg. But that is precisely what Johnson does – he misinterprets Lenin, distorts history and reveals that he does not understand the meaning of this reference.
In the first place, questions of fact are involved. On these there can hardly be any debate.
What was the first post-war period like? The proletariat took power in one country (Russia). The new revolutionary state looked to Western Europe for the continuation of the revolution it had begun and – for its completion. But the proletariat was defeated in every single other attempt it made for power: Germany, 1919, 1923 and 1933; Hungary, Austria, Spain, China, the Balkans and France. The Russian Revolution was isolated and this isolation produced the conditions which resulted in its defeat.
Imperialism has remained in power. A new Napoleonic power (not Napoleon) arose on the European scene with “victories similar to those achieved by Napoleon.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.) This power has conquered most of Europe. That it is now threatened by other powers cannot alter the facts as they have existed for several years and as they exist right now. The proletariat has been impotent and remains in that state now. This latter fact, too, has nothing whatever to do with the question of whether it has revolutionary potentialities and a will to engage in revolutionary struggles or that such struggles must and will come in Europe. Its “impotence” is a relative matter which is determined essentially by the degree of its organization, experience, knowledge, skill and strength in relation to other classes.
It is true that both Lenin and Trotsky believed the afore-mentioned development improbable. But they were mistaken. Their belief in its improbability, however, cannot affect the objective fact that the improbability has become the actuality. It is dear from Johnson’s treatise that he simply does not see this.
How does our protagonist fare with the “historical” aspects of this dispute? Even worse. Listen again to what Johnson says:
Lenin is here taking as a precedent the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. From 1793 to about 1807 revolutionary France fought a progressive war against monarchical and feudal Europe. About 1808, the progressive German aristocracy and the bourgeoisie reorganized Germany, introducing the reforms of the French Revolution (as far as was possible from above), in order to free the country from the imperialist domination of Napoleon. The war thereupon changed its character, becoming, in its next stage on the part of Germany, a progressive war of national emancipation.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
“Germany” and the Napoleonic Period
A strange history indeed! Johnson confuses the Germany of Bismarck in the war of 1870 with the Prussia of Frederick IV in 1808. Yet the two situations are not comparable. The “Germany” Johnson speaks of was not a nation at the time Napoleon ruled most of Europe. What is now Germany was then divided into separate states: Prussia, Westphalia, Saxony, the Confederation of the Rhine, and Bavaria. National unification and the national war did not occur until some sixty years later!
Johnson’s “progressive German aristocracy” was one of the most corrupt, reactionary, bourbon-feudal classes on the Continent. Under the rule of Frederick IV, it was a weak, servile and trembling aristocracy, and Napoleon’s war upon it was a progressive war. He represented, historically speaking, the rising bourgeois order. More immediately, he carried the sword of the French bourgeoisie. Of this Prussia, Napoleon aptly said: “A vile king, a vile nation, a vile army, a country which deceived everybody and does not deserve to exist.” It was certainly a far cry from the Prussia of Frederick the Great.
The “progressive German aristocracy,” Johnson notwithstanding, did not introduce the “reforms of the French Revolution.” But the bourgeoisie of Johnson’s “Germany,” on the other hand, hailed Napoleon because he liberated them from the rule of the “progressive German aristocracy.” The reforms introduced into this “Germany” came from Napoleon, and not from this newly discovered “progressive” class.
During the year 1808, which Johnson falsely refers to as date of the Prussian revolt, Napoleon ruled Prussia as well as all the other German states. Many of these states were allied with the French military genius. Prussia did not go to war against Napoleon until 1813–14, when it was assured that the continental coalition under Metternich, the reactionary, feudal-bound “Holy Alliance,” meant business. It was not a major power in this alliance. Neither was the coalition war against Napoleon fought to advance capitalism. On the contrary, it sought to strengthen the decaying remnants of feudalism, which were themselves eventually devoured in this conflict. This coalition hoped, in addition to driving Napoleon out of Central Europe, to restore the Bourbon monarchy in France, and one of the driving forces of the feudal “united front” was the fact that “the vile rabble is for Napoleon.”
The war, therefore, was not a war of national emancipation as we understand it today. Some of the states making up this coalition were themselves oppressors of other nationalities and were certainly the representatives of the old order. The real national wars began much later. Furthermore, Lenin did not have in mind the wars at the turn of the nineteenth century, but the national wars in middle and latter half of that century. To impute to Lenin the idea that the modern bourgeois society might be faced with a struggle against the reintroduction of the feudal order, which is all the sense there is in Johnson’s remarks, is due to his utter miscomprehension of the whole subject.
It is out of this kind of history and thinking that Johnson builds the whole edifice of his views on the national question. He believes that his distortion of Lenin’s views actually strengthens his own on the national question. It doesn’t. It shows that in Johnson’s mind, either the proletariat takes power now, in this situation, or else we face a throwback to feudalism, the ancient “barbarism,” or worse. This kind of confusion is a species of “defeatism” which compels Johnson to estimate falsely the current European situation.
 
The Meaning of the Fascist Victory
An analysis of the state of the European working class is crucial to the whole discussion. It is precisely in this connection that Johnson preaches a mish-mash compounded of wishful thinking and not a little yokel-chucking, all of it embroidered by rhetoric.
His analysis of the European situation is agitational. It is the result of an erroneous estimate of the historical and the concrete significance of Hitler’s victory in Germany. Where objective research is required, Johnson gives us speeches about the glorious European working class.
There are several statements in his article which reveal his disqualification to speak with any authority on the question in dispute. I shall consider them one by one.
“To say that Hitler has hurled society back,” writes Johnson, “in any sense except the purely agitational, is wrong. He has so contributed to the ruin of bourgeois society in Europe as to bring the socialist revolution immeasurably nearer.”
Before examining this unbelievable statement, I should like to pose a few questions. What does Johnson mean by “purely agitational”? If it is correct to say the above in that form, is it not also correct that it exists as a fact? Or does Johnson believe that because something is agitational, it is therefore not true? And, if it is a fact, is there not a whole train of consequences which must be deduced from this fact?
Otherwise, Johnson must conclude that Hitler’s victory was of no great consequence. Otherwise Hitler’s victory must have been the most progressive event of the past twenty-five years because – because it has advanced “the socialist revolution immeasurably nearer.” Does Johnson really want to defend this concept, which is implicit in his views? Of course he does. As a matter of fact, he emphasizes the point in his article.
It is only from the loftiest and most abstract historical plane that one can state that the victory of fascism advances “immeasurably” the socialist revolution. If what Johnson means is that the very existence of fascism is evidence of the utter decay of capitalism, that it is in a state of dissolution and disintegration, that is one thing. But if that were all there would be no need of discussing the question at all, for it has nothing whatever to do with the dispute on the national question.
Sad to say, however this is not what Johnson means. He actually means that Hitler’s victories have strengthened the proletariat, increased its consciousness, and made it more determined than ever before in history to “achieve the socialist revolution.” To say that this is not true does not make one less revolutionary; on the contrary, the recognition of the true state of objective conditions is indispensable to revolutionary Marxism.
And how does Johnson’s view square with the traditional views of revolutionary Marxism, to say nothing of the simple facts? It does not square at all; it violates every tenet of Marxism.
Our movement has had considerable experience in the question of fascism. It was Trotsky who first analyzed German fascism, its struggle for power, and the consequence of a Hitler victory in Germany. That was ten years ago. But even Trotsky did not begin anew in 1931, 1932 and 1933. The early
Communist International had already had a number of experiences with this phenomenon.
 
Fascism as Counter-Revolutionary
During the days of the fascist struggle for power in Germany, the Marxists of the Fourth International carried on a tireless agitation to convince the existing parties of the working class to unite in the common struggle against fascism. One of the most significant contributions to this struggle was the idea advanced by our movement that a victory of Hitler would result in an international defeat of the working class; that the working class movement would be thrown back for years to come.
This was the most important question in the whole dispute with Stalinism, which advanced the thesis that a victory of fascism in Germany would accelerate the proletarian revolution in that country and throughout Europe. Fascism, said the Stalinists, would destroy the democratic illusions of the masses and prepare them for the dictatorship of the proletariat. That is to say, fascism was the new locomotive of the socialist revolution.
This view of the historical place of fascism had terrible consequences for the working class. It strengthened the tendencies of inertia which already existed after a long series of defeats. It enhanced idealistic conceptions of the socialist revolution. It strengthened the view of the automatic character of the socialist revolution, the concept of spontaneity and the Stalinist version of the “inevitability of the socialist victory” without regard to the questions of organization, education, experience, struggle and plan, which are the collective attributes of the revolutionary party – the essential instrument of the socialist victory. Johnson has now acquired these dangerous ideas, and proceeds to advocate them ten years after Hitler took power in Germany.
I have not doubt that, as he reads these lines, Johnson will exclaim: This is ABC. Gates doesn’t have to teach me these things. I have known them all along.
That is exactly the point. Johnson knows about this, but it just has no meaning to him. It is merely some knowledge picked up along the wayside. It plays no part in his thinking, as witness the above quotation.
Compare Johnson’s point of view with the views of Trotsky. In warning the German Stalinists of the consequences of a Hitler victory, Trotsky wrote:
The coming into power of the German National Socialists would mean above all the extermination of the flower of the German proletariat, the disruption of its organizations, the extirpation of its belief in itself and in its future. Considering the far greater maturity and acuteness of the social contradictions in Germany, the hellish work of Italian fascism would probably appear as a pale and almost humane experiment in comparison with the work of the German National Socialists.
Was this victory by Hitler an advance of the socialist revolution or a “throwback”? Again, on fascist rule, Trotsky wrote:
When a state turns fascist, it doesn’t only mean that the forms and methods of government are changed in accordance with the patterns set by Mussolini – the changes in this sphere ultimately play a minor role – but it means, first of all and for the most part, that the workers’ organizations are annihilated; and that a system of administration is created which penetrates deeply into the masses and which serves to frustrate the independent crystallisation of the proletariat. Therein precisely is the gist of fascism. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
A Partial Balance-Sheet
Trotsky wrote that if the working class movement succeeded in defeating Hitler it would mark a new leftward turn in the international situation. But, if Hitler succeeded in prevailing over the German proletariat, the international consequences of such a victory for Hitler would result in the triumph of reaction throughout Europe.
Does Johnson know what this means? Hardly, and therefore I propose to tell him. The victory of fascism in Germany resulted in:

The destruction of the German working class movement in every form.
 
It strengthened the fascist regime in Italy and gave Mussolini the courage to engage in his Ethiopian adventure.
 
It created the conditions for the annihilation of the heroic Austrian working class and the destruction of its organizations.
 
It led to the triumph of fascism in Spain and directly assisted in putting Franco into power.
 
It stimulated the wave of reaction throughout Europe and aided in the establishment of a whole series of fascist and semi-fascist regimes in a number of other countries.
 
It incorporated Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Lithuania into Greater Germany and destroyed their national independence.
 
It aggravated the international situation and became a primary cause for the outbreak of the Second World War. The outbreak of the war has a twofold significance, however. It is not only an expression of the severest crisis of capitalism. But the fact that it could occur is evidence that the working class was too weak, too disorganized, too undeveloped and unprepared to prevent an imperialist war!
 
In the course of the war, this colossal power went on to occupy almost the whole continent of Europe with victories “similar to Napoleon’s.”

And this has done what? According to Johnson, it has brought the socialist revolution immeasurably nearer; it has strengthened the working class What has really happened in the working class will be dealt with next month, when I propose to bring the discussion back from the world of “religion” to the world of reality.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



Before the First World War and for but a short time after, propaganda for socialism was fairly widespread in this country. The socialist movement in those days knew how to talk socialism. While it was wholly inefficient in organizing large groups of workers around the conception of the class struggle and the need for constructing a militant party with the aim of fighting for a socialist society, concentrating almost entirely on the parliamentary struggle, it did quite an effective job of telling millions of people what socialism was.
This propaganda for socialism, and the agitation which supplemented it, was often romantic and sentimental. But the “dream of socialism,” as it was often called, taught thousands that socialism meant a society without classes, without the exploitation of man by man, without a production system operating for the purpose of producing profits for a few.
 
The Old Socialist Agitation
The old socialist agitators capably demonstrated how socialism could end poverty, unemployment and war by eliminating private ownership of the means of producing the things of life, national and international competition, and the struggle for existence by the overwhelming majority of the population in this and all other countries.
They supplemented this campaign for socialism with a merciless exposure of the evils of capitalist society, its murderous exploitation of the workers, its utter hypocrisy in human relations, and the most evident feature of its class character: the impoverishment of the masses and the enrichment of a small class of capitalists. In addition, the early socialists did a great job in tearing the mask from the great trusts – the railroad, steel, meat-packing and others.
But in the post-war period of 1918–29, this socialist propaganda and agitation disappeared and has remained largely a lost art. There were many reasons for this. We should like to present two of them; first, the rise of the prosperity period, and, second, the influence of the Russian Revolution.
 
Prosperity and Russian Revolution
The prosperity period APPEARED to answer the socialist criticism. The APPARENT strength of capitalism was the thing most obvious to the eye. Paid propagandists of big business, college professors, economics and intellectuals of every variety took to the pen to explain why capitalism was a wonderful society and socialism a mere utopia. Or else, these paid penmen argued that the new richness of American capitalism was actually paving the way to the kind of life, the socialists wanted. Many called it the new capitalism: no unemployment, high wages, workers owning automobiles and their own homes.
But in 1929 the bubble burst and the whole rotten system, built on a foundation of toothpicks, tumbled down. It was quickly revealed that the prosperity period was a fraud; that the capitalist became enriched during that stage, but that the working class, for all its employment, came out of it worse off than ever.
The Russian Revolution had an altogether other influence – in part challenging the propaganda of the prosperity period. The Russian Revolution showed the way to workers’ power and it showed what steps were necessary to lay the basis for the future socialism. In the very first years of the Russian Revolution, workers all over the world were thus acquainted with practical steps and problems of the new workers’ power. But the socialist goal, the new society, became lost in the support for the first experiment of a modern workers state.
We were to witness a new experience. As the capitalist world system headed into a terrible crisis of decline, the Russian Revolution, which attracted millions the world over, also went into decline. The revolution degenerated at the same pace as the crisis revealed the utter bankruptcy of capitalism. The Russian workers’ state went into oblivion and the total result of the experiences of the past twenty years has been the weakening of the world movement for socialism.
 
Fulfilling a Need
The necessity of rebuilding the movement for socialism requires the re-establishment of the art of socialist propaganda and agitation, to tell millions what socialism is, its relation and comparison to capitalism, and’how it can be achieved.
These are some of the reasons why the pamphlet, Plenty for All, is an important contribution. Ernest Lund, the author, is a person who has been concerned with this problem for a long time. He was always disturbed by the lack of simple socialist propaganda and agitation, and, above all, the socialist education of the workers. To help fill a gap in the workers’ movement, he sat down and wrote this simple, lucid and educational socialist pamphlet.
A mere glance at the chapter titles of Plenty for All will reveal what a painstaking job it is.
Lund describes the present capitalist system. He reveals how thoroughly rotten it is, how it is an outlived system capable of producing nothing but unemployment, poverty, war, the scourge of fascism and suppression of the will of the people.
But many writers have done the same thing. The importance of the Lund pamphlet is that it points a way out of this foul system. He not only shows why socialism is inevitable and necessary, but he describes What it is and how it can be achieved.
 
Spread Plenty For All
The great demand for copies of Plenty for All is the best evidence that this kind of writing is badly needed. It is only a few weeks since the pamphlet came off the press, yet already it has sold nearly 1,800 copies.
This is a grand beginning. But it is not nearly enough. Branches of the Workers Party have gone all-out in a campaign to sell Plenty for All. Many readers of Labor Action have ordered copies. And still more have ordered small bundles to distribute and sell to their fellow workers.
This is all to the good. What has to be done, however, is to increase this rate of sale and distribution. More thousands of copies of Plenty for All should be circulated among the militant workers in this country to spread the message of socialism!
 



The Treasury Department has just submitted to Congress the highest tax bill in American history. The over-all amount called for in this new bill is $10,560,000,000, a scaledown from the sixteen billion dollar bill proposed last January and thereafter reduced again to twelve billions.
The new bill calls for some simplification in making out tax returns, but this is rather unimportant When placed against the fact that it proposes to increase the taxes on all incomes, resulting in the heaviest pressure against all low-income groups, that is, the workers.
The biggest opposition to the new tax bill comes from big business and its spokesmen in the House and Senate. They object to any increases in taxation upon corporations and big incomes, even though rebates are planned for them, and even though the new tax rates proposed for corporations still give them profits equal to those made in the boom year of 1929.
The big business opposition has formulated its program: a national ten per cent sales tax on all retail goods!
This program was presented to the House Ways and Means Committee by M.L. Seidman, chairman of the taxation committee of the New York Board of Trade, a big business organization. This sales tax program was immediately supported by reactionary Representative Taber, New York Republican, who also called for “economy” and the cutting of the government budget by $4,158,000,000.
The Treasury Department is willing to eliminate the victory tax, now counted in on the withholding tax, but proposes to raise the latter tax to twenty-four per cent from the present rate of twenty per cent.
It is in the reduction of exemptions that the new tax bill proposes to hit hardest at the workers. The program calls for a reduction in exemptions of married couples to $1,100 instead of $1,200, and to cut the exemption for each child from $350 to $300.
Income taxes would start at twenty-seven per cent in place of the present twenty-two per cent (nineteen per cent income tax, plus three per cent victory tax.)
These new taxes will be accompanied by a forced savings provisions for incomes ranging between $2,000 and $25,000.
The fight in Congress against the new bill on the grounds that it places too heavy a burden on big business and the rich has made its passage unlikely.
The congressional hatchetmen are now gunning for the removal of Morgenthau as Secretary of the Treasury. Bad as his tax programs have been for labor, the congressional reactionaries are convinced that his programs demand too much from the boss class.
They are out to put the whole burden of the war on labor, on those least able to carry it and those who have received the butt end of the “equality of sacrifice” program.
That is why they are championing the sales tax and an increase in taxes on low incomes.
 
Soak the Poor!
The New York Times argues that statistics of the Treasury Department show that “four-fifths of all the income of the nation is going to people earning less than $5,000 a year.” The fact that this income is divided among almost the whole population of the country (the upper bracket incomes go to an extremely small number of people) is ignored. The reason for this is that the New York Times as well as its big business brothers want the financial burden for their war to be placed on the shoulders of the working class.
This is proved in another way. Even the Treasury Department has admitted that black market buying is done chiefly by those whose incomes are above $3,000 a year. This means that the overwhelming majority of the working class is unable to purchase the vast amount of goods sold in this market, most of it going to the upper income group.
 
How Much Is Left?
In the upper income bracket, of those making more than $25,000 a year, 110,000 of them still have an average of $30,000 left after taxes.
Yet the millions who earn less than $1,000 a year have only $866 left after taxes. This includes both single and married people with families.
In the incomes ranging from $1,000 to $3,000, the average yearly wage left after taxes is only $1,930, which is less than what is required for a family to buy its necessities of life. It is upon this overwhelming mass of people, running into the tens of millions, that big business and its congressional and press mouthpieces demand that a ten per cent sales tax be placed.
In either case, whether the ten per cent sales tax, or something less than this, is passed, or whether the Treasury tax program in its present or modified form is passed, labor will get it in the neck.
Labor Action urges its own program on taxes: Take the burden off the backs of the low income groups and the poor, who make up almost the entire population of the country. Place the burden on those who can carry it!

Put a capital levy on the wealth of the capitalists, on the corporations now enjoying a profit holiday!
 
Confiscate all war profits!
 
Conscript all Industries under workers’ control!
 
Expropriate the new war millionaires!
 
Expropriate the Sixty Families, the three per cent of the people who own ninety-six per cent of the wealth!

 

allace and the People's War (June 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Wallace and the People’s War
(June 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 5, June 1942, pp. 131–133.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

The speech of Henry Agard Wallace, Vice-President of the United States, was obviously made to strengthen the faltering ideological war of the United Nations against the Axis.
It has become clear to the New Dealers that up to now the war has been fought along purely military lines without evoking the kind of mass support which the Administration hoped it would obtain. Despite the studied references by the President to World War II as a genuine democratic revolution against militarism and fascism, no large sections of the population in this country took him seriously – certainly the powerful bloc of big business felt no compulsion to accept the presidential characterization of the war when, in fact, it knew and acted on the premise that the conflict, in the last analysis, is really fought to determine which country shall be the dominant economic power of the world.
Before December 7th and since, nothing in the conduct of the Allies warranted any belief but that the war is an imperialist conflict. There is no need to convince anyone that the aims of the Axis are imperialist, i.e., they seek a redivision of the possessions of the earth and economic domination of the world. The narrowing bases of their national capitalisms brought into existence the most frightful régimes of totalitarianism. Dominated by Germany, the Axis draws out of their ideological baggage the barbarous concepts and practices of economic, political and moral degeneration. They fight an economic, national and racial war, but it does not require a great deal of intelligence to realize that the basis of the existence of these totalitarian regimes is the poverty and strangulation of their national economies.
Just as there is no genuine unity in the camp of the Axis, there is none in the camp of the United Nations. They are bound together by the common need of defending possessions which are universally threatened by Germany, in the first place, and Japan and Italy. It is this common need of defense which holds together the Allies. Once this is understood, it becomes infinitely clearer why there is no great mass enthusiasm for the war. Moreover, there is nothing in the conduct of the war by the United Nations to lead to any other kind of mass reaction.
 
What Are the Allies Fighting For?
What kind of freedom is it the United Nations are fighting for? Economic freedom? Race freedom? National liberation and independence? Economic and racial equality? The ideological defenders of the United Nations would be hard put to explain themselves. As we have pointed out so often before, there is no need for the Axis to justify itself (even though it is sometimes attempted) since it does not cover itself with many pretensions.
In concretizing this point, let us briefly recount some of the main pretentious in the Allied camp and how they were actually carried out:
As a democratic war of the peoples against militarism and totalitarianism, the United Nations’ governments decreed that this will not be a war for profit under the slogan that “there shall be no new war millionaires.” The fact: the capitalists in all countries earn enormous profits, over and above all restrictions and taxes. Their living standards rise while the living standards of the peoples are precipitously declining. New war millionaires are being created in the very heat of the war!
The war in the Far East, where almost the entire population of a billion people live as colonial slaves of the big powers, was fought under the ideological and military concepts of conquerors. No offer of freedom was made to the colonials of the United Nations. No arms were given to the people to increase the possibility of their support in resisting the Japanese imperialists. On the contrary, the colonial peoples remained indifferent to the war. Why? Because in their eyes there was no fundamental distinction to be drawn between their present overlords and their impending conquerors.
Imperialist prerogatives ruled the conduct of the United Nations in Asia. Observe the results: Malaya lost, Burma lost, the Dutch East Indies lost and finally the débacle in India. The question can be asked: Would this have happened if the Allies were fighting a war of genuine freedom for the colonial peoples?
 
The War on the Home Front
Let us come back a little closer home. The United States is the leading power in the United Nations’ bloc. It is presumed to be the ideological leader of its allies. There is no doubt that Roosevelt is responsible for the promulgation of the “Four Freedoms.” Yet, in fact, none of these things operate at home. The antagonism to and discriminatory treatment of the Negro people has been intensified precisely since the outbreak of war. Big business enriches itself many times. It is not particular how it does so, whether on the basis of the exploitation o£ the American workers, evasion of taxes, or in league with the Axis big business. And so long as a monopoly, such as the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, can absolve itself of the “sin” of acting like a true capitalist business, by paying a fine of $50,000 for breaking the anti-trust and patent laws, nothing has changed.
The economic war is dominated by big business The ideological war is dominated by the big business press. Race discrimination is rampant. Congress is dominated by the most reactionary labor-haters, Jew-baiters and Jim Crow artists in its history. Moreover, it has given one example after another that it is nothing but the rubber stamp of big business and the most reactionary elements in the country.
We have not the slightest doubt that the real situation has caused no little worry to the genuine New Deal reformists, who have seen the New Deal vanish from sight with the opening shots of World War II. This is the real background to the speech by Wallace.
 
Wallace’s War and the Realities
What did Wallace say? “This is a fight between a slave world and a free world.” As a student with some knowledge of history, the Vice-President sought to generalize the war and give it world significance. “Just as the United States in 1862 could not remain half slave and half free, so in 1942 the world must make its decision for a complete victory one way or the other.” The trouble is that this high sounding phraseology has no relation to the reality of the world. Does Wallace propose that the United Nations give up their colonies? Does he condone or reject British colonial policy? Or the Dutch, the Free French, and even the United States?
Wallace places this war in history, as part of the continuous march of mankind toward freedom, as “derived from the Bible” and with emphasis that “democracy is the only true expression of Christianity.” But he will be hard put to prove his thesis. This Midwestern “populist,” speaking the language of an era long ago past, still lives with the thoughts of “good and evil,” the “common man” against the “demagogue.” The demagogue represents “Satan,” who would “change the signposts and lure the people back into slavery of the most degraded kind.” Hitler is really the “supreme devil.” But against the demagogue and the devil:
The people are on the march toward even fuller freedom than the most fortunate people of the world have hitherto enjoyed. No Nazi counter-revolutionist will stop it. The common man will smoke the Hitler stooges out into the open in the United States, in Latin America and in India. He will destroy their influence. No Lavals, no Mussolinis will be tolerated in a free world.
The Vice-President knows that the ideological war will not greatly interest the mass of people, especially the working class which bears the brunt of the war, if it is not offered economic succor. Thus, he adds to his speech some economic aims. These are, briefly, the need for a vast increase in the post-war period, of the production of consumers’ goods to raise the economic level of existence of all mankind. At this point he quoted his remark to Madame Litvinoff, made “half in fun and half seriously,” that “the object of this war is to make sure that everybody in the world has the privilege of drinking a quart of milk a day.”
He turns next to the post-war century and regards it as one in which the “common man” will dominate; it will be his world of plenty. How? As in all the other cases, there is no answer. Wallace himself does not really know, or if he knows, fears to state it.
The aftermath of the Wallace speech, made with the sanction of the President, was interesting to observe. A handful of the great number of papers in the country printed the speech; a few more made reference to it. But the “democratic” press as a whole ignored it! Even the Vice-President’s harmless generalities were too much for the big business press. The fear that some of his vacuous phrases might infect readers by its veiled “class” character frightened the stolid thinking, profit-mad business rulers and their editorial office boys.
Ralph Ingersoll, the playboy editor of PM, screeched himself hoarse at the sabotage by the bourgeois press of Wallace’s speech. He opened up a one-man, or one-paper campaign to popularize it. This is just what PM needed in its general efforts to convince the country, despite the facts, that this is a “people’s war” for freedom, democracy and plenty. Yes, says Ingersoll, this is a war for a daily quart of milk to every man, woman and child in the world, thus believing that he had brought home the main aim of the war in such plain language that everyone might understand. But Ingersoll is regarded as a buffoon in the newspaper world. Except for the Stalinists, who have become his bosom pals since Hitler tore up his pact of blood with Stalin, and since he began to pursue the party line, Ingersoll has no great influence. He does have the reputation of being an outstanding muddle-head.
Two new warriors for the “common man” took to the podium. First we had that notorious “liberal” and fighter for the common man, Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles, of Cuba fame. Mr. Welles, in his Memorial Day address at the Arlington National Amphitheater said:
Our victory must bring in its train the liberation of all people ... Discrimination between peoples because of their race, creed or color must be abolished ... The age of imperialism is ended ... The problem (postwar) is rather one of distribution and purchasing power; of providing the mechanism whereby what the world produces may be fairly distributed among the nations of the world ...
Another person to come to the aid of Wallace is the great humanitarian, Donald M. Nelson. In his speech to the graduating class of the University of Missouri, the chief of the War Production Board uttered this epoch-making statement: “Poverty is not inevitable any more.” We can produce enough for the whole world, the good man said, and he called for “pliancy and resiliency of mind” to abolish poverty!
 
“Poverty Is Not Inevitable”
The thing that stands out in their speeches is the complete avoidance at stating facts and the imperious necessity they feel for speaking in generalities. The reason for this is clear: to match their phraseology with concrete illustrations of the general “theories,” to present a true program of economic, political and social democracy means to attack capitalism as a social order. This none of them will do.
”Poverty is not inevitable any more!” Since when, and why not? All that these men are saying is that capitalism is ready to do things in wartime that it will never concede to in times of peace. But whatever it is that big business does, such as allowing greater government interference in its operations, it makes certain that its profits are large and above all insured! It makes certain that nothing shall change the fundamental character of the existing social order.
Poverty is not inevitable; that is true. But it is inevitable so long as capitalism exists, so long as the profit-economy reigns. An improvement of the world standard of living is possible, but not on the basis of capitalism. Freedom of the colonial peoples is possible and necessary, but it cannot be achieved under the system of imperialism. The elimination of race discrimination is possible but not in a class society where the reality of the social order increases discrimination and racial antagonism as the means of keeping the ruling class in power. Genuine freedom of speech, assembly and organization are possible, but only in a free economic society. And not even these gentlemen are willing to say that we now live under a social order making these things possible.
The speeches of Wallace, the writings of Ingersoll and the speeches of Welles and Nelson only prove what we have been saying again and again: Capitalism is bankrupt! Its ideological war has a hollow ring when faced with the real war. Big business chuckles to itself as it observes these gentlemen describe this war which does not exist. So long as the “people’s war” is confined to the speeches of Vice-President Wallace and the writings o£ the enraged Ingersoll, there is nothing much to worry about. Let the “theorists” concern themselves with post-war problems. The only reality that exists for monopoly capitalism is the living present. They’ll concern themselves with the post-war period when they come to it. If, in the meantime, impractical visionaries want to talk about a new order of things to come, let them amuse themselves in their harmless enterprise.
Therein lies the crux of the matter. New Deal reformism sounds stale and impractical because it avoids striking at the root of the social problems of the present epoch. The generalities of a Wallace can be meaningful only on the basis of a fundamental alteration of the economic system, by the transformation of society into a socialist order, by the abolition of a private property in the means of production – the profit system – and the establishment of genuine economic, political and social equality.
The real subject matter which is the concern of Wallace will be considered in other articles devoted to the problem of the economics o£ the war and the post-war problems already discussed by the New Dealers through the pen of Alva Hansen. We propose to examine them and show that all the panaceas thought up by social reformism in the era of decay capitalism is so much badinage without an iota of concrete significance.
 

Gates: James Connolly, Irish Socialist Rebel (June 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
James Connolly, Irish Socialist Rebel
(June 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 5, June 1942, pp. 138-143.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

One of the greatest figures of the international socialist movement and yet one of the least known, is James Connolly, who was, until his execution, the organizer and leader of the Irish socialist movement. The lives and works of the Continental and American socialist leaders and thinkers are rather well known to the old and new generations of revolutionary socialists. This is indeed a paradox, for James Connolly was one of the most talented of the socialist theoreticians of the new century. Unlike so many socialist thinkers, his theoretical work was not an end in itself, but corresponded to the requirements of the Irish labor and independence movements, i.e., to concrete revolutionary aims. It is not strange, therefore, that this great leader should have met his death in a rôle, regarded as romantic by those whose lives are completely intellectualized and cloistered, of commandant of the Irish Citizen Army, which he helped to organize for the concrete task of seizing power in Ireland and proclaiming the Irish Republic free and independent from British imperialism.
The life of James Connolly is not easy to assay, for the general pattern out of which judgment is drawn in analysing and describing the lives of other outstanding revolutionary socialists is, in this case, greatly complicated by the specific peculiarities of the country which gave birth to him. American and European socialist leaders grew up and developed in a bourgeois milieu of fully developed capitalism. At the turn of the century, the main processes of national unification in Europe were completed. Even the backward countries of the Continent were drawn into the vortex of bourgeois economy and became entirely dependent upon the welfare, the ebbs and flows of capitalism. Despite the intense nationalism engendered by the era of imperialism, it is possible to speak of European capitalism as connoting one sector of that universal order.
The reaction of the masses to the bitter exploitation which accompanied the rising power of industrial and finance capitalism led directly to the formation of the economic and political organizations of struggle of the proletariat and peasantry. Thus, by the year 1900, socialist and trade union organizations made their appearance in all of the advanced countries of the world. Certainly the trade union movement had already made its mark, and in most European countries the trade union movement, heavily indebted to the efforts of the socialist movement to establish it, remained under socialist influence.
While part of the general process of industrialization was visited upon Ireland, it was complicated, altered, influenced and diverted by the singular fact that Ireland was a colonial country, under the heel of British imperialism, for over seven hundred years. As a predominantly peasant country, it had experienced the ravages of an industrialization introduced by a foreign power, but in agriculture and industry the overlords were interlopers from the center of the empire, England.
 
As a Young Socialist
James Connolly was born near Cloves, County Monaghan, in Northern Ireland, on June 5, 1870. [1] His proletarian family migrated to Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1880 in the hope of improving their economic position. It was there that Connolly first began to work in the printing trade. Under age (he was scarcely more than ten) and undersized, he and his conniving boss would outwit government inspectors by having him placed on a box, which permitted him to peer over the type cases, giving the illusion of height and age. A more wily inspector caused his discharge and he thereafter became a baker’s apprentice, an occupation which he dreaded. The early morning hours and long days of labor made him always dream and hope that the bakery would burn before his day’s work began. From the baking trade he drifted into a mosaic tiling factory to learn another type of work.
During the entire period of his early youth and adolescence, Connolly was an indefatigable student who educated himself. He studied languages, history and economics and at an early age became active in the Scottish socialist movement. John Leslie, the Scottish socialist, greatly influenced the young Irishman and it was he who prevailed upon Connolly to return to Ireland to organize an Irish socialist movement. In 1896, at the age of 26, James Connolly, with his newly married wife, arrived in Dublin, where he was to embark on a career of socialist agitation and organization destined to culminate in the great Easter Rebellion of 1916.
 
A Resumé History of Ireland
Before one is able to evaluate the life and rôle of James Connolly it is an indispensable requirement to trace, no matter how briefly, the historical development of Ireland. Only by such a review will one be enabled to understand the “peculiarities” of Connolly’s ideas, his writings and his deeds.
Ireland was the oldest colonial possession in the world, having been subjected by the British as early as the 12th century. English domination of the island was not accomplished at once. The Irish clans were a fighting people and for more than 500 years they resisted the occupation of their island by the Norman and Anglo-Saxon marauders. But each successive revolt was brutally suppressed. The struggles became weaker and weaker, while the power of the invader grew. Finally, in 1798, the last great revolt was crushed. In 1801 the forced union of England and Ireland was “legally” established under the Crown.
The multiplying decades of the 19th century witnessed the painful spoliation of that beautiful country by British landlordism. The communal lands of the Irish peasants were long ago destroyed. The land, which for many centuries had belonged to the people, was now in the hands of foreign landlords, native landowners who made their peace with the invader and who helped him in his conquest, and the Catholic Church, which played its usual insidious rôle in support of the enslavement of a people which had followed its religion. (It was Connolly’s opinion that the Church had hoped by this union to bring about a return of Catholicism to England. It therefore supported any and all indignities heaped upon the Irish people.)
The economic reasons behind the terrifying exploitation of the Irish peasantry is to be found in the profitability of cattle raising and breeding in the latter half of the 18th century. It was this single fact which led the British conquerors to uproot the many-sided agricultural production of the Irish peasant and to reduce it to a secondary position in the island’s economy. Ground landlords fenced in small farms to form large grazing farms, including the commons. Small farmers lost their means of existence. (See M. Beer, History of British Socialism, vol. 1.) This annihilation of the Irish peasantry gave rise to a multitude of organizations, all basing themselves on the necessity of unending struggle against England, for the restoration of the farming lands to the peasants and for the restoration of Irish independence.
The destruction of the farm lands in favor of grazing pastures usurped by the rich gave rise to the formation of the “Whiteboys.” This organization, which existed until about 1830, employed violence in the struggle against the great landlords, tearing down the fences which had marked off the lands of the conquerors. They had hoped to reestablish the peasant ownership of the land.
There, in brief, is the background to the situation which brought about a change of relations between a section of the Irish Protestants and Catholics. More and more they joined hands in a common struggle against England. They were influenced by the radical movement in England, by the American War of Independence and by the French Revolution. The Protestant Irish furnished many thinkers and leaders for the insurrectionary struggle against England. In October 1791, they formed the United Irishmen, sent messages to Rousseau, Thomas Paine and Locke, contacted the London Corresponding Society and conspired with the French government to free Ireland. But their insurrection failed, too.
For the next fifty years, the Irish continued to struggle against hopeless odds. But the destruction of then- agriculture, the exploitation and impoverishment of the entire population in order to enrich the British, led to successive famines and physical deterioration of the race. As in Britain, during the “industrial revolution,” the British ruling classes and progenitors of the present British aristocracy were interested in only one thing: profit. The treatment of the Irish people left the world aghast.
 
World Interest in Ireland’s Plight
It was not merely a question of the brutality of English rule in Ireland. The movement of liberalism, which made its appearance under various guises, the new labor organizations, the socialists, at the head of whom stood Marx and Engels, were all interested in the struggles of the Irish people for their liberation, as a social question of paramount importance for all the peoples of the world. This is not difficult to understand, for England, the most powerful industrial nation in the world, was setting the pattern for future imperialist conquest as it set the pace for industrial exploitation.
The chartist movement of England was also involved in the movement for Irish freedom. While there was no chartist movement in Ireland, with its poor and backward proletariat, it was that country which gave chartism its greatest orator in Feargus O’Connor, and in “most trenchant writer” in Bronterre O’Brien. These individuals focused the attention of the British workers on the Irish question. The intensity of the struggle for the island’s freedom led to the second national petition of the chartist movement, issued April 12 to May 12, 1842, and signed by 3,313,758 workers. The document declared:
Your petitioners complain of the many grievances borne by the people of Ireland and contend that they are fully entitled to a repeal of the legislative union. (History of British Socialism, by M. Beer; vol. 2, p. 130)
Only the Scottish and London delegates opposed the inclusion of a demand for repeal of the forced union upon Ireland.
 
Marx and Engels on Ireland
Friedrich Engels, who visited Ireland several times to gain a first-hand knowledge of conditions on the Island, wrote a great deal on the nature of the British conquest. He described the effect of British exploitation of the Irish people in stirring detail and won Marx’s deep interest in the question which, during their lifetime, was constantly brought before the British labor movement and the First International.
In a letter to Marx dated May 23, 1856, Engels graphically described the painful conditions in Ireland in the following way:
Gendarmes, priests, lawyers, bureaucrats, squires, in pleasing profusion and a total absence of any and every industry, so that it would be difficult to understand what all these parasitic growths found to live on if the misery of the peasants did not supply the other half of the picture.
Ireland may be regarded as the first English colony and as one which because of its proximity is still governed exactly in the old way, and here one can already observe that the so-called liberty of English citizens is based on the oppression of the colonies. I have never seen so many gendarme in any country, and the drink-sodden expression of the Prussian gendarme is developed to its highest perfection here among the constabulary, who are armed with carbines, bayonets and handcuffs.
The country has been completely ruined by the English wars of conquest from 1100 to 1850 (for in reality both the war and the state of siege lasted as long as that). How often have the Irish started to try and achieve something, and every time they have been crushed, politically and industrially. (Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Correspondence, 1846–1895)
In contrast to the host of “friends” of Ireland, Marx and Engels approached the question of her liberation from a class point of view. They saw the struggle for Irish freedom as an integral part of the struggle against capitalism, against all forms of exploitation, as part of the liberative struggle for the emancipation of all humanity and as a forerunner in the struggle for socialism. On the basis of their observations, the founders of scientific socialism knew that the Irish would continue to fight for freedom no matter how many defeats they suffered. It was this conviction which led Marx to say in a letter of November 2, 1867, to Engels:
I used to think the separation of Ireland from England impossible. I now think it is inevitable. (Marx-Engels, Correspondence, p. 228.)
Several weeks later we find Marx, still occupied with the Irish question, writing to Engels on the needs of the island and saying:
The next question is, what shall we advise the English workers? In my opinion they must make the repeal of the Union (in short the affair of 1783, only democratized and adapted to the conditions of the time) into an article of their pronunziamento ... What the Irish need it:

(1) Self-government and independence from England.
(2) An agrarian revolution. With the best will in the world the English cannot accomplish this for them, but they can give them the legal means of accomplishing it for themselves ... (Marx-Engels, Correspondence, p. 229)

Marx and Engels endeavored to orient the British working class movement to struggle for Irish freedom, without which they could not hope to achieve their own emancipation. On November 29, 1869, writing from London, Marx said to his friend Kugelmann:
I have become more and more convinced – and the only question is to bring this conviction home to the English working class – that it can never do anything decisive here in England until it separates its policy with regard to Ireland in the most definite way from the policy of the ruling classes, until it not only makes common cause with the Irish but actually takes the initiative in dissolving the Union established in 1801 and replacing it by a free federal relationship. And, indeed, this must be done, not as a matter of sympathy with Ireland, but as a demand made in the interests of the English proletariat. If not, the English people will remain tied to the leading-strings of the ruling classes, because it must join them in a common front against Ireland. Every one of its movements in England itself is crippled by the disunion with the Irish, who form a very important section of the working class in England. The primary condition of emancipation here – the overthrow of the English landed oligarchy – remains impossible because its position here cannot be stormed so long as it maintains its strongly entrenched outposts in Ireland. (Marx-Engels, Correspondence, pp. 278–279)
A further illustration of how keenly Marx regarded the Irish question, especially when considering the question of freedom o£ the English workers, is his letter to Engels of December 10, 1869. He wrote:
As to the Irish question ... The way I shall put forward the matter next Tuesday [meeting of the general council of the International] is this: that quite apart from all phrases about “international” and “humane” justice for Ireland – which are to be taken for granted in the International Council – it is in the direct and absolute interest of the English working class to get rid of their present connection with Ireland. And this is my most complete conviction and for reasons which in part I cannot tell the English workers themselves. For a long time I believed that it would be possible to overthrow the Irish regime by English working class ascendancy. I always expressed this point of view in the New York Tribune, Deeper study has now convinced me of the opposite. The English working working class will never accomplish anything before it has got rid of Ireland. The lever must be applied in Ireland. That is why the Irish question is so important for the social movement in general. (Marx-Engels, Correspondence, pp. 280–281)
 
The Arrival of Connolly in Ireland
No great progress was made in the liberation of Ireland during the 19th century. There was no lack of struggles, however. Sinn Feinianism, despite heroic campaigns against British imperialism, was defeated at all decisive turns of the struggle. The Feinian organization [2], a petty bourgeois “socialistic” movement, vainly sought the establishment of a republic and the overthrow of the tenant system. The story is the same when one examines the history of the Irish Land League. Their self-sacrificing battles were unavailing. No small reason for these defeats, although by no means the principal one, was the absence of a clear social doctrine around which these purely nationalist movements could grow and join their struggle to those of other oppressed peoples against common exploiters.
The first effort to turn the Irish people in other directions was made by James Connolly. As a Marxian socialist he sought to combine the nationalist aims of the Irish people with socialist theory, toward economic, political and social emancipation. Thus, he came to Ireland in 1896 with the single purpose of establishing a socialist organization to accomplish the freedom of the Irish people.
Immediately upon his arrival on the island he proceeded to form the Irish Socialist Republican Party. Note the name he gave to the party. It was his way of surmounting the obstacles which a socialist organization inevitably encounters in a country where nationalism is the dominant spirit. As he often said, he sought a union of genuine nationalism to socialist theory and practice on the ground that they were compatible under Irish conditions. The program of the Irish Socialist Republican Party written by him with the above in mind, he summarized as follows:
The establishment of an Irish socialist republic based upon the public ownership by the people of Ireland of the land and instruments of production, distribution and exchange. Agriculture to be administered as a public function, under boards of management elected by the agricultural population and responsible to them and to the nation at large. All other forms of labor necessary to the well-being of the community to be conducted on the same principles. (The Irish Labor Movement, by W.P. Ryan, p. 166)
The demands he appended to the program, and which exclusively applied to Ireland, are not unlike those propagated by the Fourth Internationalist movement of the present era.
In organizing an Irish socialist movement, he began a campaign against the “politicians” and “nationalists” who were conservative on the question of property and who opposed every effort of the proletariat to improve its economic and social position. Realizing the tremendous obstacles which pure nationalism created in the building of the party, he always insisted on posing the social as well as the nationalist aspects of Ireland’s struggle – its completely dual character. In an introduction to Erin’s Hope, reprinted in the Harp Library, he summarizes his view of the Irish question in the following words:
The ISRP was founded in Dublin in 1896 by a few workingmen whom the writer had succeeded in interesting in his proposition that the two currents of revolutionary thought in Ireland – the socialist and the national – were not antagonistic but complementary, and that the Irish socialist was in reality the best Irish patriot, but in order to convince the Irish people of that fact he must rest his arguments upon the facts of Irish history and be champion against the subjection of Ireland and all that it implies. That the Irish question was at bottom an economic question and that the economic struggle must first be able to function freely nationally before it could function internationally, and as socialists were opposed to all oppression, so should they ever be foremost in the daily battle against all its manifestations, social and political. (Ibid., p. 169)
 
The First Appearance of Socialism
The early years of the Irish socialist movement were extremely difficult. In this sense, the organization merely experienced the same problems of poverty, isolation and opposition which always characterized the history of other socialist movements originating under identical conditions.
Connolly was its single functionary. He was its theoretician, political director, agitator and writer. As a pioneer movement, all menial tasks of party organization fell upon his shoulders. But these he accepted with infectious cheerfulness and discharged them all with high spirit.
In pursuit of the single aim of establishing a Marxian socialist party and yet combining its theories with the revolutionary traditions of Irish nationalism, he based himself upon the experiences and struggle of Wolfe Tone and James Fintan Lalor. But always the appeal was directly to the Irish working class as the one section of the Irish people which could lead the struggle for freedom.
During the Boer War, the party, under Connolly’s leadership, opposed British imperialism and announced its support of the Dutch settlers. On the occasion of Queen Victoria’s visit to Dublin in 1900, he sought to address the people in the streets, attacking Her Majesty’s government. Despite arrest, he maintained an anti-imperialist agitation in the columns of the Workers Republic, the organ of the Irish Socialist Republican Party which first appeared in 1898.
The issuance of the paper was a difficult task. Beginning in 1898, it ran for eleven numbers and then stopped. Publication was resumed in 1899 and it continued irregularly until 1903, when it ceased altogether. Its final reappearance came in 1915, the crucial years of the Irish struggle, and the final issue was the eighty-fifth in its lifespan.
The backwardness of Ireland and the problems it created in building a socialist movement was strikingly described by Connolly in his introduction to the American edition of Erin’s Hope. But its accomplishments were unmistakable:
It is no exaggeration to say that this organization and its policy completely revolutionized advanced politics in Ireland. When it was first initiated the word “republic” was looked upon as a word to be only whispered among intimates; the socialists boldly advised the driving from public life of all who would not accept it. The thought of revolution was the exclusive possession of a few remnants of the secret societies of a past generation and was never mentioned by them except with heads closely together and eyes fearfully glancing round; the socialists broke through this ridiculous secrecy and in hundreds of thousands of pieces of literature scattered through the country announced their purpose to muster all the forces of labor for a revolutionary reconstruction.
 
Life in the United States
In 1903, Connolly was invited to the United States for a lecture tour. The fortunes of the party in Ireland were indeed low and he had hoped through his tour to win interest and support from the American socialist movement and the militant Irish who migrated to the New World. His return to Ireland was short-lived. The progress of the movement was indeed slow and discouraging. When disintegration followed and Connolly found himself blacklisted throughout Ireland, he decided to take his family to the United States.
While in the United States he worked as an insurance agent in Troy and factory hand in Newark. But these jobs were merely interludes until he could once again resume his full-time work for socialism. His activity and agitation for socialism always led to a search for new means of employment. In the fluid state of the political movement of the American working class, he, like so many others, was a member of the IWW, the Socialist Labor Party and finally the Socialist Party. In 1908 he moved to New York City to take up his duties as the organizer of the Irish Socialist Federation and editor of its paper, The Harp. Each new venture meant additional problems of moving his family, which now included three daughters and one boy. But there were no family difficulties, for it seemed that everyone in the Connolly household was as much concerned with the building of the movement and Jim’s activities as he himself.
Internationalist though he was, the problem of the Irish revolution was to him paramount. Even his work among the American Irish bore the influence of the problems of the homeland. In his advice to them, he wrote in The Harp, in 1908:
We propose to show all the workers of our fighting race that socialism will make them better fighters without being less Irish; we propose to advise the Irish who are socialists now to organize their forces as Irish and get again in touch with the organized bodies of literary, educational and revolutionary Irish; we propose to make a campaign among our countrymen and to rely for our method mainly on imparting to them a correct interpretation of the facts of Irish history, past and present; we propose to take control of the Irish vote out of the hands of the slimy seoiníní, who use it to boost their political and business interests, to the undoing of the Irish as well as the American toiler.
There is a great similarity in the conduct of Connolly during his stay in the United States and that of the Bolsheviks in exile. While he carried on a literary and speaking campaign to advance the socialist movement and industrial union, ism in America, his real interest was Ireland and the development of the Irish revolution. As a matter of fact, Connolly never once regarded his migration to the United States as anything permanent. And when the labor movement in Ireland began to manifest a new restlessness, when new forces made their appearance, when the objective situation became more tense, his return to Ireland was only a matter of days.
 
Connolly’s Return to Ireland
Again, in 1910, the Connolly family was on the move; they returned to Dublin. The Harp was transferred with them and now Connolly found a sub-editor in old Jim Larkin and their cooperation marked one of the brightest periods in Irish history.
Upon his return to Ireland, Connolly embarked on a new tactic of cooperation with any militant nationalists for Irish freedom, whether or not they were socialists. The single thought behind this tactic was the realization of the need for the involvement of all elements of the Irish nation for the coming revolution which he regarded as inevitable!
He now organized the Irish Socialist Party and became a member of the Irish Transport and General Workers Union, which Jim Larkin had established. In this period, Connolly regarded the unionization of the Irish working class as indispensable to the accomplishment of the Irish liberation and together with Larkin insisted that this unionization must be carried out on an industrial basis. Membership in the Irish Transport and General Workers Union was open to all who toiled and it was this single fact which was responsible for the rapid growth of militant trade unionism. From that moment, the tide of the class struggle moved on unabated.
The growth of the union struck fear in the hearts of the Irish bourgeoisie, whose existence was based upon cooperation with England. They were determined to smash the proletarian organizations lest they become so powerful that nothing could impede their road to power. In the several years since Connolly’s return, he carried on an uninterrupted agitation for the Irish rebellion, not merely as a struggle for nationalist liberation, but as a social revolution. It was this singular fact that led the Dublin employers in 1913 to combine their resources and strength for the purpose of destroying the Transport and General Workers Union. If they could succeed in this, “Connollyism,” i.e., Larkin’s militancy and Connolly’s doctrine of industrial unionism, would be rendered helpless. [3]
 
The Offensive of the Bourgeoisie
The Dublin employers announced a lockout against the working class of the city. In retaliation the union declared a strike against the employers. The importation of strike-breakers was a direct demonstration that the bosses were determined to starve the organized workers into submission in a situation where the liquidation of the union and the dismissal of its leaders were demanded.
Connolly was no cloistered theoretician of Irish independence. He was an active participant in the strike and shortly afterward was arrested. As a protest against the action of the employers and their government, Connolly went on a hunger strike. This act had the effect of gaining widespread sympathy and support, finally reaching the shores of England and enlisting the aid of the workers there.
The real culprit behind the Dublin employers was the British government. It understood the deep significance of Connolly’s activities and saw in the union the material source for the realization of Irish independence. That is why the rulers of Ireland were always so vicious and adamant in any struggle involving the working class. Connolly had with some degree of success taught the most advanced elements of the Irish people that then: struggle for independence was linked to the class struggle, that every act in behalf of an improvement of the position of the working class would hasten by the degree of that improvement the independence of their country. So that, even though the workers suffered a defeat in struggles of 1913, they were prepared by those battles for the more fateful days of 1916.
 
The Formation of the Irish Citizen Army
At a time when war threatened Europe’s peace, with England being inevitably drawn into the conflict and occupied with the problem of defending its empire, and out of the strike which had fired the determination of the workers to struggle, there arose the Irish Citizen Army. The formation of the army on March 22, 1914, under the ideological leadership of James Connolly, marked a turning point in modern Irish history. The twofold purpose of the army was heralded throughout the island: it was to defend the workers, the people, against the brutality of the bosses, landlords and the British; it was to organize the armed struggle for independence!
The Irish Citizen Army began at once to grow. At its head stood Connolly, the Countess Markievicz, W. Partridge, P.T. Daly, Sean O’Cathasaigh [4] and the venerable Captain White, who directed its military training. The army could be seen daily in Croydon Park taking its drills and marching through Dublin’s streets. Its headquarters was at Liberty Hall, which housed the Transport and General Workers Union.
In the midst of a revolutionary internal situation which threatened to assume proportions of a social upheaval, the First World War broke out on the Continent. The war did not come as a surprise to Connolly and his closest followers. But he was sadly affected by the manner in which the Socialist International, of which he was an adherent, betrayed its principles of proletarian internationalism and class solidarity. The wretched conduct of the parties of the International, wherein the leadership of the national sections, in a frenzied wave of social patriotism, rallied to the support of their imperialist governments, drove Connolly deeper into the Irish movement.
Connolly remained, nonetheless, an impeccable revolutionary internationalist. His life in this period served as an answer to the craven reformists in all countries. His attitude toward the war was acute and was stated in simple terms. He regarded the war as imperialist and deplored the bloodbath of the proletariat. If one must die, he would say, it would be better to die for a new world than in the trenches of an imperialist war in the interests of tyrants and profiteers.
On August 15, 1914, in the article A Continental Revolution, he counseled the Irish people to continue the fight for independence, to utilize Britain’s involvement in the hostilities to secure this freedom. One can observe from his writings a feverish haste to quickly achieve this freedom. All his writings were now devoted to orienting the Irish people toward a struggle for power. In the above mentioned article he wrote:
I make no war on patriotism, never have done. But against the patriotism of capitalism – the patriotism – which makes the interest of capitalism the supreme test of right and duty – I place the patriotism of the working class, the patriotism which judges every public act by its effect on the fortunes of those who toil. That which is good for the working class I esteem patriotic ... I regard each nation as the possessor of a definite contribution to the common stock of civilization, and I regard the capitalist class of each nation as being the logical and natural enemy of the national culture which constitutes that definite contribution. Therefore, the stronger I am in my affection for national tradition, literature, language and sympathies, the more firmly rooted am I in my opposition to that capitalist class which in its soulless lust for power and gold would bronze the nation as in a mortar.
And this was not mere rhetoric. He meant every word he wrote. He brilliantly explained his political program from week to week and from month to month, until the dash of arms became the reality which determined who would rule his nation. On August 22, 1914, in Forward, he wrote:
The war of a subject nation for independence, for its right to live its own life in its own way, may and can be justified as holy and righteous; the war of a subject class to free itself from the debasing conditions of economic and political slavery should at all times choose its own weapons and esteem all as sacred instruments of righteousness; but the war of nation against nation in the interest of royal freebooters and cosmopolitan brigands is a thing accursed.
The brilliance of his dialectics stood out in a world of confusion and chaos. His work and his writings matched the efforts of the small band of internationalists in Switzerland who were also engaged in the great struggle for liberation from capitalism and imperialist war. But the heroism of Connolly is all the more remarkable in that his development and work took place in isolation from his ideological comrades in Switzerland and other parts of Europe. Yet their writings, thoughts and actions were identical. This is not difficult to understand since they all proceeded from the same set of principles, the theories of Marxism.
As a man of action Connolly was able to translate theory into practice and, more important than that, to apply to the specific conditions under which he lived, the most trenchant thoughts of Marx and Engels. Having already characterized the war in Europe as imperialist, he proceeded to concretize his analysis for the purpose of directing the Irish labor movement toward the insurrectionary struggle for national liberation. Thus he wrote:
The true revolutionist should ever call into action on his side the entire sum of all the forces and factors of political and social discontent.
We believe that in times of peace we should work along the lines of peace to strengthen the nation ... but we also believe that in times of war we should act as in war.
Moreover, he viewed the Irish Revolution, not as an isolated act of an oppressed people, but as a forerunner and as part of the international, colonial and class revolution for freedom. He wrote:
Starting thus, Ireland may yet set the torch to a European conflagration that will not bum out until the last throne and the last capitalist bond and debenture are shrivelled on the funeral pyre of the last warlord.
Both 1914 and 1915 were preparatory years for what Connolly regarded as a certainty: the military struggle for national independence. The fortunes of the Irish Citizen Army were varied. The class conflict became more intense as the war worsened the economic conditions of the people as a whole and the tremendous dissatisfaction of the people, arising from their poverty, stood out in sharp contrast to the well-being of the Irish upper classes and their English overlords. The army continued its drilling for battle. Arms were procured. Under Connolly the aim of the movement was made public: The union and the army were preparing to seize power, to establish the republic and proclaim the separation of Ireland from England, to set up the United Irish Republic.
 
The Inevitability of a Clash
But the Irish people were not alone in their preparations. The ruling classes, in their desperate fright, called upon the British for aid and this aid came in the form of armed battalions with superior weapons. As Easter 1916 approached, a clash was inevitable! Here the movement was faced with a choice: Either surrender without a struggle and thus postpone the fight for national independence for many decades or prepare for the struggle, no matter what the consequence might be, in the hope that the commencement of the fight for freedom might impel such a momentous conflict as would result in freedom for Ireland.
Connolly fully understood the dilemma which confronted his movement. He knew that the failure to fight would result in the disintegration of the entire movement for liberation. A split in the Volunteers, the conservative middle class military organization for Irish independence, made possible collaboration with its militant majority under the leadership of P.H. Pearse. In the few days of doubt, Connolly supplied the leadership and reminded the population of what he had written in his three-act play which explained why it was necessary for the movement to fight. He wrote:
The Irish Citizen Army in its constitution pledges its members to fight for a republican freedom for Ireland. Its members are, therefore, of the number who believe that at the call of duty they may have to lay down their lives for Ireland, and have so trained themselves that at the worst the laying down of their lives shall constitute the starting point of another glorious tradition – a tradition that will keep alive the soul of the nation.
The fateful week of Easter 1916 had arrived. The ruling classes had gone over to the offensive, seeking to wipe out the Citizen Army and the Irish Transport and General Workers Union. Jim Larkin, who was in the United States to raise funds and material support for the army, was prevented from returning to Ireland by the authorities. It is not difficult to surmise at whose request this refusal was granted. But the situation would not wait. The question was no longer: shall we fight or retreat? In the situation where surrender meant annihilation, only one course remained: wage the fight in the hope of victory, or, at worst, keep alive the revolutionary traditions of the Irish struggle for independence. The choice was not difficult to foresee. Connolly was keenly aware of the historic import of the situation and in his position of commandant called for the mobilization of the army, mapped the campaign for the occupation of Dublin and began to rally the workers to paralyze the efficiency of the ruling class to resist.
 
Bourgeois Desperation and the Easter Rebellion
The battle broke out with the army under Connolly seizing various parts of central Dublin and occupying the main post office. [5] For one week the Dublin proletariat kept up its heroic fight against overwhelming military odds. Remnants of the army were being rounded up and finally the British surrounded the post office, which housed the squadrons under Connolly’s command. The fight was a bitter one. Many of his closest friends and collaborators had given up their lives in this monumental demonstration against class and national oppression. And Connolly, too, was critically wounded and suffering from the excessive loss of blood. Constant shelling and the desire to save his men compelled him to surrender.
The aftermath was dreadful to behold. The bloody British tyrants proceeded to wreak their vengeance on the small band of faithfuls. All the leading personalities were sought out and indicted for taking arms against His Majesty’s government. And while some amnesties were granted, the real leaders, especially Connolly, were doomed. World-wide protests in behalf of the revolutionists were unavailing. Special intercessions in behalf of Connolly were rejected. The royal government demanded his life and his life it took. On Easter Sunday 1916 the wounded Connolly, unable to stand or walk, was wheeled out in a chair to face his executioners. [6] This great and good man was serene and composed in the knowledge that even though he lost, the battles were not over and victory would yet come.
And so the riflemen took aim at this glorious proletarian martyr as he sat in a chair, propped up to make the aim easier and his death certain. At the command of the executioner, the Irish people lost their greatest figure of the twentieth century and the world socialist movement was deprived of one of its most engaging theoreticians and leaders.
* * *
In Defense of the Irish Martyrs
A great deal has been written on the Irish rebellion deploring the road taken by Connolly. To many it is unthinkable that such an astute person could have gone into the battle against insurmountable odds. Yet they do not truly understand Ireland, its revolutionary traditions, nor needs of the world movement of proletarian emancipation. For there is no doubt that the Easter Rebellion was one of the decisive elements which led to the subsequent spurious independence granted to Ireland, an independence which divided the island on religious grounds (actually to preserve British interests).
In his analysis and defense of the Irish Rebellion, Lenin demonstrated that the immaturity of the revolt was an immaturity based on the fact that the European proletariat failed to respond to the lead given it by Connolly and his movement. But beyond that Lenin very aptly places the Rebellion in its proper historical place. In the article, The Results of the Discussion on Self-Determination, contained in the book, Against the Stream, he wrote:
Those who can term such a rising a putsch are either the worst kind of reactionaries or hopelessly doctrinaire, incapable of imagining the social revolution as a living phenomenon ... The misfortune of the Irish lay in the fact that their rising was untimely, since the rising of the European proletariat was not yet ripe. Capitalism is not so harmoniously constructed that separate sources of risings can suddenly unite without failure of overthrow. On the contrary, the difference in time, the difference and dissimilarity in the place of the risings act as a guarantee for the greatness and depth of the joint movement; it is only by untimely, partially and consequently unsuccessful attempts at revolutionary risings that the masses will again experience, learn, assemble their forces, recognize their true leaders, the socialist proletarians, and thereby prepare the joint attack; just as isolated strikes, town and national demonstrations, mutinies in the army, peasant uprisings, etc., prepared the general attack in 1905.
That Connolly understood the meaning of Lenin’s position is clear from the manner in which he prepared the Irish rebellion and explained its relation to an impending European revolution. Certainly there was something peculiarly Irish in the determination with which he pursued his single aim. As an admirer and interpreter of James Fintan Lalor he must have known of and accepted Lalor’s defense of the many defeated Irish rebellions when the latter wrote:
Any man who tells you that an act of armed resistance – even if offered by ten men only – even if offered by men armed only with stones – any man who tells you that such an act of resistance is premature, imprudent or dangerous – any and every such man should at once be spurned and spat at. For, remark you this and recollect it, that somewhere, and somehow, and by somebody, a beginning must be made and that the first act of resistance is always, and must be ever, premature, imprudent and dangerous. Lexington was premature, Bunker’s Hill was imprudent, and even Trenton was dangerous.
I have tried, in this brief sketch, to compress a study of the life of James Connolly. Mindful of its many shortcomings, it is hoped that it may serve toward a better acquaintance with one of the truly heroic figures of the international working class movement in the struggle for socialism.

Footnotes by ETOL
Unfortunately there are a number of factual errors in this account of James Connolly’s life. The first proper biographies of Connolly only appeared in the 1960s – before that most of the information available on Connolly was largely anecdotal.
1. “Cloves” should probably be “Clones” and Co. Monaghan is in the northern province Ulster, but has never been part of the political entity known as “Northern Ireland”. Connolly’s birth certificate shows that he was born in the Cowgate district of Edinburgh on June 5, 1868. On the census returns for 1901 and 1911 Connolly gives his place of birth as Co. Monaghan. This may be because he had deserted from the British Army and wanted to conceal the connection between himself and the former soldier.
2. Gates is here confusing the Irish Republican Brotherhood, popularly known as the Fenians, with Sinn Fein. The IRB was a secret society founded by James Stephens in 1858 and dedicated to the establishment of an independent democratic republic in Ireland. Sinn Fein was a political party founded by Arthur Griffith in 1905. Initially it aspired to the creation of a dual monarchy on the Austro-Hungarian model. After the 1916 rising it became the vehicle for the independence struggle. During Connolly’s lifetime it was a relatively small organization and Connolly was quite hostile toward both Griffith and Sinn Fein.
3. The unionization campaign in Dublin was actually known as “Larkinism”. When he arrived back in Ireland Connolly was actually based in Belfast as organizer of the Irish Transport & General Workers Union, which has been founded by Larkin in 1909 during Connolly’s period in America. Connolly only came to Dublin after the Dublin Lockout had already started when Larkin had been arrested. Larkin was already a promoter of industrial unionism before Connolly’s arrival back in Ireland.
4. Better known today as the socialist playwright Sean O’Casey.
5. The bulk of the participants in the rising came from the Irish Volunteers. Connolly was appointed commander of the Irish Republican Army which consisted of both the Irish Citizen Army and the Irish Volunteers.
6. Connolly was executed on May 12th, 1916 – the last of the leaders to be shot. Initially the rising had been planned for Easter Sunday, April 23rd, 1916, but actually started on the following day.
 

PM" on Germany (July 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
PM on Germany
(July 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 6, July 1942, pp. 166–167.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

The New York newspaper PM may appear to be an oddity to many people. A great deal of writing has been contributed in an endeavor to explain this “phenomenon” in American journalism. The upper strata of the financial and manufacturing circles have a venomous hatred for its muckraking exposures of their high-handed profiteering through special means of exploiting the workers, particularly through the present war production program. The reactionary politicians hate it no less for its exposures of their rôle in the legislative halls of Washington and the economic interests which they serve – this is especially true of the Southern bourbons, whose power in Congress far exceeds their specific weight in the country as a whole.
But PM earns not only the enmity of the reactionary bourgeoisie. Liberals, pure and simple trade unionists, socialists, revolutionary Marxists find it difficult to accept PM for what it says it is.
The paper’s best friends are the New Dealers, the die-hard Rooseveltians, the Stalinists and the trade unionists who are the captives of the Stalinists. For PM is an American counterpart of the radical-liberal oftentimes observed in Europe. Its pretentious independence of thought, fearlessness and objectivity are suspect by the fact that it follows the line of the Stalinists on all decisive questions. Since the involvement of Russia in the war against Hitler, its line in this direction has become clearer and there is little doubt left as to the origin of its major inspirations.
Thus, its liberalism, its defense of democratic rights, of the Negroes, the general trade union and liberal movement is proscribed by its real political position as a camp-follower of Stalinism (many of its writers are not merely tainted with this cancer, but are drenched in it – the noble editor notwithstanding). Thus, PM shrinks from clarity and creates a great confusion of ideas by its half-truths and deliberately misleading editorials and features.
 
The Story of Germany
An article printed some weeks ago, entitled Big Business Wins Complete Control in Nazi Germany, written by Kurt Singer (referred to as a Swedish journalist) and its own Victor H. Bernstein, is a typical example of what we refer to above. The article opens with the announcement that the replacement of Herr Wagner as price commissioner of the Third Reich by a Herr Fishboeck “marked the final victory, within the Reich, of Germany’s industrial plutocrats – the steel magnates and I.G. Farbenindustrie, the Aryan ‘husband’ of Standard Oil – in their struggle for power, profits and monopolies against small business and the German state.”
The article, which has an air of “Marxism” about it, goes on to describe the process by which big business triumphed under Hitler. It says, for example:
“The German industrialists did not want an excess-profits tax. It was dumped.
“The German industrialists did not want limitations on profits. The limitations were dumped.
“The German industrialists did not want the ceiling on wages to be lifted. It remained fixed.
“The German industrialists resented the sharing of war profits with small industry. Small industry is now disappearing in Germany.” (Emphasis in original. – A.G.)
 
How Big Business Triumphs
Let us stop here for a moment to see what it is PM is really saying. The impression which the writers are trying to convey is that Germany is economically different from Great Britain or the United States (in their minds, one of the main reasons for supporting the war in the latter countries). But they are wrong in declaring that “Germany’s industrial plutocracy” fought for power against “small business and the German state.” Small business was licked in Germany many years ago. It has been in a subordinate position in her economy since the turn of the century. The war has only accentuated and brutalized this process. But what is true for Germany is also true for all other imperialist nations, America, England, France, Japan, etc.
What the writers say about the plutocratic victory over the German state is ludicrous. Fascism rose to power in Germany as the servant of big business. And the state in Germany was always the servant of big business, but it was never so intimately welded to the interests of the financial and industrial ruling class as under Hitler. The victory of fascism in Germany signified that the plutocracy succeeded in destroying the resistive powers of the proletariat and thus guaranteed uninterrupted profits for its class. The theory of PM leads to only one conclusion: that there was a struggle between the German ruling class and the fascist state in which the former triumphed. This, by the grace of God, never existed.
Furthermore, the list of the demands of the industrialists, all of which were acceded to, are not peculiar to Germany. They express part of the essence of the interests of the bourgeoisie all over the world, and the above “demands” are identical to those made and won in Great Britain and the United States. The only mitigating factor in the latter countries is that the inter-bourgeois political conflicts, and the bourgeois-proletarian class struggle has not yet been solved in the completely reactionary (fascist) manner as in Germany. But the economic principles of the two orders are identical and that is why the fundamental paths traveled by these countries is similar and in many cases identical. Only those who look upon Germany as a new social order, or those who describe the Germans as the protagonists of a “world revolution” (PM) are confused and ... irritated.
 
What of America and England?
But what about the American bourgeois? Or the British? They do not want an excess-profits tax. So they emasculate all proposals in such a direction and are guaranteed in advance that in the post-war period they will be returned a large share of what is now siphoned off for the purpose of partially paying for the war.
Limitations on profits are a farce in the United States and Great Britain, even as PM has often pointed out.
If the German industrialists do not want the ceiling on wages in that country lifted, the British working class already has a ceiling on wages and the American ruling class and the Administration are fighting for a more severe ceiling than now prevails in a practical way.
If the plutocracy in Germany does not want to share its profits with small business, what of the American and British plutocracies? Or is it possible that everyone has already forgotten the findings of the Truman committee, or the frantic wailings of the small business men at home? The tendency toward the disappearance of small business in Germany has a corollary in the same tendency here and in England (see The New International, March, 1942).
The article in PM goes on to cite that despite Hitler’s promise that “None will make gold from the ruby blood of our fellow heroes,” was profits have enormously risen in the face of large taxes (this has a familiar ring!). The writers cite the growth of income for German industry as taken from the Nazi publication Wirtschaft und Statistik. These figures are based on tax returns and are in billions of marks:



Year


Net Income




1932


  0.53




1935


  2.96




1937


  6.21




1939


  8.14




1940


10.18



The article then goes on the describe the methods employed by big business to increase “invisible” profits and how the government gives industry special considerations in contracts, all of them calculated to increase profits. Here, too, the methods are similar and identical to those pursued in the United States and England.
One might reasonably ask: What is the purpose of the PM article, what is it trying to prove? Merely this, that in England and the United States, as democratic capitalist nations, a more liberal policy prevails – the tendencies in these two countries, while identical to those in Germany, are not yet as extreme in all their ramifications.
The significant nature of the article, not intended by the authors, is that it does identify the economies of the leading capitalist powers. If big business has won complete control in Germany, it is well on the way to achieve it in the United States and England. In any case, it is triumphant and dominant in the “democratic” nations and one can, with equal justification, point to the developments in these countries as one with Germany. As the war economy develops at home, the identification of American economy with that of Germany will be infinitely clearer.
 



As the German Panzer divisions roll across the desert sands of Egypt, threatening to seize its principal cities and overrun the Suez Canal, the extremely dangerous position of the Jewish population of the Near East, particularly Palestine, becomes ever more clear. It does not require a great deal of insight to forecast what a German victory means in that arena of the war.
The German army, accompanied and directed by the Gestapo and the Schutzstaffel, will unleash dreaded pogroms against a defenseless Jewish population. They will undoubtedly seek to incite the Arab tribal chieftains to take out on the Jews their hatred of British colonial policy and practice.
The most pitiful aspect of the entire situation is the fact that the Jewish population is defenseless, i.e., it is unarmed, even to protect itself. If this situation should continue under the conditions described above, a fearful slaughter will take place in Palestine.
The British policy of divide and rule sought to placate the Jews and the Arabs in the Near East and to maintain control of that area of the world in order to enforce its grip on the profitable oil lands belonging to the colonial peoples.
 
British Refuse Arms
In pursuit of these aims the British refused to accede to the demand for the formation of a Jewish army made by many supporters of the war in England and in the United States. The Jewish movements which campaign for such an army do so for a variety of special reasons, but all of them are motivated by the desire to obtain a special place in the war for their people.
It is easy to see the purpose. If a Jewish army participates in the war it will give the Palestinian Jews a firmer hold on their adopted country and in general strengthen the Zionist movement in a post-war period. Moreover, such an army, actively fighting in the war, would lay the basis for removing the British mandate over Palestine.
These are some of the reasons behind the refusal of the British to grant the request for the Jewish army.
The British imperialists are adamant even though it is plain to see that, from the point of view of their IMMEDIATE military interests in Egypt, a Jewish army could have been of incalculable value to the British forces. Such an army might have turned the tide for the British in the Libyan campaign. But the British Tories are concerned with the effects of such an army upon their colonial policy. And the British imperialists are organically incapable of changing in the slightest degree their colonial program: keep the subject peoples unarmed and divided as the surest means of maintaining British imperial rule.
The peril of the Jews in Palestine becomes alarming because it is evident that the British are unable to defend them against the wrath of the fascist barbarians.
 
Arabs in Danger, Too
The Jews are not alone in their plight. The Arab workers and peasants will find just as little comfort under fascist rule. While they may not suffer such pogroms as the Jewish population, they face the slavery of all conquered countries.
The bankruptcy of British imperialist rule has long been apparent in this war. They merely repeat the practices of Malaya, Singapore and Burma in Egypt and the Near East. These practices spell out the grave dangers to the whole population there, but especially the Jews.
While there is yet time, the Jews and the Arabs must unite to stave off the dangers which threaten them. It is clear that what they require is an independent policy – severance from the blind and reactionary British rulers, severance from their own misleaders who keep them tied to a policy and practice which doom them in advance.
What is needed in the Near East is the independent organization of the workers and peasants, Jews and Arabs alike, in a common struggle for their freedom and independence! What is needed is the arming of the whole population to defend themselves against the conquerors!
 

Gates: Bourgeois New Worlds (July 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Books in Review
Bourgeois New Worlds
(July 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 6, July 1942, pp. 189–190.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Post-War Worlds
by P.E. Corbett
Farrer & Rinehart, Inc. 208 pp., $2.00
Marxian socialists were not and are not now alone in their endeavor to chart a new world free of nationalism. But they are alone in knowing what to do about it. The contradictions of capitalist society as a world profit economy resting on a system of national states is all too apparent even to the theoreticians of the bourgeois order. Special pleading on the cause of the war notwithstanding, they all realize that war, particularly total war, is an enormous degenerating influence upon society and humanity.
At the turn of the century, in the period of expanding economy and the rise of imperialism as the main policy of the powerful and rich national states, many writers sought a justification for imperialism and war in the fact that this related phenomenon was unavoidable and necessary because it resulted in a higher development of society and a general improvement in the world standard of living. This, too, was special pleading, for such views were based on national interests and failed to take into account the fundamental basis for imperialist policy, the inevitable decline of world capitalism, and the fact that an improvement in the world standard of living was for only a section of society and that was based on exploitation of the national populations and the colonial peoples.
Since World War I, at least, the danger of a complete degeneration of capitalist society and its replacement by socialism, has become a source of discomfort to the bourgeoisie and its ideological defenders. The war of 1914–18 was a portent of the future. New weapons of destruction, the signing of a peace which guaranteed the outbreak of a new war, the narrowing bases of world capitalism, pointed the way to a new breakdown of the profit system.
 
The League of Nations Experiment
The post-war period witnessed a feverish movement in all the warring countries to prevent a repetition of that devastating conflict by the creation of instruments for solving national conflicts and to provide the means for a peaceful solution of the “differences” between the countries (or alliances) of the world. What was really sought was a guarantee of the power of one group of capitalist states against another – the maintenance of the status quo in world relationships. As a result, we had the formation of the League of Nations and the World Court.
The years following the formation of these two bodies were not promising in the fulfillment of the aims of those who prevailed in the establishment of these Utopian organizations. What stands out in the intervening years between the birth of the League of Nations and the outbreak of World War II is the sharp conflicts on the Continent and in the colonial areas between the powers which engaged in the First World War for “peace and democracy.” War, in one form or another, has existed since 1918; These preliminary “skirmishes” merely foreshadowed the present holocaust.
This is the singular fact which disturbs men like Professor Corbett, who are ardent advocates of world bodies to outlaw war and “internationalize” bourgeois society.
In Post-War Worlds we have the classic bourgeois approach to this problem. Corbett’s analysis of the First World War is unusual only in the fact that he does not, after twenty-five years, understand the fundamental cause of that war. Perhaps it is more correct to say that his understanding of the war is confused, for he declares that the root causes of the old conflict, and the new, are “political, economic, social and psychological in character” (page 3), What he understands by this is difficult to assay, since the ideas which follow this statement are devoted to the Axis program of the “master race” and their innate desire for “conquest.” The conclusion drawn by the professor is that the present war “may therefore be accurately described as one between democracy and totalitarianism” (page 5).
 
Ideas for World Reorganization
He is not really sure of this because he observes that on the democratic side are such countries as Poland, Greece and the Soviet Union. “Nevertheless,” he writes, “there is an element of truth in the description” (page 4). Having assured himself that his doubts on the character of the war are groundless, the professor warms up to his theme.
A good part of the book is devoted to the experiences of the League of Nations and its ultimate downfall. While the author readily admits that the League was doomed in advance, his theory is that this need not have happened. One of the main reasons attributed to its downfall was the failure of the United States to become a member of the body to enforce its influence (finance and arms) upon any country which sought to violate the covenants. Another, that France and England fell out over policy, the former seeking the enforcement of sharp measures against Germany, the latter aiming to reduce the strength of France on the Continent and maintain a balance of power in favor of England. From then on, the professor concedes, the conduct of the League was totally uninspiring.
Hardly a person would have disagreed. Almost from the very inception of the League new plans for world organization were announced. In the so-called “disarmament” period of post-war capitalism, “world plans for peace” were abundant. They flourished until the present war. But what is highly indicative of the utter futility of this war is that such plans have been pushed precisely in the midst of the present conflict when the warring governments avoid any discussion of specific war aims.
There are literally hundreds of books devoted to this problem of the establishment of permanent peace by international organizations under capitalism. Professor Corbett’s book has this value: it discusses all the plans proffered by the ideological representatives of bourgeois life and thus presents a compendium of futility. For anyone interested in the burning problems of social reorganization, of socialism, this is a valuable handbook, summarizing the best thinking of the existing social order!
 
The Federal Idea and Internationalism
In the opinion of the reviewer, the important chapter of the book is the one entitled Ascendancy of the Federal Idea (page 42). Here we find summarized the most important projects for bourgeois world reorganization. (At this point it is important to bear in mind that federalism is not internationalization; the plans fostered by bourgeois theorists are, in truth, opposed to true internationalism.) In their order, Corbett outlines the main ideas of Briand’s plan for a United States of Europe; Civitas Dei, by Lionel Curtis; Union Now, by Clarence Strict; New World Order, by H.G. Wells; A Federation for Western Europe, by Ivor Jennings, and similar plans based on identical thought.
All the gentry mentioned, with the exception of H.G. Wells, think only in the terms of the continued existence of capitalism and their plans are based, not on a thoroughly internationalist concept, but on the national interests of whichever country they happen to represent. Thus the plans are regional or sectional, and their realization is based on the “power principle,” the right of domination by one power or set of powers over the rest of the world. For the socialist point of view, Corbett turns to the muddle-headed thinking of utopia-crazed Wells.
These plans, as already indicated, are predicated on the idea that union must be initiated by the Western democracies, which should employ arms to enforce peace! Or, international organization must begin on the European continent; or, it must be organized and led by the United States and Great Britain against the rest of the world!
Corbett proceeds to outline the concrete form of world organization through economic reorganization based on capitalist production, the formation of supranational police, supranational courts, supranational legislation and supra-national administration. All of this is to be based on the maintenance of the fundamental structure of the system of national states and private capitalism, howsoever amended.
 
How They Regard the Colonial World
The reactionary thinking of the sponsors of “post-war worlds” is nowhere so graphically revealed as in their common attitude toward the colonial world (page 177). Here again they prove the contentions of Marxian thought which charges that bourgeois society cannot act beyond its national and profit interests. The gentlemen referred to realize that the colonial problem is of the deepest significance, and by his devotion to the question, Professor Corbett reveals that, at least in so far as he is concerned, it is in many respects decisive.
And the solution? You can guess it immediately. It is not freedom and equality for the colonies. Quite the contrary, a new form of the exploitation is projected for the vast majority of the people of the earth. The new exploitation should be conducted in common by the “white world.” Thus, Corbett writes: “To share out the colonies as a step preliminary to federation or reconstituted and reformed league would involve dislocations as disastrous as they would be absurd. The alternative appears to be their assignment to the federation or league for administration” (page 178). Who will determine the share of each country in the wealth and exploitation of the colonial world? Naturally, the strongest of adherents to the new world organizations!
The key to understanding these men is the fact that in the entire book there is no discussion of the economic problems of imperialist capitalism and the class problems of this social order. It is not really funny that Professor Corbett chooses the writings of H.G. Wells as representative of socialist thought – a man whom not even the milkiest of socialists regard as an authority. All that Corbett has to say about the socialist solution to the problems of modern society is: “A spontaneous world revolution aiming not only at the abolition of privilege, class, monopoly, but at the suppression of political boundaries and the fusion of all peoples into one society is as inconceivable as the immediate perfection of civilization in every corner of the globe” (page 193). And why not? Perhaps the reason why the professor leaves a discussion of the socialist answer to the very last two pages of his book is because it enables him to avoid answering the question.
Immediately following the above, we are treated with a genuine piece of bourgeois thinking: “Even if it be admitted that socialism is a condition of peace, it does not follow that it is the sole condition” (page 194). It is, for our money, especially after reading Post-War Worlds.
 

ep. May Speaks Out (July 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Rep. May Speaks Out
(July 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 6, July 1942, pp. 163–164.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

As the days roll into weeks and the weeks into months, the front in World War II widen and increase; its conflicts grow more intense. Millions of soldiers are locked in battle. The war on seas and in the air involves ever greater forces. The employment and destruction of material goes on as if this decisive element of modern war is inexhaustible. All the nations of the world, massed millions of humanity, are crushed by the weight of the struggle for profit. And yet there is no end in sight. As a matter of fact, for Americans, the war has not yet truly begun!
In Europe, in Africa, in Asia, war has been going on for years. The economies of these areas, the peoples, the armed forces, have been living through a gruesome hell. But in the Western Hemisphere, in the United States especially, every thing is in preparation. Economy remains in a process of transformation. Production is still being altered for total war purposes. The armed forces have not been thoroughly mobilized or trained. In this part of the world, the people have merely been inconvenienced – the hardships are still to come.
But even before the war has really begun for Americans, the ranks of the bourgeois rulers of American society are split into many segments on two vital issues of the conflict: war aims and the length of the war. The truth is, it is no longer possible to excite the passions of the people merely by the hurling of shibboleths against the skies. To one degree or another, the masses want to know, not only what this war is about, but what are the aims of the powers. Will humanity experience another bloodbath merely to re-travel the roads of 1914–39? And how long will this thing go on? How long will it be necessary to tighten one’s belt, to alter one’s existence, to shed the blood of the people?
 
Absence of Unity
Even though the bourgeois rulers are more vitally concerned with the concrete problem of the total reorganization of the national economy, which they have not yet been able to achieve, they must take time out to answer the questions which really concern the people. The absence of unity among the various groupings in the bourgeoisie needs no additional proof other than their failure to agree on the multiple problems and measures before legislative and administrative bodies in Washington. It is not enough to explain this situation by saying: the politicians are playing politics as usual.
There is a more fundamental reason behind the inability of the Administration and the ruling class to accomplish quickly the steps necessary to put the United States on the high road of a total war footing and that is the lack of a unified concept of the war, its object and the measures required to win it.
At first the speech of Vice-President Wallace, which characterized the war as a struggle for the “common man’s century,” was received with a grim silence by the press and the leaders of the American bourgeoisie. This silence is now followed by abuse and ridicule. For there are an infinite number of purposes for which the bourgeoisie is fighting. Principally, they are fighting to destroy the power of a renascent German imperialism, the main threat to the world economic and political position of American capitalism. It is generally overlooked that the war is not so much a war between Germany and Great Britain-Soviet Union as it is a war between Germany and the United States. Roosevelt understands this and the most acute leaders of the financial and industrial ruling class understand it. They are not fighting to save the “democracies.” They are not fighting to save China, to insure a quart of milk for every man, woman and child in the world, to overthrow the power of monopoly capitalism, or greed, or barbarism, or half a hundred other purposes. Those who do not understand this, understand nothing about this war.
The most potent weapon in the struggle against fascism cannot be employed by the democratic imperialisms – the social and political weapons, the propagandistic weapons of the fight for a new social order of economic, political arid social freedom, of the struggle for socialism. Against socialism, the bourgeois rulers of all the countries in the world would unite to defend their common booty. The New Dealers, the professional “democrats,” the liberals notwithstanding, the war against the Axis is a military struggle, pure and simple. The conflict is a test of economic and military power – and nothing else!
 
May on the Length of War
But such a conflict may be endless and there is a growing suspicion among the people that this war may come to no definitive conclusion. Certainly, the Administration and the military leaders of the United States, as well as the United Nations as a whole, know that this war will be a long and bloody affair. Imagine, then, their consternation when Representative Andrew J. May, chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee, spoke out and said that the war might end “probably in 1942 and unquestionably in 1943.”
The occasion for this remark was to assure the people that there would be no need to draft the youths of 18 to 20 years and married men, that the job could be done with the present army and with the induction of the remaining single men on the draft rolls. May’s remarks brought angry comments from the Administration and the military staffs and experts. On what basis did he make his prediction?
As chairman of an important House committee, presumably in the know, May’s remarks could carry enormous weight. Did he have some information not generally known? At least he intimated as much. But this was extremely embarrassing to the war effort. The War and Navy Departments, busily at work trying to create a powerful military force for eventual mass employment to turn the tide of a war which is now unquestionably favorable to the Axis powers, were greatly chagrined by what was undoubtedly a blow against their efforts. The military experts were at a total loss of how to explain their predictions of a long and bloody conflict in which victory was by no means assured, when an “authority” forecast a quick end of the war.
A complete objective analysis of the state of the war can lead to no other opinion but that the representative was talking completely through his hat, spreading marmalade to create good feeling and false hopes among the people. Hanson Baldwin, the nation’s outstanding journalistic military observer, who predicts a war of at least seven years’ duration, wrote in the New York Times of July 9:
“Mr. May’s remarks about the possibility of a quick end to the war finds no basis in any generally known military, political, economic or psychological facts ... The present military situation justifies no assumption except that of a long, hard war – a war in which we shall not only have to become far ‘tougher’ than we now are in order to win, but also have to go ‘all-out’ to prevent defeat.”
Ernest K. Lindley, the able chief of the Washington bureau of Newsweek, wrote in the issue of July so: “Actually Mr. May’s prognostication has no discoverable sanction among the well-informed.”
These two commentators forecast a long war. Both assert that the military authorities will have to take all available manpower, married and single, young and old. The global war will be a great devourer of human material. It will be an even greater devourer of material. It is becoming clearer every day, even for those who do not wish to see, that all of American industry and agriculture will be chained to the war, producing almost exclusively goods for the multiple fronts. And American manpower will be shipped to all the corners of the earth before this war is won.
The American masses are not yet prepared for this kind of war. They are not ideologically prepared for a long, destructive conflict. That is why the Administration is so disturbed. It still lacks unified support, a common aim, the necessary will. The fundamental reason for this is that twenty-five years after World War I they are re-fighting the same battles, the same basic forces, for the same basic imperialist goals!
 

dell Waller (July 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Odell Waller
(July 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 6, July 1942, pp. 164–166.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Odell Waller is dead. His life was taken in an electric chair to which he was sentenced by a poll tax jury in the state of Virginia. By this act the symbol of our democracy was raised a little higher.
The case of the dead sharecropper became a nation-wide issue. For more than two years, chiefly through the efforts of the Workers Defense League, Waller was kept alive. Appeals to the higher courts were unavailing. The Supreme Court, now regarded as a New Deal judiciary, or as a “great liberal institution,” refused to consider the case on technical grounds, i.e., on the grounds Of an error by the trial attorney!
The case itself is shrouded in confusion. Odell Waller, a poor Negro sharecropper, admitted that he shot and killed his white planter-boss, Oscar Davis, in an argument over their respective shares of his tobacco crop. It was claimed by the defense that Waller interpreted a movement of Davis’ hand toward his hip pocket as reaching for a gun and that he shot first. It seems that the case was one of first degree murder. That, at least, was the position taken by the prosecution and the rulers of the state of Virginia.
And so, once again, a Negro was tried by a jury of “his peers,” this time consisting of ten white farmers, one white business man and one white carpenter, in a state where the Negro suffers inequality and the decades-old prejudice of the South. The verdict of the jury could have been foretold.
We have made a rough citation of the legal aspects of the case merely to introduce the subject because we do not believe that this case could or should have been decided on “legal” grounds. The case of Odell Waller was one of tremendous social import, for it again sharply posed the position of the Negro in American society and the reactionary forces which keep alive the powerful racial prejudice which exists and is artificially nurtured in this country.
The Waller case called attention to the condition of semi-peonage which befalls so large a section of the Negro people in the Southern and “border” states and which is also the lot of a large number of white farmers. The condition of servitude under which these people live is not far removed from the slavery of the pre-Civil War days. Negroes and poor whites work land for their bosses and obtain a share of the products of their long and arduous toil. More often than not, the landlord decides the cropper’s share and cheats him in a hundred different ways. The glutted landlords idly await the fruits of the toil of the sharecropper. The fact that there are white sharecroppers does not make this condition of semi-peonage any more palatable. It merely goes to show that the landlords and profiteers are not greatly concerned with how and from whom they profit.
 
The Plight of the Sharecropper
Sharecroppers are the lowest paid of American toilers. They have few rights and little or no means of fighting for democratic, economic and social rights. Their lives are completely brutalized by the extreme poverty under which they live. The landlord, the vigilante and the gun rule the cropper areas. The Negro, especially, must fight, in the most literal sense, for his very existence. Behind the landlords stand the petty officials, the armed deputies, the legal powers and the governing officials. Thus, all the cards are stacked against the poorest of those who work the land in order to live.
If in the Waller case it is true that Davis himself was a tenant farmer who employed this poor sharecropper, it does not help the case of the Southern Bourbons. It only emphasizes the demoralizing and degenerating effects of the sharecropping system. In this case, one tenant farmer parcels out the land he works on to another sharecropper and a fight ensues over their collective meager rations. Thus, the vicious system of exploitation wends its way.
Governor Colgate W. Darden, Jr., was within his power to change the verdict of the jury. But after several reprieves and following what he called a complete examination of the facts of the trial, Darden refused to act in any way which might have saved Waller’s life. It was reported that the President had sent a personal message to the governor – but the content of the message is unknown. The announcement, however, is intended to show that Roosevelt and his Administration cannot be held responsible for the action of a governor acting under the doctrine of states’ rights.
There are however, some interesting sidelights to the case and these concern the efforts of the Workers Defense League and a committee of leading Negroes to see the President and other Administration officials for the purpose of obtaining their intervention in the case. The President could not be seen! Vice-President Wallace, the ideological champion of New Dealism and the advocate of a “new world for the common man,” the genuine believer in the “Four Freedoms,” fled from the committee in a highly agitated and embarrassed manner. Eleanor Roosevelt, who sought thrice to get the President’s ear, finally acknowledged defeat.
What powers lay behind this White House drama? It is obvious that the Southern bloc had warned Roosevelt to keep hands off the case of Odell Waller! And the White House conceded to the demand! The reasons are plain to see. Roosevelt governs on the basis of a political fusion with the most reactionary, semi-fascist elements in the country. The prosecution of the war and the success of the war economy, the retention of some of the achievements of the New Deal (those not already violated and abolished by congressional actions) rest, in a large measure, upon support of these elements. Rather than risk a head-on collision with these forces, the Administration plays the game. If only for this reason, it is not decisively important how the President personally feels about the Negro question. For the same reason, it is not too significant that the New Dealers, and a large part of the Administration, would like to overcome Jim Crow and general discrimination, not only against the Negro, but against all other racial and national minorities, in industry, in the Army and Navy, and in all other aspects of American social and political life. They are part of an economic and political system which gives rise to the existence of these conditions, and since they live and act within the orbit of this system, since their own political existence, power and actions are the result of the worst kind of compromise between bourgeois reformism and reaction, one cannot expect them to act in any way which violates their genesis – small matters notwithstanding.
 
Southern Rulers Dominant
The adamant position taken by the Southern bloc is worth investigating. Aside from the fact that they are, as a group, the most backward, ignorant and feudal-minded reactionaries in the country, the fundamental explanation for their conduct lies in the field of economics. By this remark we do not overlook the environmental conditioning of decades, the effects of the system of slavery, ended only seventy-five years ago. We are not unaware of how the post-Civil War generations have been educated in the Southern schools or by their immediate family ties, of how the anti-Negro and general race, national and religious prejudices have become an integral segment of the cultural growth in the Southern states. These prejudices, spread beyond the borders of the South to the entire country, are by and large maintained, artificially and otherwise, by the practices of the entire ruling economic class, particularly in the South.
The power of the Southern landlords, industrialists, bankers and professionals, rests upon low wages, intense exploitation, poor housing, sub-standard foods, and these are maintained by keeping the poor, the worker, the small farmer, the tenant and sharecropper, white and black, in a state of subjection in which race prejudice is the strongest single factor of division. Anything which threatens the economic, social and political rule of the Southern Bourbons is met with an automatic unity on their part that is well-nigh unshakable in the absence of a united opposition. But their greatest strength lies in the halls of Congress, where every progressive measure is met with their censorship or rejection. Their political power, based upon the existing electoral system, is far in excess of their real strength in the country.
Only one party rules in the South – the Democratic Party. Its representatives have a veritable life tenure in Congress and in the Senate. In the legislative halls, where seniority rights prevail, the Southerners are chairmen of almost all of the leading committees. They can make or break legislation. And they do! That is why no lynching bill and no anti-poll-tax bill have as yet been put to a vote. But that is also the reason why the most reactionary legislation can pass in the congressional halls,
*
The Waller case is important because it has brought to a head a situation which nails to a cross the infamy of the Southern statesmen. But not only the Southerners. Where were the Northern statesmen, the Western statesmen, the great Administration leaders? Where were the propagandists of the “people’s war,” the believers in the “common man,” the believers in the “Four Freedoms”? All of them acknowledged defeat! They confessed their impotency in the face of rabid reaction. More than that, they confessed their utter bankruptcy!
That is why A. Philip Randolph said, after vainly trying to get an audience with Roosevelt: “The President and the government have failed us.”
But listen for a moment to those responsible for the execution of Waller. Listen to the august governor o£ the state of Virginia fulminating against those who sought to save Waller’s life: “I regard such propaganda campaigns as extremely detrimental to the public interests. The only possible effect is to sow racial discord at a critical time when every loyal citizen should strive to promote unity.”
That is the way of these gentlemen. To come to the defense of a poor sharecropper, to oppose discrimination and Jim Crow is to “sow racial discord.” No, it is not those who enforce this barbaric system in the South who sow racial discord, it is those who fight against it! Adding insult to injury, the governor wraps himself in the flag and behind the war by denouncing the objectors because this is “a critical time when every loyal citizen should strive to promote unity!”
The Norfolk, Va., Ledger-Dispatch, in an editorial of July 1st, ecstatically says: “To Governor Darden for having seen clearly and acted fearlessly – all honor!”
The Danville, Va., Bee accused those who sought clemency for Waller of having constituted “another form of mob law,” and defends the orderly processes of law! The movement in defense of Waller was characterized by this same newspaper as a “sociological movement” – perish the thought!
In the midst of the agitation around the Waller case, the ignorant Representative Rankin of Mississippi kept up a running barrage against those who “desire to defile the purity of the white race,” especially in the South (!), by accepting unmarked containers of Negro blood for the armed forces. He too, did it in the name of avoiding racial discord! He did it in the name of Americanism and in the interest of the war against Hitler!
If one examines the professions and business of these gentlemen who compose the Southern, ruling class, he will find that well-defined economic interests dominate their actions. In the South you find capitalism in the raw. Class relations are so fixed that there is no requirement yet for the “niceties” of capitalist rule in the North. But this condition is changing there with the growing might of labor and it is this which strikes fear in the hearts of the Bourbons – fear lest their barbarous economic rule will be threatened! That is why it was necessary for them to take Waller’s life – to demonstrate their power, their readiness to fight any encroachment upon their “rights.” The execution of Waller was a demonstration by the Southern ruling class.
 

fter Pearl Harbor (December 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
After Pearl Harbor
(December 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 11, December 1942, pp. 323–327.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

One year has passed since the surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and America’s military participation in the Second World War. Theretofore, the nation was a non-belligerent supporter of Great Britain and her allies; today all the resources of the country, material and physical, are mobilized for the prosecution of the war.
There is a vast difference in the preparations of the country prior to entrance in the present war and 1917. Then it was necessary to build an army and to organize industry for war production simultaneously with and after the declaration of war. Thus, it was only at the Armistice that the country was fully mobilized to wage battle. The greater part of the time was spent in preparation.
On December 8, 1941, the Administration and its War and Navy Departments had two years’ experience under its collective belt – the experience of Britain and her allies. But more important than that, American industry had been largely converted to the production of war materials, or was prepared for a total transformation. In addition, the Roosevelt Administration was politically prepared for participation in the war and had in a measure readied the entire country for eventual entry. From the time that the President made his “quarantine the aggressor” speech until Pearl Harbor, it was a foregone conclusion that the United States could not stay out of the war. The only question that remained was the date and manner of such entrance.
When Roosevelt proclaimed that it was the task of American industry to act as the “arsenal of democracy,” he did two things: first, he provided the material basis for a continuation of the war by the Allies, and second, he provided the basis for an enormous extension of the productive capacity of American industry to a point where it could conveniently and quickly take on the added responsibility of producing for American armed forces. A great loss of time was therefore avoided, since the most important period of experimentation was carried through in the two years during which American industry produced for Great Britain, France, China, et al. Moreover, these experimentations carried on in the field of production were largely paid for by these nations. Thus, experience in the utilization of new materials and new methods of production were acquired almost without any cost to American financiers and industrialists.
Long before war became a reality for Americans, Roosevelt had successfully campaigned for a universal registration and conscription of manpower. Many millions were made available for military service. At the time of the declaration of war, the Army had almost two million trained and partially trained and equipped soldiers ready for battle. In addition, the other services were greatly expanded and strengthened, especially in the development of an enormous air force. No one really knows how large these forces will become. Estimates of the authorities range anywhere from seven and a half to fifteen million. Naturally, this question is entirely dependent on the fortunes of war on the numerous fronts; yet without a thorough knowledge of its needs, the Administration has an over-all armed force of more than six millions, twice as many as were employed in the First World War. This single fact has already had a sharp effect upon economic and social developments in the nation. The situation will be accentuated by the end of 1943, when an additional two to three million men will have been inducted.
 
What the Bourgeoisie Foresaw
The fundamental basis for the war preparations made by the American bourgeoisie was its recognition that the future of its rule was entirely dependent upon a victory of the United Nations, more properly, upon a defeat of Germany. It should be abundantly clear, and it was pointed out by Marxists long ago, that the fundamental antagonism between Germany, riding the crest of victory in Europe, and the United States, seeking to solidify its predominant world position, must lead to armed conflict.
The war has amply demonstrated the structural weaknesses of a declining Great Britain and its empire. The first shots in the war proved that while she could and would put up a magnificent defense of her particular world position, in the larger and fundamental sense she had lost the war before it began. British investors in Latin America, the United States and in the Far East have suffered enormous losses. The loss of important territories has materially affected London. Losses in the war, of men and material, and the heavy demands of the conflict which require England to defend an empire stretching around the globe have already had a disastrous effect upon her economic and political position in the world. Most important of all, she had lost her dominant place in the world market, a situation which can be repaired only by a future struggle against the United States.
But for the British Empire it was either complete annihilation at the hands of the Axis, or a bad bargain with a powerful ally. While Britain’s bourgeois leaders know there is nothing to be gained from the other warring camp except abject surrender, they still hope that the fortunes of war will permit her to circumvent the gains already made by her American “friends” and prevent a further diminution of her colonies, her investments, her material resources, in a word, regain her pre-war position.
Irrespective of the outlook of the British ruling class, the American bourgeoisie has never been concerned with how to cope with that country. But the power of a renascent German imperialism was an entirely different story. On the basis of a conquered Europe and a defeated England, Germany would have become a most formidable foe, and the outcome of a struggle with her would have been in great doubt. It became an urgent necessity for American capitalism to enter this war to insure the defeat of the Third Reich.
 
The Role of the Pacific War
The war with Japan, important as it is, remains secondary. The American bourgeoisie understands this perfectly and will brook no departure from its present strategy of concentrating the main fire in the European theater of the war. A victory over Germany would guarantee an eventual victory over Japan, no matter how difficult that struggle might be. But the concentration of the war effort against Japan might well exhaust the American war machine to the point where victory over Germany would become impossible. The tactics in the Pacific and the Far East therefore are calculated as delaying actions to keep Japan from further expanding and exploiting its present gains until such a time as the full force of the United Nations can be directed against her. This general strategy has always been implicit in the conduct of the warring staffs of the two leading members of the United Nations, Great Britain and the United States.
The Allies suffered enormous defeats in the initial stages of the war with Dai Nippon. In steady sequence they lost out in Indo-China and Thailand. They lost Malaya and that “impregnable” fortress, Singapore. They lost Burma and suffered the dosing of the Burma Road. They lost the Netherlands East Indies and a number of Pacific islands, including the Philippines. Hawaii, Alaska and Australia were threatened and it was even believed at.one time that the Japanese might chance an invasion of the Pacific Coast. No matter how rapidly and far the Japanese advanced, the strategists of the Allies would not change their fundamental outlook.
As we look over the multiple fronts of the greatest war in history we are struck by its magnitude in the employment of men and material, by the extreme distances traversed by the military machines and by the number of countries ravaged in the seeming endlessness of the whole senseless and destructive venture. When will this bloody holocaust end? This is the question which everyone asks. Yet there is nothing on the horizon to warrant any justification in believing that this war can be brought to a close in any foreseeable future.
It is true that the involvement of the United States as a military factor in the war has greatly strengthened the Allied camp. It has brought to its side many millions of soldiers, sailors and airmen. The growth of production on the Allied side is giving it a material preponderance which it had only in a potential sense when the war began. But the war will not be brought to an end in a substantially shorter time. No one can foretell its length, and the judicious leaders of the warring countries evade giving any reply to this question.
The invasion of North Africa and the rout of General Rommell’s Afrika Korps have strengthened Allied arms, improved the Allied position in the Mediterranean Sea and prepared the basis for a possible invasion of Europe from the South. But the victory in North Africa only presages a more intensified stage of the war, the preparations on all sides for spring offensives. The outcome of the offensives of 1943, whether it will be recognizable or not, may determine the length of the war, and it may point to the eventual victors. But whatever the result of this intensified warfare, it will unquestionably be followed by a long period of warfare by attrition. The principal reason for this lies in the inability of the United Nations to fight any but a purely military war against the Axis.
 
Prospects in Europe
The continuation of the war will only add to the terrible misery of the suffering millions in many countries. Its intensification will bring the war to new areas and new peoples, as it has already done in North Africa. Even without this prospect, large areas have already been devastated. Casualties in soldiers and civilians have run into millions. Many more millions are starving and homeless; they are without adequate clothing and housing. Yet, there is literally nothing they can long forward to except the continuation and intensification of the war, a worsening of their already low material level of existence.
For Europe, the war is well in its fourth year. Hitler’s armies dominate the whole Continent. On the basis of this domination and enslavement of Europe, his regime has been able to retain itself in power and carry on the war. All the material resources of this great area, its industry and agriculture, its manpower and the many points at which an invasion of the Continent is possible are at the disposal and under the control of the Gestapo and the German general staff.
In order to realize the benefits of this control over Europe, Hitler is compelled to enforce his demands at the point of the sword, to keep an eternal vigilance over the masses of workers and peasants lest the whole enterprise blow up in his face. He has had no trouble with big capitalists in the occupied countries. They reconciled themselves to his victories and made admirable adjustments, continuing to make profit even though the real orders and directives come from Berlin. But that is of little concern, say the European bourgeoisie, so long as we make a profit, and better a little profit with Hitler than no profit without him. Hitler at any rate has solved their labor problem; they do not have to dicker with the workers, they do not have to contend with the trade unions: the Gestapo has solved this little problem with the gun and the concentration camp.
The millions of peoples in the occupied countries, however, have never reconciled themselves to German rule. There are daily reports of clashes between the authorities and the workers or other sections of the population. These clashes take place in the shops, in the food lines, in rural communities. The wonder is not that the European masses have failed to revolt long ago, it is that despite the brutal regimes of German fascism, despite the stringent controls of a highly experienced and organized police regime, despite the betrayals of these people by their former governments, their political parties and their labor leaders, they are fighting desperately against their new oppressors.
 
The Rise of Nationalist Movements
What we see in Europe is a reawakening of the struggle for national liberation in the conquered countries. Thus, a phenomenon which appeared historically outlived at the close of the First World War has been replaced by the unforeseen developments in the years since the outbreak of the Second World War. These movements, as they seek to free their countries from the yoke of Nazi rule, are fighting for national independence and they involve all classes, including sections of national bourgeoisies. Despite their illegality, for they are entirely underground, and despite the absence of clarity, they are the only movements which contain inherent qualities of developing into a mass revolt against one camp of the war, at least in its first stages. The nationalist movements of liberation and independence are progressive movements under the given world conditions and out of them the organization and struggle for socialism and a United States of Socialist Europe can arise. Certainly the European masses, while they seek their liberation from Hitler, are not seeking to re-establish the pre-war status quo, the bankrupt régimes of the so-called “free” governments of incompetents who, when they had the power, were utterly impotent to solve a single one of the problems which faced them or their peoples.
The strategists of the United Nations would like to utilize these movements to bring a speedy end to the war. They are aware too, that the German masses are becoming war-weary, are losing their confidence in the invincibility of the Nazi regime and German arms and that a large residue of the socialist working class only awaits a more favorable conjuncture in the war to make their hatred of fascism felt in concrete ways. But they are in holy fear of these mass movements because they may take on a social character and bring about the real liberation of Europe. They fear these movements because their revolts may develop from anti-Hitler to anti-capitalist actions. While vocal support is given to the nationalist movements of the people, the leaders of the United Nations prepare post-war governments which, while non-fascist, are nevertheless reactionary.
 
Allied Policy in the Far East
We have already had a sample of the ideological war in the Far East. When the fight against Germany was completely defensive, when it was necessary to win the undivided support of a people unenthusiastic about the war, intensely suspicious of their governments, or even opposed to the war, it was necessary for Roosevelt and Churchill to lay heavy stress on the ideological war against Hitler, to emphasize that the struggle of the United Nations was a struggle for the freedom of all the peoples of the world. But when the first test of the Atlantic Charter came in the Far East, the Indian masses, for example, were informed that the Four Freedoms had no application to them. It also had no application to Burma, Malaya and the Dutch East Indies. For the right to free speech, the right to free organization, the right of national independence, the right to establish one’s own government, would mean the end of the colonial empires of all countries, especially those which make up the United Nations.
Obviously this is not what was meant by the Atlantic Charter. The Atlantic Charter applies expressly to Europe, “to the white world,” as Lin Yutang has expressed it, referring to the imperialist powers. When representatives of the Pacific countries asked for a Pacific Charter they were told by the President that, in his opinion, it was unnecessary because the Atlantic Charter applied to them also. If it has any application to Asia, everything that has happened since the war broke out there belies that claim. The colonial peoples are fully cognizant that the war in Asia is merely the struggle between two powers for control of the great resources of their country and for the right to exploit them. Their vain hopes that a victory of the United Nations would free them have vanished and given rise to mixed feelings of doubt and anger. They realize that they have again been used against themselves, for the pretentious ideological war of the Allies, the much heralded war for “freedom and democracy,” has now settled down to its own level of a military struggle between imperialist rivals.
 
The Year at Home
The transformation of America’s rôle from the “arsenal of democracy” to belligerency has finally brought the real war home to Americans. One year has passed and already the war has been sharply felt by the people. American economy has been on a war basis for some time; now the transformation from peacetime production is complete.
The armed forces have already been engaged on several fronts. Their size has been greatly increased and now numbers over six million for the Army, Navy and Air Force. The nation-wide draft, drawing from a pool of many millions, will take an additional three millions in 1943. Industry is operating at full blast and there is a growing shortage of workers. The same situation obtains in agriculture. Everywhere a shortage of manpower manifests itself and results in a greater state control over the movements and activities of the people. Job freezing has already been inaugurated in certain areas of the country and it threatens to become a national phenomenon.
The New Deal has been partially dead for a long time; the WPA was buried with formal rites by presidential action. This was the final official notification to indicate that the War Deal cannot be a half-hearted effect. As a result of this economic transformation great social changes have taken place. The national market has greatly diminished since the government has become the main receiver of goods produced. A special kind of “planned economy” exists, i.e., production is planned and organized by the war administration on the basis of its military needs. As the arsenal for the United Nations, industry in this country is living through another technical revolution and has reached unprecedented heights of production. The most immediate effect of this intense economic activity has been the virtual liquidation of unemployment.
The great rise in employment has resulted in an enormous growth of the national income among all classes. But this very growth in the national income produced a sharp contradiction in economy. The disparity in the production of war and consumers’ goods lays the basis for an inflationary spiral which threatens to grow beyond control. Despite the many measures of the Administration to control the inherent “imbalance” of the war economy, it continues to pursue its logical way. Price controls, rationing and priorities have not been effective means to curb the widening contradictions created by the demands of the war. This is especially true since the organization of these controls have been essentially directed against the workers, that is, the mass of the people.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the war economy has been achieved under the complete domination of the monopolist-imperialist big business men. They control production, they issue contracts, they set the percentage of profits in war contracts. The Roosevelt Administration is completely dependent upon big business to carry through the economic part of the war effort. Through the dollar-a-year men they have a death-like grip on the war economy. Moreover, the needs of the war make it inevitable that the powers of big business are strengthened and by its control over the production program its enrichment is insured.
The enormous costs of the war are already placed on the back of the American people. A heavy taxation program, rationing of consumer goods, destruction in the quality of existing goods, rising prices, completely out of line with wages earned, long hours of toil under deteriorating conditions of employment, are taking a heavy toll of the masses.
 
Concretizing the War Economy
Concretely, what the continuation of the war will mean at home can be ascertained from the following facts: According to the United States News, the war cost, which is currently $80,000,000,000 a year, will, beginning with the new fiscal year (July 1, 1943), rise to $100,000,000,000 out of a total national income now estimated to reach $135,000,000,000. From December 1941 to the end of the next fiscal year, July 1944, the cost of the war, at the present increasing rate of expenditures, will reach the astronomical total of $200,000,000,000. In order to realize its significance, this figure should be compared to the $26,000,000,000 spent from 1917 to 1919 in the First World War.
It can be readily seen that forthcoming expenditures will leave only a fourth of the total national income for the civilian population. Increased taxation to meet these costs, in addition to the existent heavy tax program, will undoubtedly be proposed by the Administration.
One must add to this financial burden the fact that the war will eat up two-thirds of the national economic effort. In one year it will absorb a hundred billion dollars’ worth of fuel oil, gasoline, food, clothing, metal, transport, rubber and kindred indispensable materials formerly used up by the people.
In addition to the precipitate decline in the production of consumer goods, inventories will be quickly absorbed. The net effect will be that the masses will have to divide what is directly left over from war production, with no further possibility of looking toward piled-up goods to reinforce then-needs. Widespread rationing must and will follow. Whereas the rationing of goods is as yet confined to several major products, rationing in the coming year will spread over many vital commodities necessary to the well-being of the population. There will be a more stringent control over all types of fuel and a reduction in the consumer’s share of gasoline and fuel oil. Drastic cuts in meat allowances are scheduled with the latest estimate suggesting that less than two pounds of meat per person will be allocated. Moreover, the trend will be downward. Rationing will take place with milk, butter arid canned goods.
In contrast to the enrichment of American financiers and industrialists, there is the steady but unmistakable destruction of small business and the middle class. Thousands of small businesses have been liquidated. The intellectual and professional groups are faced with similar prospects of elimination and ruination. But above all, it is the working class which carries the brunt of the war. In addition to the fact that it alone makes the war effort possible, high prices, the absence of indispensable goods, worsening conditions of labor, it is faced with the prospect of a reduction of its living standards, forecast by Leon Henderson, to reach the depth of the crisis in 1932. Thus, within one year, the pattern of American development, except in degree, approximates the course of development in other warring countries.
 
Big Business Threatens Labor
The American bourgeoisie, taking advantage of the war and a weakening of the organized strength of the labor movement, made possible by the abject surrender of its labor leaders, has chosen this occasion to open up an offensive against the workers designed to destroy their organizations, their wage levels and their working conditions. Through the kept press and with the aid of the political reactionaries in both parties, the National Association of Manufacturers and the United States Chamber of Commerce have mobilized their enormous resources to carry through their fight. Using the no-strike agreement imposed upon the labor movement, they have kept up a steady barrage against the workers and their unions. The labor-management committees have been employed for the same purpose.
The reactionary congressional leaders will seek to offset the mounting dissatisfaction of the people by turning the congressional halls into a meeting ground for organizing reaction against labor. Everything that is wrong with the war effort, i.e., the existence of capitalism, will be blamed on the union movement with its ten million members. The new Congress has not met but already the signs are unmistakable as to the intentions of these lackeys of big business. They are seeking two immediate things: control over the trade unions by control of their finances, and legislative cancellation of the forty-hour week. The passage of two such measures will lead to a witchhunt within the unions, the aim of which will be to destroy the effectiveness of organized labor. Powerful forces, led by the large daily newspapers, stand ready to unloose one of the most thoroughly organized anti-labor campaigns ever known.
The workers are fighting back in the form of a rank and file revolt. Where they cannot force their leaders to take action against the reactionary drive of the bosses, they act without them. The workers were never greatly enthusiastic about the war. But they accepted a fait accompli and were prepared to do “their share.” They do not, however, propose to allow the monopoly capitalists to use the war as a lever to destroy the labor movement and the gains won by it after years of long and difficult struggle.
The recent elections, which demonstrated this sharp right turn in bourgeois politics and a general resurgence of the reactionary forces of the nation, was accompanied by an almost total distrust and disinterest on the part of the working class. Although the desire of the workers for independent political action has again been stifled by their misleaders, they demonstrated their genuine feelings by refusing to participate in an election campaign to choose one or another of the reactionary candidates of the bourgeois parties.
Thus, in two important respects, economic and political, the American workers exhibit great unrest and a desire to march in an independent class direction. This will have important implications for the future of the American union and political movement of the workers. For the last word has not been said in the increasing conflict of the two main classes in American society.
 
Collapse of the “Free World”
The main offensives of the Allies are not yet in full motion, but the first casualty – for those who took the ideas, speeches and writing of the liberals seriously – is Vice-President Henry A. Wallace’s Century of the Common Man. No one doubts the sincerity of this liberal and mystic. But we pointed out, at the time Wallace was making his perorations about this war being fought to guarantee every man, women and child of this world a quart or a pint of milk every day, that his speeches were errant nonsense, that the real war had nothing to do with Wallace’s idealism, and that before long it would become clearly evident to every man, woman and child that even a modest quart or pint of milk was too much for them to expect from imperialist capitalism.
On almost every front, Wallace and his reformist Board of Economic Warfare face a fight for life. While he and his organization exist for the purpose of preparing plans for postwar reconstruction, the real powers in the war administration carry on an incessant campaign against the “expensive experiments” of this “visionary.” Thus, in South America, where hard-fisted American financiers and industrialists are seeking to organize production with what amounts to slave labor, Wallace and the BEW have to wage permanent warfare to prevent the complete ruination of the “Good Neighbor” policy. In the Far East, in Europe and in South Africa this body meets the cry of “military exigency” which frustrates every liberal plan that its representatives seek to enforce under the illusion that they are the ideological arm of the United Nations. Disillusionment sets in everywhere because the war itself has nothing in common with the aims of the BEW, and the real directors of the war will not countenance such liberal nonsense.
The war administrations, the military staffs, the Prince Ottos and the Admiral Darlans, these are the real figures in the war. Freedom and democracy mean exactly what Lin Yu-tang said it appeared to mean: freedom and democracy for the Occidental powers (read: freedom and democracy for the ruling classes in these countries). Pearl Buck, whose long residence in China has made her a champion of the independence of the colonial peoples, is neither a Marxian socialist, nor anti-capitalist, but she has already publicly declared, in vigorous speeches and articles, that the “war for freedom has already been lost” and that a third war for freedom will have to be fought.
The “awakening” of such liberals to the real state of the war merely reflects in modified form a situation that is far worse than appears on the surface and one which we indicated in the foregoing.
Nor is there a single force associated with the warring governments, the Soviet Union included, which offers the slightest hope that this war may, after all, turn out differently from the last. Stalin’s speech on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the October Revolution made little or no reference to the greatest event in modern history. The socialist aspirations of the Russian masses and the new Soviet state were little if at all mentioned. His speech, in the manner of a bourgeois diplomat, was merely an assurance that the proper revenge would be taken upon- Germany and that his Russia, the Russia of the counter-revolution, would join its British and American allies to restore pre-war Europe and the world, upon the defeat of Hitler. There is absolutely nothing to distinguish the Soviet Union from Great Britain or the United States. Only the most rigid reactionaries, the most ignorant and shortsighted of the bourgeoisie, still retain fears of Stalin and the Soviet Union. For this they are regularly chided by the “more far-sighted leaders of finance and industry” and the New York Times, which recognizes counter-revolution when faced with it.
On the other side of the coin we have tendencies within the workers’ political movement which are completely disoriented by false theoretical and political concepts, whose ideas are extremely harmful to the cause of international socialism. The most blatant violator of the best interests of the revolutionary socialist movement is the Cannonite group, which at its last convention adopted a resolution stating: “The war of the Soviet Union is our war, the war of the workers everywhere .... Only traitors to the working class can deny support to the workers’ state in its war against imperialism ...” The vigorous language employed in this resolution is merely subterfuge to hide the politically impermissible and factually false separation made between the Soviet Union and its allies. To these people the Russian front has no relationship to the war on the other fronts; the alliance of Stalinist Russia with Great Britain and the United States is a matter of convenience arising from the needs of the “defense of the Soviet Union” having no real significance, and finally, the Stalinist regime is an abstraction when measured against the “reality of the workers’ state.” Obviously, when compared to this tendency, the vision of the New York Times is crystal-clear.
 
Talk of Reconstruction
The new wave of confidence in victory by the United Nations has already led to a great deal of discussion about postwar reconstruction, and here again the dispute between the war leaders and the reformists will become extremely sharp. The pro-capitalist reformists are staking everything on a postwar international New Deal administered by the United Nations as a means of fortifying their military victory and bringing about a measure of economic revival through a “benevolent” exploitation of the peoples of the world.
The Beveridge Plan in England and the unpublished but oft-referred-to super-Beveridge Plan, which Roosevelt is said to have ready, proceed on what they consider to be an acknowledged fact: that capitalism cannot provide for the people and has outlived its progressive historical function. These plans are therefore predicated upon reforming capitalism by a world system of social insurance but retaining the basic features of capitalism, the private ownership of the means of production, i.e., the profit system.
We shall return to this subject in the immediate future.
 

ms: Return of a Scoundrel (December 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Sam Adams
Miscellany
Return of a Scoundrel
(December 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 11, December 1942, pp. 345–346.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

The degeneration of the Communist Party is not a new phenomenon and reports of its varied conduct are often passed by without comment because it is no longer strange or evidence of a tendency. For the counterrevolutionary degeneration of the American Stalinist party is complete. In its transformation it has merely followed the pattern laid down by its tutor, the Russian Stalinist party. Yet from time to time something happens which does not escape the eye, but is cause for comment.
In scanning the columns of the Daily Worker of November 29, we ran across an interview between Seymour Stedman and a Stalinist hack writer, one Milton Howard. The report stated that Seymour Stedman, “running mate of Debs,” joined the Communist Party of America. Howard proceeds to write a running account of his interview with Stedman, which reads like a tabloid society reporter spreading his good fortune upon meeting some nonentity from the social register in the lavatory of a Fifty-second Street night club.
For the uninitiate, the story may or may not have significance, for Seymour Stedman has practically disappeared from the labor movement. He has been in retirement for a number of years and a whole new generation of revolutionary socialists and militant trade unionists have never even heard of his name. But Seymour Stedman is well known to the older generation of revolutionary socialists, the early communists, the reformist socialists, the right wing trade unionists, and a host of others, not the least being the state’s attorney’s offices in Chicago and Detroit and the old officials of the Department of Justice.
 
The New Stedman
Howard’s interview refers to Stedman as Debs’ co-worker, a founder of the Socialist Party and vice-presidential candidate on the Debs ticket in 1920. The opening paragraphs of Howard’s sophomoric panegyric read as follows:
A small, thinnish man, vigorously wielding an ever-present cigar (!), whose very much alive light-blue eyes make it hard for you to realize that he is almost seventy-five years old –
Whose talk is nimble, alert and filled with irrepressible ardor for human liberty.
Howard quotes this man who was “vigorously wielding an ever-present cigar”:
Tell them that I am a Communist Party member today. Tell them that this gives me joy, and the only regret I have, the thing that really hurts, is that I cannot actually get into the fight. (Emphasis in original – S.A.)
The rest of the story is a report of Stedman’s great admiration for the “keen reasoner,” Earl Browder, his love of the Communist Party, how he was converted, and his record in the old Socialist Party in Chicago. But this is only part of the story. We propose to tell the rest of it, and it is the story of a reactionary social reformist whose chief enemy was and is the revolutionary party and the struggle for socialism. It is the story of a man who was a social patriot all his life, an enemy of the Russian Revolution and the Soviet state of Lenin and Trotsky, a court prosecutor of the left wing during the Palmer raids and finally an official of a small neighborhood bank in Chicago, where he was indicted on a charge of malpractice.
 
... And the Old
The writer very well remembers the years 1917–20 even though he was only a young lad then. Brought up in a socialist home, resident in the famous socialist 15th Ward on Chicago’s Northwest Side, we remember attendance at many election campaigns and celebration meetings of the Socialist Party, held in the Old Style Inn and Wicker Park Hall. The name of Seymour Stedman was then the most popular of all the socialist leaders in Chicago and he was the party’s outstanding spokesman. But the writer remembers too that when the split with the left wing came, Stedman was absent from the left wing meetings and celebrations of the Russian Revolution. He also recalls, though he did not understand it then, the debate between Stedman, speaking for the right wing, and Dennis Batt, representing the Michigan left wing. The strongest memory of that meeting, gained from a seat on the stairs of the podium, is Stedman’s anger throughout the discussion, and the laughs of the audience at his discomfort from the debate. For Stedman was violently against the Russian Revolution and the proletarian state.
At the time of the left wing split in the post-war period, he was its most vicious opponent, never missing the opportunity to call upon the aid of the police in those political struggles, or going to the bourgeois courts for legal redress against the “communists.” There are two famous events in the struggle between the right and left wing and in both of these Stedman played a leading, though ignominious rôle.
On the morning of August 30, 1919, the Socialist Party emergency convention was scheduled to meet. There the issue between the revolutionaries and the right-wing leadership was to be resolved. It was apparent even before the convention that the left wing would have a majority and so the right wing, under the leadership of Adolph Germer, Julius Gerber and Seymour Stedman, called upon the police to insure their control of the party. The scene on the morning of the convention opening is vividly described by William Brass Lloyd in his Convention Impressions, published in The Class Struggle of November 1919:
... As I came into the building where the Socialist Party emergency convention was to be held, I met a crowd of delegates coming down from the convention hall. They were the left wing delegates thrown out of the hall by the police acting under order of Adolph Germer and Gerber ... No delegate could get into the convention hall on credentials signed by his state officials. A special card of admission had to be procured from Germer’s minions in the national office. The card was white, historically symbolic of the work of Finland’s White Guard, and her bloody field and streets, of Berlin’s streets red with workers’ blood spilled by our “comrades,” Scheidemann, Ebert and Noske; symbolically prophetic of the part for which the Socialist Party of America has cast itself. Later in the convention in response to a question I could not hear, the chairman, “Comrade” Seymour Stedman Noske, raised his impassioned voice above the tumult: “Chief of Police Garrity has his orders and when the time comes, he will obey them.” One cannot help wondering whether the police who shortly before beat up the striking IWW restaurant workers were also following Comrade “Noske’s” orders. Truly, when the police cooperate with our “comrades” and take their orders, the revolution must have come to pass. (Emphasis mine – S.A.)
 
The House of the Masses Case
Robert Minor, leading Stalinist potentate, should well remember Stedman. He once wrote a scathing indictment of the gentleman in a pamphlet called Stedman’s Red Raid, which dealt with the latter cooperation in the campaign of Palmer’s raiders and the Michigan state authorities in their efforts to wipe out the left wing in that state during the year 1920.
We have reference to the case of the “House of the Masses.” The story is a simple one. The proletarian Socialist Party of Michigan, overwhelmingly left wing, established a large headquarters which it used for meetings and for the formation of one of the finest Marxist schools in the history of the American revolutionary movement. Upon its expulsion by the right wing the Michigan organization took the name “Communist.” This left wing, in the early days at least, made enormous political and organizational progress. It received great impetus from the Russian Revolution and the growth of its party during those days led to its purchase of the “House of the Masses.” The money was obtained from its members and sympathizers and was established on a cooperative basis. Since under the Michigan laws a political party could not own property, they formed the “Workers’ Educational Society” but declared that only members of the Socialist Party for three years preceding could be members of the association.
Under the influence of the Russian Revolution, the “House of the Masses” became a discussion center of all the revolutionary problems of the workers’ movement, the proletarian seizure of power, the character of the state, the building of a new international, general tactics and strategy of the proletarian party. Because of its mounting revolutionary influence, the Department of Justice, under Palmer, and the Michigan state authorities engineered their reign of terror. Left wing leaders were arrested by the score and imprisoned without trial. Scores of members were likewise arrested in the dead of night and held for deportation. The aim of the authorities was to wipe out the movement in Michigan and especially in Detroit. This is where Stedman and the right wing leadership of the Socialist Party came in.
The state criminal syndicalist law had charged the left wingers with violation of the law, “advocates of the overthrow by force or violence of the government of the United States or all forms of law; aliens who disbelieve in or are opposed to all organized government; aliens who advocate or teach the assassination of public officials ...” and so on, repeating the usual content of criminal syndicalist laws.
Seizing the opportunity occasioned by the state prosecution of the Michigan socialists, Stedman entered his own bill of complaint in the name of three right wing members of the
Workers’ Educational Association, thereby hoping to seize the property from the WEA. Stedman’s bill of complaint repeated all the charges of the authorities. It stated, among other things, that the left wing socialists:
... Are known and style themselves as “Communists” and “members of the Communist Party.” That the Communist Party has committed itself to the program as set forth in its manifesto and program on page 8, in the following language:

“Communism does not propose to ‘capture’ the bourgeois parliamentary state, but to conquer and destroy it. As long as the bourgeois state prevails, the capitalist class can baffle the will of the proletariat.”

The complaint went on to state that the defendants were “expelled from the Socialist Party of the United States because, among other things, they advocated the use of direct or mass action as the primary and principal means of securing a change or destroying the ‘capitalist system’ and the present form of government of the United States; that the said defendants and their associates and agents still advocate the use of said direct or mass action ... that the use sf the hall (House of the Masses) on the premises of the said plaintiff (the right wing socialists in whose name he filed the suit) for advocating direct or mass action for overthrowing the present form of government constitutes a continuous nuisance and irreparable injury to the plaintiff herein.” (Emphasis mine – S.A.)
There was a nation-wide revulsion in the labor movement over Stedman’s strike-breaking conduct. He sought to excuse himself on the ground that this was the only way in which he could get the property for the almost non-existent right wing in Detroit. But this did not stop him from following the line of his bill of complaint during the examination of the witnesses.
It is true that in all these affairs Stedman acted in the name of the right wing leadership of the Socialist Party, but it took a certain type of personality, a man devoid of principle and basically reactionary to carry out such a decision of the Socialist Party National Committee. Seymour Stedman was perfectly suited to the rôle and he carried out his miserable task with the considerable legal skill for which he was noted.
Stedman went into an eclipse following his “police” activity. He was heard from years later as vice-president of a bank on Chicago’s Northwest Side. The bank failed and Stedman was among those indicted for mismanagement. The writer lost track of that trial and heard no more of Seymour Stedman until the Daily Worker saw fit to do itself proud with a scoundrel.
Rereading the bill of complaint which Stedman filed against the Michigan “communists” we can understand why he waited until 1942 to join the Stalinist Party. It has long long since ceased to be a revolutionary party; it cannot be charged with the “crimes” of the old left wing. A counter-revolutionary party, it has plenty of room for the Seymour Stedmans. The war brought him out into the open and to find his way home. And it is entirely fitting that such a party should welcome him to membership. Only age would keep him from repeating the years 1917–20.
 

he Issue of Labor Unity (February 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
The Issue of Labor Unity
(February 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 1, February 1942, pp. 3–5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

When the New York Times, on January 19th, published an alleged agreement between John L. Lewis and certain top leaders of the AFL whereby the unification of the two labor organizations might be accomplished, it willfully distorted the most important labor problem of the present period by directing attention to the issue of labor unity as merely something to be realized by a division of posts and salaries. This journalistic fraud intended to convey the thought that the split in the American union movement had nothing to do with any fundamental issue of unionism, but was rather the result of a simple fight for power.
The Times’ story, moreover, intended to give the problem of labor unity an aura of mystery, pictured it as a mess of intrigue, politics, double-dealing, personal ambition. We are certain that all of these things are involved. However, important as they may be, the issue of labor unity is so powerful, so sweeping in fundamental importance for the American working class, that they decline in significance when compared to the main problem. The one merit the Times story had was that it pushed the whole matter into the open and revealed that the question of unity was discussed and considerably advanced. Everything else in the “scoop” was yellow journalism.
Almost immediately thereafter, Lewis’ letter to Murray and Green on the subject of labor unity was made public. The letter stated: “Labor imperatively requires coherency in order to give maximum assistance to the nation in its war effort to defend American liberties and American institutions.” Thus Lewis precluded, so he thought, any attack on his proposal for immediate unification of the AFL and the CIO, on the grounds of his isolationism and support of Willkie in the last presidential election.
 
The Opposition Lines Up
What followed the publication of the unity proposals took on the air of a Hollywood scenario. Roosevelt, who had heretofore insisted upon labor unity as essential to the war effort, suddenly reversed himself and came out flat-footedly against Lewis’ proposal. An isolationist plot was charged against Lewis, Wheeler, Norman Thomas and Dorothy Detzer of the International Women’s League for Peace and Freedom. This charge was thereafter denied. Roosevelt also denied a Times story that he declared his belief that an isolationist plot was involved in Lewis’ proposal.
Lewis denounced the Times’ story about the retirement of Green at a pension of $20,000 a year for life, the division of posts with George Meany as president, Lewis as vice-president and Murray as secretary-treasurer of the united labor organization, the collusion with Dan Tobin and William Hutcheson, as a pure fabrication. There is no evidence to sustain the allegations of the Times’ report.
Dan Tobin entered a demurrer! William Green sulked and pouted until Roosevelt openly stepped in to stop Lewis and then suddenly Green began to bark like a puppy dog enraged. Murray hastened back from a Florida vacation to halt what he regarded as his demotion. The “isolationist bloc” denounced the story contained in the New York Post that they had in any way fostered the Lewis proposal.
Amidst the great confusion which necessarily emanated from the fog created by the incessant flow of charges and counter-charges, most people lost sight of the singular fact that the most outspoken, militant and threatening opposition to labor unity came from big business, the industrialists and financiers organized in the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce, and the venal toady of big business, the corrupt and reactionary “press of the nation.” How they howled and screamed! They, above all, were not interested in the Washington side-show. They were concerned with the issue of labor unity itself.
And finally, we come to the Stalinists. They too, joined the wolf pack in denouncing their erstwhile friend (before Germany attacked the Soviet Union) for his proposal on labor unity. They had found a new man in the CIO, Philip Murray. The Stalinist policy was based on a fear that unification of the AFL and the CIO would result in their elimination as an organized destructive force in the labor movement.
 
CIO Misses the Point
Several charges were levelled against Lewis’ proposal for labor unity. Roosevelt’s opposition originated from his fear, despite his denial, that there might be an isolationist scheme involved in the proposal, that unity now would bring forth an intensive period of class struggle arising from the determined opposition of America’s financial and industrial ruling class, or that a series of strike struggles would ensue from a unified labor movement’s desire to organize the unorganized. His proposal, at once accepted by Green and Murray, to set up a joint AFL and CIO committee under his personal supervision, to handle all jurisdictional disputes, has as its one and only aim the maintenance of class peace and, therefore, postponement until after the war the question of labor unity. Meanwhile industry “earns” fabulous war profits. And the labor movement remains disunited.
It seems evident that Lewis had done considerable exploratory work in the AFL and the CIO before launching his proposal. But the extreme pressure of the capitalist press and the White House compelled retreat among all the proponents of “unity now” with the exception of Lewis. Green and Murray reacted, the one meekly, the other violently, to what they regarded as a maneuver to eliminate them from the scene. Murray went so far as to charge that Lewis intended to sell out to the AFL on the issue of industrial unionism, that he had become, once more, a confirmed craft unionist. Murray also charged that Lewis had no right to make any proposals on labor unity except through the CIO executive board over which Murray presided. In its official statement, the executive board of the CIO declared:
Organic unity between the CIO and AFL is an additional problem which merits the attention of organized labor. The CIO desires a unified labor movement which will reflect the aspirations and needs of the American workers. This would necessarily require a recognition of the industrial form of union organization in the mass production and basic industries and the absolute need of non-discrimination against any affiliated union or any member of the CIO.
In this rather back-handed manner, the executive board of the CIO sought to create the impression that under Lewis’ program, industrial unionism would be surrendered in favor of the old-line AFL craft unionism.
Since a large part of the attack on the Lewis proposal revolved around the question of the war effort, the CIO executive board created another smokescreen, namely, that the Lewis proposal would hinder this effort. This was done by indirection, as is indicated in the following section of its statement:
The issue of labor unity must be viewed today in the light of the all-embracing problem which now confronts the American people. Every American is interested in one objective – to win the war. Any contribution which organized labor can make toward this objective must be the desire of every affiliated member.
This quotation reads as though it were taken out of the editorial columns of the Daily Worker, for it reads like a typical Stalinist document of the “new turn” type. A more grievous implication of this statement is that it ties the CIO movement behind the war machine, placing the defense of the labor movement in a secondary and, therefore, weakened position.
Thus the CIO made use of the patriotic issue to nail Lewis to a cross. But in doing so, it has only prepared the ground for future attacks upon it as an “unpatriotic organization.”
 
The Constitutional Issue
Finally the CIO executive board declared that Lewis had no constitutional right to initiate any moves for labor unity since this right was vested only in the board and Murray. For our part, we are not too greatly concerned with this legal conflict. It is beyond the issue of labor unity. In any case, Lewis has a constitutional case. Lewis is not a member of the executive board and did not attend its meeting. But in his letter to Murray, he points out several interesting things in connection with the constitutional issue:

The third constitutional convention of the CIO specifically conveyed this authority (to initiate unity moves) to three of its representatives, designating them by name.
 
The foregoing convention unanimously adopted the following motion: “Your committee recommends that this convention continue its negotiating committee, consisting of Mr. John L. Lewis, Mr. Philip Murray and Mr. Sidney Hillman, with the authority to participate in any future negotiations, looking forward to real labor unity, which must be in conformity with the foregoing principles.”
 
This action was not nullified by the Detroit convention.
 
Under the CIO constitution, the executive board is an inferior agency without power to change “the enactment of a constitutional convention.”
 
That unity negotiations were adjourned in 1939 with the proviso that it may be reconvened by Lewis, chairman of the negotiating committee of the CIO.

Lewis, in anticipation of a rejection of his letter to Murray, concluded with the following proposals to the executive board:

Express their good will and their hopes for successful negotiations, fully protective of the interest of the CIO and its membership.
 
Exercise the constitutional powers of the board by convening a special national convention of the CIO to take action on this question under the white spotlight of open public debate.
 
Submit the question of participation in further negotiations to a referendum vote by secret ballot of the members of each of the thousands of local unions affiliated with the Congress of Industrial Organizations.

These proposals were swiftly rejected. The unity proposals had already been torpedoed by the President and by the actions of Green and Murray.
 
Opposition from Other Quarters
From an examination of the cross section of “opinion” on the Lewis proposals, it is clear that the opposition to them stems from considerations having nothing vitally to do with the issue of unity itself. The Nation of January 31 put it plainly when it stated in its editorial, Everybody Wins but Lewis, that “John L. Lewis’ sudden espousal of unity in the labor movement is, if we may slide into Lewis English, the accouplement of an unimpeachable idea with the most impeachable auspices.”
The Militant, weekly organ of the Socialist Workers Party, for example, attacked the Lewis proposal on the ground that it was favored by the bosses, President Roosevelt, the reactionary Congress and was, above all, a war measure. The Militant, as usual, was wrong on all counts, with the possible exception of the last. In its issue of January 31, however, it goes on to say that “President Roosevelt has countered John L. Lewis’ inacceptable proposal for AFL-CIO unification with a plan that shelves the question of unity altogether.” But The Militant fails to explain why Roosevelt shelved a plan which he is presumed to have fostered.
The Militant also fell in with the official line of the CIO executive board when it incorrectly attributed the defeat of Lewis’ proposal to “disfavor among the militant workers not because it proposed unity, but because it threatened to sacrifice the interests of the industrial unions and lead to the kind of unification that would weaken the labor movement.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.). Following this type of reasoning, we are to conclude then, that the bosses, Roosevelt, the reactionaries in Congress, Murray and Green, all united to oppose Lewis’ proposals because it would weaken the labor movement!
In its over-all significance, the issue of labor unity is far superior to all the secondary considerations posed by everyone who joined the chorus of denunciation of the Lewis scheme. For our part, we are not greatly concerned, at this moment, with what Lewis may have had in mind by the proposal – that is, how his espousal of labor unity may or may not have pushed him, once more, to the top in the labor movement. We do not hold the slightest brief for Lewis. We regard him, as always, a reactionary labor bureaucrat. By the same token, however, all the other “outstanding” labor leaders fall in the same boat – many of them having been tutored by Lewis, and were, only until yesterday, his loyal subordinates. If Lewis had in mind by his proposals an improvement of his bureaucratic position in the labor movement, his opponents, too, were chiefly concerned with their own positions in fighting him.
 
Unity Is Still the Issue
We are against all the bureaucrats, we are against the high salaries which these bureaucrats vote to each other, we are opposed to any and all behind-the-scenes maneuvers and deals, no matter from what quarter they may arise. But one of the initial steps by which such things can be eliminated from the labor movement is by the unification of all labor organizations into one mighty federation. Of infinitely greater importance, is the cumulative effect of a single labor organization to the tune of 10,000,000 workers. Given such an organization, the unification of the entire American working class becomes a genuine reality. This is by far the paramount consideration in the whole situation. Given such an organization, the South could be more readily organized. Given such an organization, the great mass production industries could be completely organized. Given such an organization, labor in this country could not possibly be at the mercy of the best organized and strongest ruling class in the world.
We know that for some years the issue of labor unity was not real. But the fact that it was propelled forward in the dramatic manner in which Lewis announced his proposals made it the burning issue it is today. The labor movement would be remiss if it did not do all in its power to effect such genuine unity. The politically conscious working class organizations would be doubly remiss if they did not openly declare their unqualified support to labor unity – and cast aside all secondary considerations. Labor unity is the great hope of the working class for the immediate period ahead.
 

he Truman and Vinson Reports (February 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the month
The Truman and Vinson Reports
(February 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 1, February 1942, pp. 5–7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Several weeks have passed since the Truman Senate Committee investigating the war effort made its report. Washington was shocked by its disclosures. The press was startled, but only for a moment. The labor movement chuckled with an “I told you so” attitude, while big business denounced the “one-sided” nature of the report, charging that the senators had only a political interest in making their report. But it was only a matter of days when the Vinson Naval Committee tendered a report in which it was shown that industry was making “unconscionable profits” at the expense of the government. In the hands of a labor-hating chairman, this committee then proceeded to make the pernicious charge that the trade union movement, too, was making “unconscionable profits” out of the war effort.
Since the reports were made public the atmosphere has been cleared. The President’s action in appointing Donald M. Nelson completely in charge and personally responsible for the war effort was taken to ward off the growing criticism of the OPM, headed by the now deflated William Knudsen. Knudsen was promoted by being made a lieutenant general of the Army, in charge of war production.
The Truman committee investigation differs from past committees occupied with similar tasks in that its work and report came at an early stage of America’s participation in the war – not years afterward. Thus, it has the appearance of an intervention while “something can be done about it.” Its findings, in their general content, are not unlike those of similar congressional committees, after the last war. Wittingly or not, the Truman report substantiates everything we have said about the war effort since the conflict broke out in Europe in 1939.
Big business in America reaps enormous profits from the war program. It controls every major field of war production. Unmonopolized business, the small producers, are completely discriminated against by the representatives of the huge monopolies in charge of the OPM. Big business had so contrived matters, through its monopolistic stranglehold on production, as to artificially increase prices, create false shortages, control markets and hold up the government on contracts until its profit demands were met.
 
The Big Business Mind
All of this was accomplished, says the Truman report, because the giant monopolies controlled the OPM, and were aided and abetted by the “big business minds” in the War and Navy Departments. In hurling the lie at the manufacturers, who said that there are “no real profits in big defense contracts because of the heavy tax program,” the committee showed, as an example, that the three largest automobile manufacturers, Ford, Chrysler and General Motors, had aggregate profits for the first nine months of 1941, of $430,604,778, as compared with $408,212,589 in 1940 and $296,075,775 in 1939.
The Truman committee likewise disclosed that the copper, lead and zinc monopolies had withheld increases in production so as to obtain increased prices and larger profits. Despite this fact, the government subsequently signed contracts with these monopolies allowing a 42 per cent increase in the price of copper, 33 per cent in the price Of zinc and 62 per cent for the total production of these metals above the level of 1941! To complete this picture, the committee “observed” that these metal corporations enjoyed a 30 per cent increase in profits during the first nine months of 1941 as compared to the corresponding period of 1940.
In explaining the conduct of the dollar-a-year men who fill the offices of the OPM, the report says:
... the companies loaning the services of dollar-a-year and no-compensation men obtain other and less tangible, but perhaps even more important benefits. All important procurement contracts must be approved by these men, which means that contracts must conform to their theories of business. Since they represent the largest companies, this means that the defense program in all its ramifications must obtain the approval of the large companies.
It is only natural that such men should believe that only companies of the size and type with which they are associated (the big monopolies) have the ability to perform defense contracts; that small and intermediate companies ought not to be given prime contracts; that the urgencies of the defense program are such that they have no time to consider small companies for defense contracts; that the large companies ought not to be required to sub-contract items which they could profitably manufacture and as to which they express lack of confidence in the productive facilities of smaller concerns; that the producers of strategic materials should not be expected or required to increase their capacities, even at government expense, where that might result in excess capacity after the war and adversely affect their post-war profits; and that large companies should not be expected or required to convert their existing facilities into defense plants, where they prefer to use their plants to make the profits from their civilian business and, at the same time, to have additional plants directly or indirectly paid for by the government; which they can operate profitably on terms dictated by themselves. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
But Nothing Can Be Done
This statement of the Truman committee explains pretty nearly everything one wants to know about the OPM. But what did this august body propose to overcome the situation? Only that the dollar-a-year and no-compensation men be paid by the government and sever their monetary relationship with their companies. A knobby proposal, indeed. The OPM men are not merely “representatives” of their companies; they are the companies themselves. On top of that, the committee already precluded any change to be accomplished by such a step when it declared:
The dollar-a-year and no-compensation men subconsciously reflect the opinions and conclusions which they formerly reached as managers of large interests with respect to government competition, with respect to taxation and amortization, with respect to the financing of new plant expansion, and with respect to the margin of profit which should be allowed on war contracts. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Nothing else need be said on this point, since the new director of the war effort, Donald M. Nelson, already said it. He is going to retain all the dollar-a-year men, because one cannot expect to obtain the services of such qualified persons by asking them to sacrifice (!) their private incomes for government salaries of about $10,000 a year! Nelson maintains that they are irreplaceable! Especially the private incomes!
The great objections of the capitalist press to the Truman report is that is generalized too much! It should have named names, said the press, for otherwise the report was in the nature of an indictment of capitalism! There’s the rub. Big business is ready to indict individual members of its class when there is a requirement for it, but be careful, they say, that in doing so you don’t indict the whole class and the profit system.
 
The Vinson Report
When this point was made, the Vinson Naval Affairs Committee came in with its own report on a specific aspect of the war program, naval construction. The section of the report dealing with profits was simple enough. It stated that big business had been earning “excessive and unconscionable profits” out of construction for an enlarged two-ocean Navy. Profits ran as high as 247 per cent on a small contract, 24.5 per cent on many large contracts running into millions of dollars, and that General Motors, Cleveland Diesel Engine Division, earned profits of from 12 to 27 per cent on fifteen separate contracts ranging from §1,000,000 to $18,000,000. Bethlehem Steel Co. earned profits of 20.7 per cent. In general, more than half of the contracts reported on showed profits in excess of 7 per cent, others 8.7 per cent, with the tendency upwards.
The real significance of this aspect of the report was revealed by Pearson and Allen, who disclosed that, in response to a House investigation committee questionnaire on profits accruing from naval contracts, arid in anticipation of the Vinson report, companies voluntarily (!) made refunds to the government in the amount of $27,000,000.
Having made its exposure of the greed for profits on the part of big business, the Vinson Naval Affairs Committee proceeded to couple the labor movement with big business, showing that it, too, had earned “fabulous profits” as a result of the war program. How? Well, the labor unions increased their membership, increased their dues payments and assessments and thus enriched themselves. This could not have happened without the war program. The reactionary, labor-hating members of the Vinson committee presented figures showing that the AFL, CIO and all independent unions had total assets of $82,594,939, an increase of 14.85 per cent from October, 1939, and this increase occurred despite liabilities of $18,103,878. These figures reveal that for every paid-up member of all the trade unions, the treasuries of these unions have $14 to pay a variety of benefits, cover expenses and carry on union work. Thus the committee concludes:
The tremendous financial gains made by labor organizations during the period of the defense effort and the vast amount of funds and assets in their treasuries, present an astounding picture of concentration of wealth, a situation heretofore usually associated only with industry and finance. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
You may well ask yourselves: Are these people stupid, ignorant and vicious? Are they merely malicious? Or is there something more fundamental behind this insulting report? Consider the comparisons made by the intellectual giants comprising the House Naval Affairs Committee. The AFL, CIO, and independent unions with a membership of 10,000,000 workers who pay dues and assessments, have $82,000,000 in their treasuries, or an average of $8.00 for all members. The union movement has in its ranks one-fourth of the proletarian population of the United States, or 13 per cent of the entire population. On the other hand, big business represents an infinitesimal percentage of the population. The significance of the report becomes clear when one observes that in this monopoly dominated country, 200 out of 250,000 non-banking corporations possess 62 per cent of all corporate assets. Here are a few examples:
American Telephone & Telegraph Co., $5,385,000,000; Pennsylvania Railroad Co., $2,781,000,000; United States Steel Corp., $2,279,000,000; Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, $1,827,000,000; General Motors Corp., $1,313,000,000; Electric Bond & Share Co., $1,231,641,000; and Cities Service Co., $1,194,450,000.
These figures are several years old. The war has had the effect of increasing the incomes, profits and assets of giant corporations. These seven companies, out of 250,000, own between them some $15,000,000,000 in corporate assets! And the Vinson report has the colossal impudence to denounce the unions as “an astonishing picture of the concentration of wealth”!
 
The Aim of the Vinson Committee
The purpose of the Vinson committee is twofold:

Divide the attention of the masses; make it appear as if everyone is guilty of utilizing the war program to make large profits, that labor is as guilty as business. This would steal the thunder of the workers and forestall demands for sharing in the profits of the bosses by showing that labor has already an unwarranted share; it would temper the criticisms directed against big business.
 
Accomplish the passage of anti-labor legislation now pending in Congress, especially those which call for supervision of the books and finances of the unions.

Vinson, a poll-taxer from Georgia, is the sponsor of one of the most vicious anti-labor bills in the House. The committee’s counsel, Edmund Toland, was counsel associated with the Smith committee whose bill passed the House, and it is he who led the fight for repeal of the Wagner Act. It becomes clear that the main aim of this committee was not to indict profiteering big business but to push through the reactionary anti-labor bills in the House.
Thus we have seen two investigating committees report to the House and the Senate on the war effort. Neither report produced anything fundamentally new or striking. They permitted a little steam to be blown off. The culprits who have “hindered” the war effort were promoted. A new person has been put in charge of the war program. Big business, having been chastised but feeling less chastened, continues to enrich itself from the war. The working class, and the people in general, face more difficult times ahead with the prospect of a higher cost of living, greater taxation, inflation and rationing. A few senators and congressmen received national publicity which they hope will be remembered by the “peepul” at home in the next elections. And the President – he is blissfully confident of the future! Everything was taken care of in good stride.
 



With the fall of Singapore the attention of the world is now directed to the Japanese struggle for the conquest of the Netherlands Indies, more commonly known as the Dutch East Indies. Should Japan succeed in its present aim, it will have won what is considered the richest possession in the Western Pacific.
The Japs have already taken Borneo, the Celebes and have established a strong foothold on Sumatra. They have taken a series of important bases on the numerous islands forming this group and are now pointing toward the invasion of the most important island of them all, Java.
The legends about the Dutch East Indies are many; Hollywood has done its part and from that seat of magic and fancy has come the common picture that the Dutch East Indies are famous only for the beautiful women of Bali.
Some people know that oil is to be found on the islands, and perhaps even rubber and tin. But very little real knowledge exists of this Dutch possession. Few people know how the Dutch came to control the islands or why the struggle over them is so fierce. It is our purpose in this article to sketch briefly the facts of its seizure from the native peoples and how it has been exploited for the benefit of butch imperialism and a few large corporations in Great Britain and the United States.
 
A Little of Its History
Twenty-five years before the Pilgrims set foot upon Plymouth Rock, the Dutch East India Company was already in the islands seeking to establish control of the spice trade with the islands. This company had done well for a period of years. But later reverses led to its collapse in 1798. It was then that the Dutch government took over the business of the company and as a government proceeded to the complete possession and control of the East Indies.
During the Napoleonic wars, when the Little Corporal had overrun Europe, the possession of the East Indies changed hands, first going to Napoleonic France and then to England. Following the defeat of Napoleon, the Dutch regained the islands and have held them until this moment, when their control is threatened by Japan.
Once the islands were regained, the Dutch government began to exploit them with a vengeance. The government employed what became known as the “forced culture system.” By this policy, the natives were taxed in labor and compelled to work (without pay) on the government plantations. The system was so profitable that in 40 years the government made a clear profit of $334,000,000, or an average of more than $8,000,000 a year (Fortune Magazine, May 1934). The system was abolished by a mass liberal protest in Holland. But these profits were only a forerunner of what was yet to come.
If you were to lay the Dutch East Indies across the United State’s, they would reach from Baltimore to San Francisco. Java is the most important island of the group with a population of more than forty million of the islands’ 65,000,000 people. Java is the world’s most densely populated country, having about 850 persons per square mile, as compared to 41 in the United States. This is greater than the population density in Japan.
These 65,000,000 people are exploited by a foreign power with only 8,000,000 people (Netherlands). The Dutch and Chinese capitalists dominate the islands economically, while the Arabs have given the Malay-Polynesian population its religion, Mohammedanism.
 
The Material Wealth of the Islands
Thee East Indies are extremely rich in natural resources. Here are some of its products:



Products


Percentage of
World Production




Oil


10




Sugar


8




Copra


 




Tobacco


50




Tea


18




Coffee


8




Tin


20




Kapok (mattresses etc.)


95




Rattan (furniture mfg.)


 




Tapioca




Pepper


84




Sisal (rope making)


60




Quinine


95




Iron


 




Gold



These products have been produced in great abundance and have gone to enrich the foreigners who have appropriated the production of the islands. The native population gets precious little benefit out of the natural richness of their home. Even Fortune, the magazine of big business, was led to say:
”The 59,000,000 black and brown inhabitants of the Indies have been exploited in the past without mercy to produce this mighty total of commodities.” (May 1934)
It is necessary only to add that this exploitation has never ceased!
World capitalism has almost two billion dollars invested in the islands. All but $69,000,000 is held by four countries. The Dutch lead with an investment of almost $1,250,000,000, followed by England with $175,000,000, the United States with $164,000,000 and Chinese capital of $137,000,000. (Figures for 1934)
The largest corporation on the islands is the Royal Dutch Shell Oil, which controls 75 per cent of the oil production. Other large corporations with a rich stake are: Goodyear, U.S. Rubber Co., Standard Oil Co. of N.J.; Anglo-Dutch Plantations, Ltd., Amsterdam Rubber Co. and Handels Vereenigung, Amsterdam.
The biggest interest, of course, is the Dutch and they are the most vitally concerned with maintaining control of the East Indies. Between one-fourth and one-third of the Dutch government’s revenues are profits from its property and plantations. It has a monopoly on opium, salt and pawnshops. Evidently, with the great poverty of the native peoples, the latter is a profitable business.
The unfavorable balance of trade of Holland, the mother country, was offset by the more than $244,000,000 average favorable balance of trade of the East Indies.
Thus the East Indies have been the source of economic prosperity for the ruling classes of Holland. Little wonder why John Gunther, in his book, Inside Asia, writes:
“The Indies have a European as well as an Asiatic function. The life blood of the Netherlands comes from here. Pumping into Holland from Insulinde, as the Indies are called, is a stream of invigorating wealth. The Indies tail is what wags the Dutch dog. As a consequence, Dutch policy in the East is to conserve this precious appendage, to see that the Japanese are held off and that the Malays do not rise.”
 
How the Dutch Rule
There is the background to the whole Dutch policy: to maintain a stranglehold on the riches of a possession taken from its people. While Holland is counted among the democratic powers of the United Nations, the government in the East Indies, as Gunther pointed out in his book, is “a complete autocracy.” The Dutch, less hypocritical than the British, make no bones about a “white man’s burden.” They frankly avow that their main purpose is to maintain control of the islands and the people in order to drain off the wealth and enrich the great corporations which have investments there.
The Dutch have kept the island peoples from self-government. The Dutch APPOINT their governor (from professional politicians or big business) FOR FIVE YEARS AT A SALARY OF $122,000 A YEAR and he is a dictator, since his rule is final and no governmental bodies exist to countermand him.
A Volksraad or People’s Assembly exists, but 22 of its 60 members are appointed. The others are elected by an “extremely limited franchise” of one per cent of the population (Gunther). It has practically no powers outside of advisory.
One of the methods by which the Dutch have maintained their rule is through keeping the people in ignorance. Fortune, in its praise of the Dutch as colonizers, said: “They have given the islands an extensive native school system.” But this is completely contradicted by Gunther, who wrote:
“Indeed, the record of the Dutch in education is miserable. Illiteracy is 95 per cent and the public school system is a myth.” (Inside Asia, page 327)
 
The Conflict with Japan
The plan for a Japanese conquest was prepared some years ago by the economic penetration of the Nipponese. Japan was, prior to the war, the chief competitor to the Dutch and British.
For example, in 1928 England supplied 29 per cent of textiles imported into the Indies. Holland and Japan, were tied for second with 26 per cent.
In 1933, Japan’s share rose to 76 per cent, while Holland and England tied for second with 7.1 per cent!
Japan’s share of total East Indian imports rose from 10 per cent in 1928 to 31 per cent in 1933, while Holland’s share dropped from 20 per cent to 12 per cent. Thus, the Japanese were defeating the Dutch economically in their own possession.
It is clear from the foregoing facts what the war is about. It has nothing to do with democracy – something which never existed for the colonial peoples of the Far East. Japan desires the possession of the great material wealth now in the hands of Great Britain and the Dutch. The Japs want the oil, tin, rubber and other material resources of these great colonial possessions.
They will no more educate the native peoples than did the Dutch or British. They will give the colonies as little democracy as they have had heretofore. They will keep the living standards of these people just as low as they have been kept these many centuries. The only thing they are interested in – as is England and the Dutch and the United States – is the material exploitation of the Far East for PROFIT.
 



The attempt of the Vinson Naval Affairs Committee to smear the labor movement and center public attention upon it, by appending to its report on profits accruing from Navy Department war contracts, the charge that the labor organizations were also profiteering through war contracts, received, an unexpected setback when it heard the testimony of J.E. Barnes, Washington lobbyist for the Todd Shipyards.
Barnes’ testimony was extremely outspoken in revealing the “unconscionable profits” gained by his company. The important aspect of the whole affair is the manner in which the big business press concealed the details, for aside from a few, the large metropolitan papery remained discreetly silent about it all or referred to the remarks made by this lobbyist in the most general terms. Immediately; after the Vinson report was made known, the press, and the companies mentioned, objected to it on the ground that the report might tend to create false impressions as to the extent of profits made on naval contracts. They asked the committee to wait a longer period (no doubt, the end of the war) before determining how much profit would actually be realized. But the cat was already out of the bag.
Mr. Barnes took the stand for the purpose of “correcting a statement” contained in the Truman committee report on his company’s profits. But his testimony revealed the following facts:

Todd Shipyards Corp. is capitalized at $40,000,000.
 
The company expected to do about $150,000,000 to $200,000,000 worth of business this year.
 
The government had built $24,000,000 worth of plants on company land, which, when the leases expire, will either be torn down by the government or sold outright, at a low price, to the company.
 
The company expects to make $15,000,000 to $20,000,000 profit on its present contracts, or a 50 per cent return on its capital investment of $46,000,000.

How did this occur? Barnes stated that the Navy “voluntarily” offered contracts to Todd Shipyards based on rates established during the height of the economic crisis and that under such rates the company made profits up to 62 per cent on individual contracts! The company, according to PM, “charged the Navy all wage costs, plus 40 per cent to cover overhead, plus commissions on machinery and materials, plus 10 per cent of the total for profit.”
In face of the current congressional investigations, the company returned $4,000,000 of their profit. But the excuse given was that they believed their profits to be “outrageous.” The subsequent revision in their contracts limiting profits to 10 per cent still leaves the company with enormous profits, as we stated above, of $15,000,000 to $20,000,000.
But Barnes added: “With our low capitalization, if we only made 1 per cent profit we’d be profiteers.”
Barnes went on to say: “We made big profits. There is no denying it. We paid about $4,000,000 back to the Navy because we were taking such big profits.”
Then followed a question by Republican Senator Brewster of Maine, which appeared only in the New York Daily Mirror. Brewster asked Barnes: “Would you use the word unconscionable?”
“I think so,” Barnes replied. Brewster, apparently surprised at the frankness and implication of the reply, remarked: “This information is shocking when a Navy Department spokesman testified that he did not think unreasonable profits were being made.”
Barnes also testified that in the last war his company tried three times to reduce its profits, but were told by Chairman Hurley, of the Shipping Board: “Shut up. What do you care?”
No wonder the reactionary Senator Byrd, completely upset by the results of this investigation, remarked: “That’s an astonishing situation.”
Actually there is nothing astonishing about the Todd affair. The same general facts apply to all companies that have been handed juicy contracts by the big business minded brass hats of the Navy and War Departments. And that’s the story of the whole war program: Big business is enriching itself on the war. It demands sacrifices only from the workers.
 

ur White "Democracy" (February 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Our White “Democracy”
(February 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 1, February 1942, pp. 7–8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In the December issue of The New International we expressed the opinion that the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms were essentially the shibboleths constructed and designed to gather in mass support for this imperialist war, pointing out at the same time that the freedoms outlined by Churchill and Roosevelt obtained in general only for the white race and, at that, the small economically dominant section of the white race, the bourgeoisie. The Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter have no applicability to the oppressed colonial peoples who inhabit the possessions of the big powers nor to the Negro people of the United States.
If we, this time, omit reference to the racial policies of the Axis (Germany, Italy and Japan) it is only because no hypocrisy shrouds their program. They frankly state that their program is based upon the most reactionary racial doctrines (Herrenvolk, Aryanism, divine destiny, etc.). They do not engage in any double-talk. But a glance at the ideological propaganda of the United Nations leaves one aghast at their cynicism and the wide gulf which separates the word from the deed, the program from the practice. The “democratic” powers speak of the right of national self-determination, the freedom of speech, press and assembly, and the equality of races. But they do not have and never had any intention of concretizing their program. Moreover, they do not believe in it. The colonies of Africa, India, the Dutch East Indies, the American colonies (Hawaii, Haiti, Puerto Rico) – all of them are governed upon the principle of white prerogatives, the superiority of the white race over all others.
One need not go to the colonies to observe the living expression of the race doctrines of American democracy. With 12,000,000 Negroes living within the borders of the United States, the practice of race discrimination, Jim Crow and daily physical persecution has many-faceted openings. Prejudice against the American Negro is not confined to the South; it is not limited to civilian life. Discrimination and persecution of the Negro pervades every sector of our national life, economic, political and social. Since America’s entry into the war this situation has become aggravated.
 
Some Notable Examples
1. In Philadelphia, for example, the United Service Organization (USO) Center, erected for the sole purpose of providing some social enjoyments for the soldier, bars Negroes with the statement that another center was being prepared for them in the Negro section of the city. It wouldn’t do, the authorities declare, to mix the black and white boys, because that would give rise to ideas of equality!
2. This action was followed by the posting of a regimental notice in Philadelphia, declaring that any sexual relations between a Negro soldier and a white girl, with or without the girl’s consent, would be regarded as rape and would invite the penalty of death!
3. Only a few weeks ago, the harrowing news of a “race riot” among the soldiers on leave at Alexandria, La., was published announcing that 29 Negro soldiers were shot and beaten, three of them seriously. What caused this outburst against the Negro boys? First, their stationing in Southern camps and in the heart of Negro-hating centers. Secondly, the assigning of white mounted police to supervise Negro soldiers on leave. Thirdly, the inexcusable failure of the authorities to accord proper protection to Negroes from the North and the damnable discrimination in the Army itself, especially where Southern officers are in charge.
In this event, it was obvious that it was simply a case of prejudice assuming a violent physical form. The protests that followed the shooting compelled the War Department to undertake an investigation. But there was still another reason for this investigation. Continued persecution of Negro boys in the armed forces would hinder morale and militate against the conversion of Negro youth into soldiers.
So rank and obvious was the affair in Louisiana, where civilian police joined in what they no doubt regarded as a little fun “shooting and clubbing n..........s,” that the War Department could hardly avoid pinning the blame where it belonged: on the civilian police, the white authorities. The report states:
Preliminary reports indicate that although a show of force (1) may have been justified to disperse the excited crowd which gathered when a colored soldier resisted arrest by a military policeman, nevertheless civilian policemen and one military policeman indulged in indiscriminate and unnecessary shooting.
And what is the War Department going to do about it? It says that:
... the investigation is continuing and efficiencies in military police control are being studied carefully with a view to appropriate action in this case and elimination of basic and correctible causes which might otherwise result in future disorders.
We are certain that this ends the Alexandria affair! In the meantime, twenty-nine colored soldiers are recovering from their wounds.
 
Sikeston, Mo., Gains National Fame
4. No sooner had the Alexandria affair ended when Sikeston, Mo., received some national prominence in the press. Cleo Wright, a 30-year-old Negro cotton mill worker, charged with an attempted attack on a white woman, was seized by a white mob and lynched. Lynch law, of course, has nothing to do with investigation, the ascertainment of facts and truth. It is the legal code which operates in the Southern and border states. The assistant chief of police of Sikeston announced that Wright had admitted (confessed) that he stabbed the wife of any army sergeant. After his “capture” he stabbed an officer and was in turn shot three times. We can understand his resistance. He knew what was in store for him if taken alive by his “judges.” He had not long to wait!
Certainly, Governor Donnell became indignant. Certainly, the action of the mob was “a disgraceful blot on the state of Missouri.” Poor blot! Poor state! The governor now demands justice be brought to those who participated in the lynching. But the county prosecutor already observes that it will be impossible to apprehend the lynchers. Why? Because, undoubtedly, the lynchers include the “best citizens” of the town and the surrounding area! And isn’t that always the case? And did ever a lynching take place where the lynchers were brought to justice? Stuff and nonsense. Lynching is a law of the South!
5. On January 20th, the New York Post published a story of the intrigues in Congress that serve as a glimmer of light to show what happens even when a housing project for Negro workers in war industries is completed.
Here is the story: Such a housing development was recently completed in Detroit. Congressional pressure compelled the Federal Works Agency to turn the project over to white defense workers. Congressional pressure compelled the discharge of Clark Foreman, director of the FWA and New Dealer, for his opposition to the transfer of the housing project to white families.
According to The Post, the day before Foreman was discharged, the Public Buildings and Grounds Committee of the House informed Baird Snyder, acting FWA director, that before they would authorize a new defense housing program, Foreman would have to go. This demand was made by Representative Frank W. Boykin of Alabama, a member of the committee!
Foreman, the report states, was in conflict with the Southern congressmen for a long time. It began by his hiring of a Negro woman as secretary! Although his rating was “excellent” and he received an increase in salary for his work, the Southerners finally got him because he was quite obviously undermining race relations in this country.
The Detroit project, named after the Negro heroine and abolitionist Sojourner Truth, is now turned over to a Polish settlement. The protest against the Negroes occupying the project was first made by Representative Tenerowicz of Michigan, a Republican (!), on the ground that the Polish residents objected to Negroes occupying the houses. The Michigan representative appealed to the House committee and the Negroes were deprived of their project, but were promised another one!
But this is not the first time a Negro housing project was taken from them. According to The Post, Negro spokesmen in New York point out that a development in Texarkana was “temporarily” diverted to white construction workers. A 210-unit development near Portsmouth was, at the request of the Navy Department, turned over to white workers. A Maritime Commission development at Pascaguola, Miss., which originally contained a Negro section, is fully occupied by whites.
[Since this writing, the decision on the Sojourner Truth project has been reversed. Many-sided protests brought about the change, but nothing has yet been done about it.]
 
The Power of the South
This is the “way of life” for the Negro people in the United States. It is not our purpose to trace the origin and persistency of race prejudice and antagonism in this brief note. But we do insist on one point: Such discrimination and persecution of the Negro people would be greatly reduced and traditional race antagonism would be largely overcome if it were not fostered and nurtured in congressional halls; if the “great and freedom-loving” press had the courage and foresight to treat the question honestly and in a forthright manner; if the radio and the schools and the churches were to inveigh constantly against our native reactionary racial doctrines. We agree, that is asking too much.
The Senate and the House cannot even pass a lynch bill which is aimed at a prosecution of lynchers. Why? Because the Southern bloc is powerful and if such a bill were passed it would be a blot upon the Southern states – and the Southern congressmen would then prevent legislation of interest to the Northern congressmen. An eye for any eye! What makes the Southern congressman so powerful? An archaic representation system in Congress which gives an enormous power to the South far in excess of its population. Five Southern states, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Arkansas and Georgia, with a voting population of 1,620,584 (see, poll tax) have 43 representatives in the House, while five Northern states, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Washington, Connecticut and Indiana, with a voting population of 4,973,203 votes, have only 40 members in the House!
But this is only a partial answer. Race discrimination, the persecution of the Negro, the lynch law and Jim Crow are simple and typical means of class rule. It divides the oppressed and exploited peoples; it keeps them in conflict; it makes easier their exploitation. It is a weapon that did not originate with capitalism, but it is a weapon used to its extreme by capitalism. It is not confined to the United States; it is an international phenomenon.
The recent events mentioned above are not new. They may not be even the most extreme examples of Negro discrimination and persecution. But they take on an added significance in the light of the war for the Four Freedoms. They tear the mask of hypocrisy from the Atlantic Charter and show it to be in truth, another imperialist doctrine, in its own way hardly different from barbaric fascism.
 
The One and Only Solution
But the issue of Negro discrimination and persecution has an even deeper significance. It is a tradition that goes beyond the Negro. It strikes at the Jew, the Catholic, the foreign born. It is a doctrine which gives heart to the most reactionary prejudices of our social order. It is one of the bases for fascism. And there are not a few sycophants ready to become “the leader” of such a movement.
But, above all, the existence of these conditions stresses more than ever that only one solution remains for the Negro people. It is, in fact, the one solution for the workers and poor farmers of this country, for the workers and peasants of the entire world, for the colonial peoples and all subject races and peoples. It is socialism! For the root evil which gives life and blood to the most reactionary of all prejudices is the ever-present hunt for profits, the capitalist social order. Only socialism can destroy this evil. Only a society in which the means of life belong to the people, in which class rule and class exploitation are forever barred, can bring genuine and lasting political, social and economic freedom to all of mankind, no matter their color, no matter where they may be.
 

Gates: An Economic Review of 1941 (February 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
An Economic Review of 1941
Prospects for the Coming Year
(February 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 2, March 1942, pp. 37–43.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

“We live and work in an era completely dominated by war, and we look forward to a future that will be shaped, and conditioned and determined, by the outcomes of the wars that are now under way, and perhaps by those of still other wars that may grow out of them.” – The Cleveland Trust Company Business Bulletin
The significance of the above-quoted description of the present era is accentuated by its terseness. The United States has entered the arena of the war as a belligerent. In the two months since the attack on Pearl Harbor the government has moved quickly toward perfecting the machinery necessary for the prosecution of what appears to be a long war extending in multiple directions over the entire globe. An economic review of the nation in this period, therefore, can be written only if one trains his vision on the panorama of the war and keeps it there constantly.
The outstanding feature of 1941, as of the entire period since September, 1939, is the conclusive development of America’s war economy. The speculative stage has ended! The future of the United States is completely joined to that of every member of the United Nations. But for that very reason, its responsibilities have been manifestly increased, since the problem of supplying war materials to all the Allies has been complicated and made more difficult by the need of equipping its own mass military forces.
In my article, Modern War and Economy (The New International, November 1941), I endeavored to outline the principal features of the new type of total warfare and the economic requirements arising therefrom. A series of fundamental measures, essential to the modern war effort, was cited to indicate the nature and extent of the required economic reorganization. Briefly stated, they are the following:

Production: Augmentation of the production of the heavy goods of war; reduction in output of consumer goods and the consequent reduction of national consumption, to be accomplished by conversion of the existing industrial plant; reduction in investments of new capital (private); depletion of existing capital, particularly in light and non-war industries. The net result is a further strengthening of heavy metallurgical industries at the expense of light-consumer industries.
 
Consumption: A sharp diminution of the standard of living of the masses, since it can be raised only at the expense of armament production; “it is impossible to have both more guns and more butter.”
 
State: The government intervenes more actively in the production process to the point where it is the final arbiter, planner, and supplier of money capital. The government has become the greatest market in the domestic economy and foreign trade is primarily a matter of supplying the material of war to the Allies and obtaining raw materials for war purposes.
 
Balance: In the concrete manifestations of the war economy it is necessary to maintain class peace, especially in view of the inherent tendency of bourgeois war economy to increase the polarization of wealth expressed through the astronomical rise of war profits and the decline of the mass standard of living. The government seeks labor peace for the duration, a ceiling on wages for fear of inflation, control of prices, and control, not abolition, of the profit economy. The government, likewise, seeks to keep the public debt at the lowest possible point by a system of taxation destined to strike hardest at those least able to pay.
 

The End of the New Deal
This is certainly a far cry from the New Deal, which was the product of the severe crisis of 1929. The New Deal sought a stabilization of American economy on a lower level in a peaceful period. As an earnest of the difficulties faced by American capitalism ten years ago, it must be remembered that even then, the direction was not toward expanded production and a constantly rising index of industrial activity, or a rise in the living standards, but toward ever diminishing living standards and artificially stimulated production on depressed levels.
The New Deal experienced its own ebbs and flows; it was primarily a series of stop-gap measures designed to bring about a halt in the precipitate decline of the economic curve. New Dealism represented the belated arrival of American reformism with state power in its hands. It was the era in which social legislation flourished and the labor movement grew by many millions. Achievements were necessarily temporary, because the New Deal endeavored to reach economic stabilization by restricting industrial and agricultural production, while seeking to enlarge the specific weight of America’s foreign trade in a contracted world market.
On a world scale, a genuine improvement of the bourgeois economic order was precluded. The economic prosperity of one nation, or group of nations, depended upon the veritable destruction of competing economies and a thorough subjugation of the colonial areas of the world. International competition was fraught with the danger of war, and it came once Hitler had consolidated national power. The outbreak of war over the domination of the continent, between the two principal European powers, Great Britain and Germany, was only the preliminary stage leading to the world conflict for a redivision of the earth. Thus, the New Deal was doomed at the outbreak of the war.
The war, while it expresses the deep-going stagnation and decline of bourgeois society, propels forward one-sided production because of the enormous requirements of materials of every kind and description. Economic developments in the United States since 1939, and especially during 1941, show rising indices. In this respect, the country is merely repeating the experiences of the other major powers engaged in war, and while some of these powers appear to have reached a maximum expansion and production and tend toward a stationary situation, or slow decline, American economy is first beginning its new production. No ceiling has yet been indicated in this experimental period since information relating to the limits of the native war economy is incomplete.
 
The Growth of Production
After the 1937 economic rise, American capitalism, still seeking a high level of revival through the New Deal, experienced a new decline. This situation, according to the Survey of Current Business of the U.S. Department of Commerce, continued up to the outbreak of the European war. Taking the figure of 100 for the period 1935–39, the report disclosed:



Year  


Industrial
Production


Factory
Employment


 


Factory
Payrolls


   


Cost of
Living




1937


113


111.6


118.4


102.7




1939


108


  98.0


106.5


  99.4



Since 1939, a rapid rise occurred in all economic fields. Between the period of September of the foregoing year and actual belligerency, American economy passed through the preliminary stages of war conversion. The transformation occurred slowly and by fits and starts. No little cause for this lay in the confusion of the Administration, inter-Administration conflict and the adamant refusal of big business to make the slightest concessions to Administration demands without prior guarantees of large profits and post-war relief of business by the government. Now, however, conversion takes place with giant strides.
The figures cited below indicate the sharp rise in economic activity as compared to the foregoing table. They include, for purposes of comparison, those of 1929 and 1932, at which time the economic crisis had reached its lowest point. The figures are taken from the Survey of Current Business. The period 1935–1939 = 100.



Year


Industrial
Production


Factory
Employment


 


Factory
Payrolls


   


Cost of
Living




1929


110


108.6


127.6


122.5




1932


  58


  68.1


  53.9


  97.6




1940


123


110.6


121.8


100.2




1941 (Oct.)


163


136.2


192.5


109.4



The Monthly Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for January 1942, records that industrial production rose to 167 for November, and its issue of February 1942 shows a figure of 168 for December, with the gauge pointed upward. Business Week for February 7 indicates that in the first month of the new year, the business index rose to 169.9. The production aims of the government are such that the business index may well reach 200 at the end of 1942.
 
The Influence of the War Budget
The new war budget adopted by Congress will have a revolutionizing effect upon all of industry. Whatever was accomplished, in 1941, however, was already due to the national budget and the stimulation induced by governmental orders. As of October 15, 1941, the authorized budget of the war program was more than $57,000,000,000, of which $37,000,000,000 was awarded in contracts as of September 30th, and $10,650,000,000 already disbursed. The latter figure explains the rise of business activity for the last year.
Money spent by the government for arms production rose from $157 million a month in June, 1940, to $1,347 million in September, 1941. The total expenditure for the year 1941 reached almost $15 billion. While this marked a tremendous rise in the war budget actually expended, it was only about 15 per cent of the national income.
Total war appropriations jumped from $5 billion in June of 1940 to $63 billion in September of 1941. The actual manufacture of war goods rose from $2 billion a year in June 1940 to an approximate $16 billion a year in September 1941. From the beginning of the fiscal year, July 1941 to December 1941, almost 72 per cent of all moneys spent by the federal government went for war purposes. It is in these figures that one must seek the explanation for the rise in the industrial index.
 
Change in the Character of Production
The process of conversion, though incomplete, registered sufficient changes in 1941 to indicate the degree and intensity of war production and what impends in 1942 and 1943. There was a rapid rise in the production of heavy durable goods (war) and the setting in of a decline in the production of non-durable goods (primarily consumers’ material).
The board of governors of the Federal Reserve Bank, in its report dated December 19, 1941, points out the following developments (1935–39 = 100):



Industrial Production:


 




Total


167




Manufactures


173




Durable


212




Non-durable


142



The figures represent increases but the output of non-durable goods rose only 21 points in a year, while the output of durable goods rose by more than 51 points. This is only a partial story, for beginning in 1942 the production of non-durable goods began to decline while the production of durable goods has already passed the figure previously mentioned.
Breaking these figures down, we find this distinctive point of interest: iron and steel production, according to the Federal Reserve System reports, rose to 191, machinery to 234, shipbuilding to 659 and aircraft to 1,397. The implication of these figures are plain. Many plants engaged in the production of non-durable and overall consumers goods will be closed down as a result of priorities on raw materials. Washington has estimated that at least 20,000 business may very likely be destroyed as a result of the arms program.
This trend is accentuated by the death-like grip which monopoly capitalism maintains upon the war program by its control of the governmental agencies in charge of contracts. The concentration of contracts in the hands of an already highly monopolized industry only hastens the destruction of small business. Despite the avalanche of protest by the “little man” and the setting up of a special department to insure “a fair allocation of contracts,” the situation remains unchanged. Toward the end of the year, only 6,657 of the 12,000 plans chosen by the Army and Navy for utilization in war production, were employed. It is the little more than six thousand plants out of 184,000 manufacturing concerns which held prime defense contracts of $50,000 or more.
 
The Growth of Profits
The war program has boldly accentuated the class character of American economy and this is nowhere so sharply illustrated as in the tremendous rise in profits of monopoly capitalism contrasted with the decline in the living standards of the overwhelming majority of the people. In face of mounting taxes, the profits of industry grew continuously. According to the Economic Outlook for January, 1942, an organ of the CIO, preliminary reports “on industrial profits of 71 principal corporations for the year 1941 show an increase of 77 per cent over the year 1939. This is after all deductions for corporate and excess profits taxes, depreciation, depletion, contingency reserves, etc.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
The report further points out that for detailed figures up to the first nine months of 1941, the profits of 401 leading corporations increased 26.1 per cent over the corresponding period of 1940, and 78.6 per cent over the same period of 1939.
“The greatest increase in profits,” says Economic Outlook, “occurred in the durable goods and defense industries. For example, profits of five aircraft manufacturing companies increased 38.2 per cent in the first nine months of 1941 over the same period of 1940 and 171 per cent over the first nine months of 1939 ... for the automobile industry, profits increased for 13 representative companies 29.7 per cent in the first nine months of 1941 over 1940. The increase over 1939 was 51.7 per cent.
“Profits for four copper and brass fabricators, mainly producers of shells and other ordnance equipment for the Army and Navy, showed profit increases of 77.5 per cent in 1941 over 1940 and 1270 per cent over 1930. The increase in profits for 28 industrial machinery and accessory corporations, mainly producers of machine tools for defense industries, was 153 per cent in 1941 over 1939. Some five copper mining companies showed an increase of too per cent in 1941 over 1939.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
It is also pointed out that of a representative group of thirty-two iron and steel corporations, profits increased 36.1 per cent in 1941 over 1940 and 338 per cent over 1939.
 
Reports from Other Sources
This is the prevailing tendency in profits. Anticipating objections to the foregoing figures of the CIO, I cite the resume on industrial profits made by the New York Times. In a report by Kenneth L. Austin, Industrial Profits in 1941 Near 1929, the writer states:
“Industrial profits in 1941 were second only to those of 1929 and, for some groups, exceeded the records of that boom year by a comfortable margin, a survey of the first seventy-one principal corporations to report last year’s results shows. Twenty-one of these companies earned more in 1941 than in 1929 or any other year in the last fourteen years. Five others bested the 1929 results but earned slightly less than in one or two intervening years.
“Combined net profits of the seventy-one companies for 1941 were $426,114,500, in comparison with $364,906,900 in 1940 and $526,302,400, the only better year, in 1929. This decline of $100,000,000 decline from the 1929 peak, however, consists mainly of a $90,000,000 shrinkage in the combined profits of five steel companies ... Thus profits came within 7.7 per cent of the record results.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
This is only part of the picture. As Austin points out: “There is no doubt that 1941 earnings would have exceeded those of any prior year substantially had the same rates and principles of taxation applied.” There are additional reasons for this, among which are lower income tax rates and the absence of excess profits taxes in 1929, absence of social security taxes, a current higher total employment, lower income from investments and far greater current appropriations for contingency, inventory, self-insurance and other reserves in preparation for an “eventual return to peacetime operations.”
A subsequent report made for the New York Times by the same Mr. Austin, analyzing 337 industrial corporations, merely substantiates the trends he enumerated in his analysis of the 71 corporations. He adds that for the 337 corporations, “the cumulative earnings over twelve-month periods have not shown a single decline since 1938.”
Elsewhere he states that “it is clearly shown that the earnings have made an unbroken rise, although they were slowed up somewhat in the third and final quarters of 1940 by the first of the heavy tax measures, known as the Second Revenue Act of 1940.”
Moreover, the profits of manufacturing industries rose high enough to offset the even “harsher” tax program in the Revenue Act of 1941. This is illustrated by Mr. Austin in the following words:
Whereas in 1940 taxation required 30 to 40 per cent of earnings, the United States Treasury absorbed 50 to 65 per cent of earnings in 1941. Nonetheless, the twelve-month cumulative profits resumed a definitely upward trend last year.
The figures given are the following for 337 companies:



 


 


Profits




1938


$ 538,128,000




1939


1,075,000,000




1940


1,374,869,000




1941 (October)


1,611,725,000



For 454 manufacturing corporations, the following combined net profits are recorded during the first two years of the war.



12 months ending June 30, 1940


  


$1,463,960,000




12 months ending June 30, 1941


1,731,597,000



The increase is 18.28 per cent for 1941 over 1940.
From another source, Business Week (January 24, 1943), we learn that “corporation profits are rising – from about $4,000,000,000 in 1939, to 14,500,000,000 in 1940, to $6,250,000,000 in 1941, though they are still below 1929’s $8,100,000,000.”
The important point to be remembered, however, is that while these high profits were achieved in 1941 even with the setting aside of huge and varied reserves and higher taxes, profits will continue to increase to higher levels in 1942–43 as the war program operates more efficiently and production mounts.
 
Big Business Shows Indignation
Big business, with its accumulated knowledge of what had transpired during the last war, is out to get the limits of profits out of this one. The war of 1914–18 is as nothing as compared with the expenditures that will be made in the present carnage. A ruthless determination characterizes the mood of monopoly capitalism.
Whatever the many purposes of the Truman and Vinson reports, they disclosed incontestable facts which have remained uncontroverted by the most reactionary elements of a labor-hating Congress, that the profits of the large corporations are “unconscionable” in the most important instances. When these reports became public property, the business world retorted with the cry of “persecution.” And when big business was charged with hampering the war effort by delaying conversion in favor of large profits through normal production, they went veritably berserk.
The Automobile Manufacturers Association, in full-page ads, cried: “We stand under an attack and a challenge. This attack impugns our integrity, our ability, our loyalty to our country.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
The big business press denounced the congressional reports as extremely one-sided, since their condemnations, might be interpreted as directed at the profit system rather than individual culprits. By this charge they merely indicated either a lack of astuteness, or political purpose, on the part of the congressmen. As a matter of fact, the disclosures of the congressional committees were merely scratching the surface of the true situation.
The injured congressmen declare that they have far more “interesting” facts yet to announce, and unless big business becomes more amenable to certain unimportant restrictions, they will be compelled to take more drastic action, especially if the labor movement continues its pressure for “equality of sacrifice.”
Pearson and Allen, in their column of February 19, 1942, wrote:
“Not nearly has the whole story been told on war profiteering ... There is information that certain big-money executives of war production firms with huge cost-plus orders kilted their salaries sky-high. The government pays all the freight; so these self-given boosts come out of the taxpayers’ pocket ... In one case the head of an aircraft company gave himself a raise of $35,000 a year. Another increase doubled the boss’ salary – from $25,000 to $50,000 ... The Army and Navy resorted to cost-plus to expedite production. But the contracts were so loosely drawn by business-minded military bureaucrats and dollar-a-year ‘experts’ that the government has practically no protection against gouging.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
Labor and the War Economy
Be that as it may, the great monopolies go blithely on their way to grab everything, conscionable or unconscionable, legally or illegally. They are prepared to travel the legal highways and to fight any efforts to reduce their take in the war effort. They have little to fear of post-war litigation by the government since they know by experience that such legal entanglements stretch out over so many years that by the time decisions are reached, they can “prove” such enormous contributions and mitigating circumstances as to warrant anything they “earned.” (See the case of U.S. vs. Bethlehem Steel Co.) Or else they may file counter-charges against the government for additional bonuses for “extraordinary services,” certain that somewhere along the route, one or another of the courts will find for them. In the worst case, they can settle any dispute by compromise and still come out ahead of the game. After all, it is their game.
The position of the working class in the war economy is sharply contrasted to the bourgeoisie enjoying enormous profits made possible by monopoly capitalism. Undoubtedly a large section of the working class has increased its wage earnings, but these increases are already offset by the measures adopted in Washington to render them ineffective and the mounting cost of living.
The exact figures on wage increases are difficult to obtain because the numerous research bodies engaged in assessing the economic situation in the country do not always agree as to figures, but more important, their various approaches to the question often conflict. But in general, it is possible to state that the following situation exists:
Up to October 1941, hourly earnings in all manufacturing industries rose by 14.7 per cent. In the one year from October 1940 to October 1941, average weekly earnings in all manufacturing industries increased by 20.6 per cent. A variety of figures have been published to show how wages have risen not only in the last year, but from previous periods. For example, Labor Department researchers announced that factory wages increased 33.9 per cent from August 1939 to mid-November 1941. In order to make the pay rises appear more startling, figures were released to show that weekly earnings in all manufacturing groups rose “from $17.86 at the end of 1932 to $32.81 at the close of November 1941 ...” Note well, that this comparison is made between the year in which the economic crisis reached its lowest point and the year in which war production began to rise, the whole period covering an entire decade!
On the basis of the figures which disclose that the working class, more particularly the organized working class, has received wage increases, a national conspiracy is being organized to saddle labor with far heavier war burdens than it now suffers. It is necessary, however, to contrast real wages with wage increases in order to determine the actual position of the working class.
 
Real Earnings of the Workers
In the midst of the present war boom the state of unemployment has been completely overlooked. This is not unnatural since the tendency, in a. period of war production, is toward an ever-greater employment of the labor supply. Whatever the tendency, the fact remains that as of November 1941 there were 5,470,000 unemployed, an increase of 8.6 per cent over October. This growth in unemployment is partly due to the slow process of war conversion of industry, but this fact is balanced, too, by the fact that more than two million former and potential workers have entered the armed forces. Even before the problem of plant conversion arose in its acute form there were 4,871,000 unemployed workers (September 1941). The overall effect of such a large number of unemployed upon the working class is to reduce partially some of the gain achieved by a section of the higher paid employed workers.
While there has been an absolute increase in factory earnings, a large part of this increase is not due to higher employment but to overtime payments, double time for Sunday work and the seven day week. No appreciable change has taken place in shift-work to employ more workers. Monopoly capitalism, up to this point, at any rate, has sought to meet the demands of increased production by intensifying the exploitation of its present labor force.
The intensified exploitation of labor is manifested by a rise in productivity.
“From 1937 through November 1941,” writes Economic Outlook, “labor costs per unit of output, in spite of the 15 per cent rise in average hourly earnings for all manufacturing industries, is unchanged. This occurred because output per man hour in all manufacturing industries increased 15 per cent in the same period.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
In addition thereto the Office of Price Administration made public the fact that industry’s overhead costs have decreased by 3.6 per cent (the figure of Isidore Lubin) since the outbreak of the war and that this also resulted in a further reduction in overall production costs.
Thus the rise in hourly and weekly earnings of manufacturing labor was of no cost to industry since increased productivity cancelled out the wage increases. Actually then, increased wages in no way affected the profits of American capitalism.
 
Wages and the Cost of Living
Of infinitely more importance than the above mentioned factors is the relation of wages to the rising cost of living, because the latter automatically results in the destruction of the gains of at least that section of labor which won them by its organization and struggle. When the comparison is made of wage increases to the rising cost of living, it will be immediately noted that the real standard of living of the masses, following a short rise, has actually remained static for the past period.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics pointed out that between August 1939 and December 1941 the cost of living rose by 12.1 per cent. From January 15, 1941, the increase was 9.8 per cent!
Prices for staple commodities directly affecting the consumer, i.e., retail food, which makes up the most important part of the cost of living, increased in the corresponding period by 21.8 per cent. From January 15, 1941, the rise was 15.7 per cent. Wholesale food prices increased by 38.6 per cent from August 1939 to January 10, 1942, while 29.1 per cent of this increase occurred since January 15, 1941. In the case of a limited number of food items reported in the Daily Basic Commodities Index of the Bureau of Labor Statistics an increase of 76.7 per cent is recorded, with 49.7 per cent of this rise taking place during the past year.
Prices will continue to rise in the coming year and they will be hastened in their upward march by the constantly declining production of consumer goods and the increased national demand for the dwindling total of available consumer commodities. As of October 1941 the cost of living had soared to the point where, according to Economic Outlook, the net increase of wage earnings was only 10.5 per cent. The most important aspect of this relationship lies in the fact that since then wages have remained virtually static. Prices, however, continued to rise.
 
Labor’s Living Standards and Taxes
The economic position of the working class is further depressed by the taxation program passed for the year 1941 and will be greatly aggravated by impending legislation. By the simple expedient of reducing the taxable income of the head of a family to $1,500 a year and of a single person to $750 yearly, the Administration has created an estimated new group of taxpayers of many millions among the lowest income earners. This is only one aspect of the question.
The steadily mounting war budget has the financial experts of Washington busily engaged in figuring new ways and means of raising additional funds. In the President’s budget message, he indicated that the Administration would soon propose measures which would increase the Treasury income another seven billion dollars and thus reduce the simultaneously mounting national debt. Although the precise aims of the Administration are not yet known, sufficient feelers have been put out by the President and his aides in Congress to permit of some forecasts.
There is no doubt that there will be an increase on corporation profits (the enormous earnings of the corporations from governmental war contracts makes certain that the Administration will seek some return of these funds in this manner). Increased corporation taxes will be accompanied by a still further lowering of exemptions on incomes, those on heads of families to $1,000 and on single persons to $500. The tax laws now in the making will carry provisions for “selective” excise and sales taxes. With the decline in the production of consumer goods, Congress will seek to drain off considerable sums from consumer purchasing power. In each instance, whatever the final determinations of the Administration and Congress, the working class will suffer the burden of new forms of taxation.
Consider for a moment the fact that, without a single new increase in taxation, workers’ families with incomes ranging between $1,000 and $3,000 yearly, pay approximately 17 per cent of their incomes in variety of federal, state and local taxes.
It is no wonder then, why E.A. Evans, writing in the New York World-Telegram for February 19, stated:
The money income of Americans is going up. In 1942, it will reach a record-smashing total of at least $95,000,000,000 (only one-third of this income will go to the working class).
But their average standard of living is going down to depression depths. In 1942 they can buy civilian goods and services worth only, at present prices, $65,000,000,000 or less. There can’t be any more, because more than half of the country’s industrial capacity must be devoted to war. (Parenthetical comment and emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
The Income of the Proletariat
Thus the rising cost of living, the decline in consumer goods, the continued existence of a large number of unemployed and the creation of a series of new taxing measures, will have the cumulative effect of sharply smashing the standard of living of the masses, which had not yet completely emerged from the devastating effects of the ten years’ economic crisis.
This condition is brought out in bold relief by the investigation of all committees devoted to estimating minimum requirements for a minimum standard of living. The Department of Labor once estimated $2,100 a year as the minimum amount required for a reasonable standard of living for a family of five. The Heller Committee of the University of California, narrowing its investigation to the City of San Francisco, raised this figure to $2,211 yearly, which the CIO corrected, in the light of the increased cost of living, to $2,400 yearly.
The Economic Division of the CIO, in a study of incomes among the higher paid workers, revealed that the average yearly wage per family was $2,000, at least $400 below the minimum requirements stated in the Heller Committee report. But there are only 7,747,000 workers in this category. More than 24,516,000 workers early less than $30 a week, or $1,500 yearly. Of this number, more than half, or 13,769,000 workers, earn less than $20 a week ($1,000 a year). This figure may be broken down once more to reveal that of this number, 4,9750,00 people earn between $10 and $15 a week ($500 to $750 yearly), and 3,324,000 people earn below $10 a week. There is the real picture of American society as revealed by the income earning groups. (The figures are taken from a report by Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau.)
 
Some Future Prospects
Let us try to simplify several of the problems posed before America’s class society. As visualized by the Administration leaders in charge of war production and by big business, the national income, variously estimated at $92,200,000,000 (New York Sun, January 21) for the year 1941 and anywhere from ninety-five to a hundred billion dollars for 1942, will undergo a sharp change in composition.
During 1941, the production of war materials of every type consumed only 15 per cent of the total national income (fifteen billion dollars). Stated in another way by the Department of Commerce, production for military purposes aggregated only 21 per cent of total production in 1941. The initial estimates produced by the Administration for the impending year is that 53 per cent of the total industrial output will be devoted to military production, with expenditures reaching more than 50 per cent of the total national income.
The following are some of the projected production increases planned for 1942:

In the durable goods field, an estimated “80 per cent of the total output will be for war purposes, compared with 35 per cent in 1941.”
 
Total industrial production is expected to climb to 15 per cent over 1941, which when added to the 25 per cent increase between 1940 and 1941, will show a total industrial production increase of 42 per cent since 1939. The lower estimated rate of increase for 1942 is primarily due to the curtailment of the production of consumer goods.
 
One-third of the estimated 1942 increase will occur in the aircraft industry. Machine industry will contribute almost another third of the increase. Shipbuilding will be the third highest contributor to this growth.
 
A drop of 31 per cent in the “civilian portion” of production “will be more than offset by a gain of 188 per cent in the war portion.”
 

Wages, Taxes and Profits
We have already indicated that profits continue to rise, while wages have reached a static stage with “real wages” tending downward. Taxes continue to rise with a heavier share placed on the masses.
An increasing class tension is visible as monopoly capitalism is determined that the major burden for the war be taken by the working class. Since profit is the quintessential aim of big business, it fiercely resists any measures that will interfere with this pursuit, and thus far, with Congress in its vest pocket, has experienced no little success. Currently, all decisive measures to control war profits have been defeated and the latest attempt to tax excess war profits has been shelved by the Administration.
The National Association of Manufacturers, the kept press and a servile Congress have launched a successful drive against all wage increases on the theory that wage increases on the basis of a diminution of consumer goods must result in inflation. The Administration has come around to the point of view of big business, because in its calculations, based on a profit economy, war production is paramount, consumer goods must decline sharply and wages must remain static for the duration. Not only that, but bond sales and taxes must be so devised as to drain off large sums of the workers’ static wages. This will halt inflation, say the bourgeois minded “experts.” Other measures to halt inflation by invading the province of profit economy are hastily rejected.
The organized labor movement resists and in its resistance reflects the deep pressure of the workers who are completely aware of the profits of big business and the general enrichment of the ruling class through war production.
 
Wage Ceilings – A National Wage Cut
The approach of the industrialists and financiers has been so crass that it led Business Week, January 31, to say:
Labor’s action is understandable (demanding an increase in wage levels and heavier taxes on profits). So far, in the United States, a lot of us have treated defense as a national grab-bag. (!)
Elsewhere it points out that:
Congressional tax leaders are bucking the Administration ... They favor going easy on corporations, heavy on individuals. (Parenthecated matter mine – A.G.)
The present increase in labor militancy, precisely at a time when Washington exhorts all workers to sacrifice everything to raise war production, is indicative o£ the tension between the classes. The workers acutely feel their living standards declining while that o£ the ruling class increases and remains unaffected by the countless measures produced in Congress. They realize that all the forces o£ reaction are allied in the conflict over who is to pay tor the war. They instinctively feel that, as Economic Outlook wrote:
... the amount of national income available for consumption may be reduced to as low as forty billion dollars during the coming year. (This is in conflict with the estimate of E.A. Evans, but is more nearly correct – A.G.) This would be at the lowest level of the depression year 1932. If such a reduced income for consumption were to be distributed at the same ratio as present shares, workers would be forced to levels of poverty and starvation. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Faced with such a prospect, the labor movement demands an increased share of the national income and a reduction of the share of the ruling classes. In reply to the charge that increased wages would result in inflation, the labor organizations have stated that governmental price controls, taxation and rationing would balance the tendency and, therefore, urge a reduction of the profits of big business.
Since Congress has already precluded any sharp measures against monopoly capitalism and thrown some crumbs in the direction of the upper stratum of the farming population (the small farmers will receive no benefits by the congressional action hiking farm prices, and the large group of farm laborers remain one of the lowest income-earning groups in the country), it is their determination to compel the working class to pay for the war effort.
A ceiling on wages, a reduction in consumer goods and consequent reductions of the means of existence for the proletariat and lower middle class, is only another form of a national wage cut for the overwhelming majority of the population. Given a small and weak labor movement, the course of big business and the Administration would have been a direct national wage cut. But in face of a powerful trade union organization, this national wage cut is being accomplished by devious ways, and only for that reason difficulties and apparent confusion exist.
A veritable crusade has been organized against the labor movement, with a large part of the leadership of the labor movement already succumbing to the conspiracy of big business, Congress and a section of the Roosevelt Administration. The absence of labor unity, the deep inner conflict of the trade union leadership and the strike-breaking, reactionary role of the Stalinists in the labor organizations, have greatly weakened the struggle of labor for its existence. These subjective factors hinder the American proletariat and prepare it for some crushing economic blows.
* * *
In résumé, it will be observed that the tendencies of a war economy described in the early part of this review and contained in previous articles, have become the standards of measurement for American economy today. Obviously, we have not exhausted the subject since we treated only with several of its main features. But we shall often have occasion to return to these matters to examine their variegated manifestations.
February 21, 1942
 

oosevelt's Economic Program (May 1942)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Roosevelt’s Economic Program
(May 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 4, May 1942, pp. 99–102.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

President Roosevelt has spoken once more on the main domestic problems relating to the economic mobilization of the country behind the war. War profits, production of consumers’ goods, price control, rationing, the problem of inflation – these were, for the first time, treated as an integrated whole. In his speech of April 28, the President outlined his “equality of sacrifice” and “anti-inflation” program in the following way:
Yesterday I submitted to the Congress of the United States a seven-point program, a program of general principles which, taken together, could be called the national economic policy for attaining the great objective of keeping the cost of living down.
I repeat them now to you in substance:

We must, through heavier taxes, keep personal and corporate profits at a low, reasonable rate.
We must fix ceilings on prices and rents.
We must stabilize wages.
We must stabilize farm prices.
We must put more billions into war bonds.
We must ration all essential commodities which are scarce, and
We must discourage installment buying, and encourage paying off debts and mortgages.

Two things are immediately evident in the President’s proposals: First, it is obvious from the seven points that this is not a program to reduce the cost of living but a program to reduce the standard of living of the American masses, and second, the program is so general that numerous alternative practical measures will be adopted under the guise of “equality of sacrifice” which can have no other effect but to strike directly at the working class. There is no need at this time to prove the first contention; it is the very heart of the program. In so far as the second point is concerned, it is obvious that conflicting inter-class interests prevent concrete agreement on the practical application of the program.
A great illusion persists that what Roosevelt consciously seeks in a “sportsmanlike” manner is to compel equality of sacrifice; that such equality is traditionally American; that no one shall profit out of the war, and that no group or class of Americans shall obtain advantages over another. Behind this myth, bolstered up with every deception at their command, stand the solid phalanxes of American liberalism and the divided ranks of the labor leaders. The American bourgeoisie, its kept press and the host of economic writers, experts and college professors who serve it, have joined in an attack on those parts of the President’s program which seemingly strike at the riches which the ruling class drains off each passing day of war production. They are determined to retain their economic “rights” under capitalism and thus far, proceeding on the premises of this social order, everything is in their favor.
 
Inequality Is the Starting Point
We live under the system of capitalism. By that very fact, inequality, class inequality, and therefore, social, economic and political inequality, are the inescapable preconditions for the continued existence of this profit economy. Roosevelt’s program of “equality of sacrifice” is a myth because the starting point for the program is inequality. The economic differences between the classes are enormous; the variations in the standard of living between the capitalist class and the proletariat are tremendous; the bourgeoisie has many ways of enriching itself, the proletariat lives only on its wages. Equality is possible, then, in several ways: reduce the standard of living of the ruling class to the level of the proletariat, raise the standards of the proletariat to those of the bourgeoisie, or have them equalized at some middle point. We are prepared to listen to the multitude of objections that would arise at the very mention of these ideas, for they strike at the very heart of capitalism.
The fundamental fact remains, however, that the ruler; of American society base themselves on one single premise which reduces Roosevelt’s program to an absurdity, namely, the inviolability of the profit motive. War sacrifices are all right, they say, provided they do not interfere with the God-given and historic right of the capitalists to earn profits! Given this premise, the real nature of the President’s program becomes clarified.
The April bulletin of the National City Bank, commenting on the question of profit control, declared:
It is in the public interest to ask how much further ... the government can hope to restrict earnings [they mean profits – A.G.] without so increasing the possibility of loss as to weaken the incentive to expand plant and take on more work and more risks. Granting that patriotism is the highest incentive to production, neither the war effort nor the welfare of society is served by causing the war work to be done at excessive risk.
It is obvious that the National City Bank does not refer to the working class. The New York Times, which has been carrying on a vile and aggressive editorial campaign against the labor movement at the same time that it vigorously defends the profit rights of big business, wrote on May a on the subject of a flat 94 per cent excess profits tax:
If a corporation were earning more than it was earning in the pre-war “base” years, its incentive to economy would be enormously reduced.
A more direct opinion was given by Albert W. Hawkes in the name of the United States Chamber of Commerce:
There can be no complete success from victory in this war unless we preserve the individual freedoms, the free enterprise system, private property rights and things that make Americans willing to render supreme sacrifice in order that those things may be defended.
 
More of Big Business Opinion
Referring directly to the President’s proposal for a $25,000 limit on incomes, the president of the Cleveland Chamber of Commerce added the following bit of plain speaking to the roll of bourgeois opinion:
Although 1 have not had a chance to study the President’s proposal, it in effect makes many men work for nothing. The plan was suggested in a patriotic vein but I don’t believe most men are patriotic enough to work free of charge. They just aren’t made that way.
The outlook of the bourgeoisie was perhaps best summarized by the slavish-minded Benjamin M. Anderson, professor of economics at the University of Los Angeles, in his published letter to the New York Times of May 3:
From the standpoint of the efficiency of American business again, the proposal to tax away all income above $25,000 is an ominous thing. Recipients of large incomes, and particularly the recipients of large salaries, are in general the most efficient business leaders of the country. Leaving aside all questions of justice and fair play and looking at the matter simply from the standpoint of winning the war, it is definitely unwise to force these men into a position where they must divert their attention from the work that they are doing to a drastic readjustment of their personal affairs.
These thoughts are not confined to representatives of big business. They are the prevailing ideas of government leaders and they dominate the minds of those who direct the War and Navy Departments. Thus Colonel Knox, Secretary of the Navy, in protesting profit curbs, reflected the thoughts of hundreds of government leaders and the present labor-hating Congress when he said:
The profit motive is still relied upon as an important factor in the inducement of extraordinary war production and industrial effort ... The Navy Department starts from the premise that sufficient profits must be provided to make the profit motive work ...
In the course of these notes it will be demonstrated that the seven-point program, no matter what the President professes as its aim, is directed against the proletariat, the poor farmer and the lower middle classes.
 
Profits – At a Low, Reasonable Rate
With the above premise in mind, we arrive at the first point in the President’s program: “We must, through heavier taxes, keep personal corporate profits at a low, reasonable rate.”
What is this “low, reasonable rate?” Great silence and confusion of thought dominate in Washington. But consider first the matter of corporate profits. Tax rates have increased enormously in the past two years of the war economy. Despite these increases, profits have enormously risen (see An Economic Review of 1941, by Albert Gates, in The New International, March 1942). Big business has been greatly enriched by governmental expenditures for war purposes. The disclosures of congressional committees investigating war contracts have presented a lurid picture of the manner in which the war industries have gorged themselves with corporate profits and how big business men have paid themselves huge salaries and even larger bonuses. Whatever profit restrictions take place in the form of increased corporate profit taxes, the government accedes the right to profits, and these are guaranteed by the President’s program. The only issue in dispute is how high they shall be.
To date, Congress has been unable to pass an excess profits tax. The pressure of the war and domestic political requirements will bring about the passage of some kind of legislation. But already committee proposals for an excess profits tax have raised the point at which these taxes shall begin after an 8 per cent “normal” profit has been earned. While the figure appears small, the size of war contracts is so great as to guarantee enormous profits no matter what kind of a bill is passed. As a matter of fact, there remains only one genuine way to eliminate war profiteering and that is by a 100 per cent tax. But the Administration dare not even suggest it.
The section of the President’s program which has caused the most comment, as we already indicated, is the proposal to limit incomes to $25,000 a year. A completely objective point of view cannot lead to any conclusion but that this measure has only a political purpose – to soften up resistance to the remainder of the program. Bourgeois economists were quick to point out that earning power necessary to retain a $25,000 a year salary would have to be about $65,000 (Randolph Paul, tax adviser to the Treasury). The National City Bank Bulletin for May reveals that, according to the Treasury reports for 1940, there were only 13,900 taxpayers with incomes over $50,000 a year. Even if we grant that this number increased during the war profiteering year of 1941, the increase cannot materially affect the income of the Treasury from personal earnings in the higher brackets.
We are for a drastic limitation of the incomes of the American ruling class, but we must warn the over-zealous not to take this measure too seriously for reasons which we believe to be obvious.
The bourgeoisie does not live from day to day on its yearly earnings – its living standards cannot be affected by such temporary measures as proposed by the President. It has an enormous accumulation of wealth in capital and personal incomes. If its total income were immediately halted, that class could live on for a considerable number of years without the slightest inconvenience. Moreover, big business men have all their day-to-day expenses paid; in many cases their salaries are pure income to be deposited or merely spent on living. Their great estates are often incorporated and all expenses for servants, repairs, improvements, etc., are business items which do not affect the yearly “salaries” of the big business men. Leaving these factors aside for the moment, we are not at all touched by the difficulties which these gentlemen, living by the exploitation of their fellow men, will experience on a $25,000 yearly income.
The way in which the financial burden of the imperialist war must be met is by a capital levy upon the accumulated wealth of the bourgeoisie, both corporate and personal, and by expropriation of the “Sixty Families.” Thus the real sources of wealth would be tapped.
 
What Their Price Control Means
As his second point, the President said that: “We must fix ceilings on prices and rents.” In concretizing this part of the program, the Office of Price Administration proceeded to freeze prices of various commodities and rents as of March, 1942! The joker in this action lies in the fact that the freezing of these prices occurs at their highest point since the outbreak of the war in Europel Freezing of prices would have real significance if it were based upon the year 1940. As it stands now, prices are way out of line when compared to the wage standards of the entire working class!
Price Administrator Henderson already admits that prize freezing notwithstanding, prices will continue to rise as high as 10 per cent within the freezing orders. Moreover, the tendency which immediately follows such orders is a subsequent reduction in the quality of goods, and manufacturers continue to maintain their high profits through this device.
More important, however, is the question of how prices shall be genuine controlled. No real safeguards are likely if administrative controls are in the hands of the bourgeois-minded government bureaus and functionaries. The one guarantee against profiteering in consumer goods, even under price ceilings, is through the establishment of trade union, cooperative and consumers’ committees. Such committees are the only means by which the sly and cheating consumers’ monopolies, which control the means of subsistence, can be kept in check.
For political purposes the President avoided the word “ceiling” in relation to wages. Instead he said: “We must stabilize wages.” It did not take long for Roosevelt to clarify his meaning. A few days after the delivery of his speech, he sent a telegram to the Shipbuilders Union convention counseling them not to insist upon the provisions of their legal contract with the shipyard owners by requesting pay increases to meet the high cost of living. The specious reasoning of the presidential letter can be summarized in the following way: The program which I presented to the country must be regarded in its entirety. If you insist upon increased wages you will upset everything because it will make it more difficult to control prices, limit salaries (at $25,000), siphon off excess profits, etc. Therefore, despite the rise in the cost of living, and the lowering of your living standards, you must not insist on the fulfillment of your contract.
The immediate effect of the presidential utterance was to give new strength to the robber barons, the industrial rulers, who now refuse, to consider wage increases to meet increasing costs of living. They reject recommendations of the War Production Board in those cases where this question is arbitrated (General Motors Co.).
While certain skilled workers in the war industries have won increases in the past year, the vast majority of the workers earn wages far below the standards indicated by the Department of Labor.
The one action which has made possible the freezing of wages was the manner in which the two labor organizations, the AFL and the CIO, have given up the ghost without a struggle. The Pearson and Allen reports from Washington describe Murray and Green as two presidential office boys. They have surrendered in advance the strike weapon of the workers, in return for which they received nothing.
The stabilization of farm prices is a meaningless gesture because it does not affect the lot of the poor farmers, tenant farmers or sharecroppers. The fact remains that this section of the farm population is heavily exploited by the rich farmers, landowners and landlords, the railroads and the big food corporations and commission houses. Farm price increases in recent years have only slightly affected the farm poor, and subsidies from the government went primarily to the rich farmers who engineered favorable legislation in their own behalf through the farm bloc in Congress (rich farmers and landowners). The poor farmer remains poverty stricken and at the mercy of his giant competitors. The Roosevelt program offers them no hope whatever of amelioration.
 
Draining Off Workers’ Income
As another means of draining off the income of the working class and the low income population, the President proposes that “we must put more billions into war bonds.” Government experts know that the overwhelming majority of the population cannot possibly purchase bonds, certainly not in the fabulous amounts requested by the Administration. But already feelers have been extended to ascertain reactions to the forced buying of bonds. The Administration is playing with the idea of “forced wage savings” whereby a certain portion of wages will be deducted, either for the compulsory purchase of war bonds or to be held in trust by the government for the duration of the war. Thus a large part of the purchasing power of the masses will be “captured” and the “inflationary spiral” checked. This section of the program is only another measure directed against the poor.
The President proposes that “we must ration all essential commodities which are scarce.” In this field, too, great dangers face the masses. Undoubtedly, some commodities will be scarce, in one degree or another, for the duration of the war. Rationing, under such circumstances, is a necessity. But this rationing must be based upon equality, for otherwise the rich and the well-to-do will control the market at the expense of the great mass of the population. The only guarantee the people have in a fair rationing system is by the establishment of trade union, cooperative and consumers’ committees which will control the rationing system and insure equality to the working class and the under-privileged mass of the American people.
The establishment of such controls by the people would go a long way to prevent the scandals of the “Black Market.” In Great Britain the Black Market enables the rich, the aristocracy and the privileged government workers to obtain goods which are not available to the British masses. As in the case of price and rent freezing, unless there is genuine control from below, they may all easily become a grand farce at the expense of the people.
The final point in the President’s program is also directed against the great mass of the people. He says: “We must discourage installment buying, and encourage paying off debts and mortgages.” Whom does the President have in mind? The bourgeoisie? Certainly it is not they who engage in installment buying, who are saddled with all kinds of little debts, whose homes are heavily mortgaged. Obviously not! The latest measure enacted under this provision in the President’s program is the limitation of installment buying to 40 days! It is obvious that this is a plan designed to prevent the purchase of consumer goods by the great masses of people. It puts pressure upon the indebted poor and the small home owner. On the heels of these proposals, Washington is now giving consideration to a national sales tax. This is also a measure directed against the people.
 
The Realities of War Economy
Stripped of its vagueness and fully explained, it is clear that the President’s program, when enforced, will signify a national wage-cut for the working class, a further impoverishment of the low income farm population and increased hardships for the lower middle classes. And it is just as obvious that the bourgeoisie, even though they will be compelled to disgorge themselves of some of their profits, their “hardships” will be like a drop of water in the ocean as compared to the concrete living conditions of more than 80 per cent of the American people.
The war economy is here with a vengeance and all the forecasts made about the destruction of the living standards of the people are a growing reality. The cost of living rises, wage rates, set more than a year ago in a majority of instances, are frozen, while price ceilings are set as of March 1942. Rationing of goods begins, while no safeguards are established to guarantee genuine equality in the distribution of goods. Every possible means of draining off earnings are being prepared daily. What the working class will retain will be just enough for their food, shelter and clothing, in order that they may live and work to produce the means of war and profits for American big business.
Leon Henderson has said that “it is probable that in the next twelve to fifteen months we will get a civilian standard of living equivalent to 1932, which was the low of all lows during the depression.” This is the prospect held out for the working class, the poor farmers, the lower middle class. It is obvious that the promised “1932 living standards” do not apply to the bourgeoisie now any more than they did in 1932.
In opposition to the President’s program, I place before our readers the following sections of the platform of the Workers Party:

A government levy on capital to cover the costs of the imperialist war! Confiscate all war profits!
 
Conscript all war industries under workers’ control! (Prevent the scandals of Standard Oil, Alcoa, General Electric, the duPonts and other Merchants of Death.)
 
Expropriate the “Sixty Families” – the 3 per cent of the people who own 96 per cent of the national wealth!

 



On the twenty-fourth anniversary of Armistice Day, the Second World War has spread to new and greater fronts. American land, sea and air forces, aided by the British, landed this week at a number of points in French North Africa.
With great speed, occasioned by the surprise nature of the landings, key ports and capital cities were quickly invested and occupied. American troops are now moving eastward to attack Rommel and catch him in a pincer with the British coming westward. They are rushing rapidly into Tunisia and toward Tripoli to meet counter-attacks of the German and Italian forces now rushed to North Africa to prevent that part of the Continent and the lower half of the Mediterranean from falling into the hands of the Allies.
Allied forces already occupy the principal cities – Oran, Algiers and Casablanca – and a number of intermediate points. Troops continue to land and a vast amount of weapons is being sent ashore in preparation for the counter-blows expected from the Axis.
 
Hitler Moves Over France
Reports coming in from the front indicate that the Allies counted upon defections in the French army, both among ranking officers and among the troops. General Henri Giraud at once went over to the Allies and is already being groomed as the leader of the French forces in North Africa. Admiral Darlan, anti-British commander of all the French forces, has been “captured” by the Americans, along with General Juin, commander of the French in Algiers. It is possible that they too will soon join the British and Americans and may already have done so at the time of this writing.
These early developments are overshadowed by the developments on the Continent. Following a hurriedly called meeting of Hitler, Mussolini and Laval, the German army crossed the demarcation point which divided Occupied and Unoccupied France and is in the process of taking over the whole country. They are racing to seize the key French ports on the Mediterranean and to prevent if possible the flight of the French fleet.
Hitler’s occupation of the whole of France has only intensified the national political-military situation. Early reports announce Petain’s plea to the French people to revolt against Hitler – by what means and with what kind of arms and for what purpose, is not made clear by the senile leader of Vichy. The French fleet was ordered to join the Allies. If this should occur the naval situation will be significantly altered in favor of the Allies.
While it is yet too early to pass judgment on the ultimate significance of the recent military developments, certain possibilities immediately show themselves.
The occupation of France by the German army will require for Hitler an ever-greater expenditure .of troops and materiel. And while his land army is still an enormous and powerful organization, it is bound to lengthen and therefore weaken his Continental line of defense. He must guard a sea coast many thousands of miles long, including now the whole Mediterranean Sea. His Italian ally is in a desperate position and without German aid and control would undoubtedly be knocked out of the war.
Germany’s position in Russia remain’s largely unchanged. The fight there goes on unabated with no likelihood, despite German victories, of a decision being reached. The peoples of the Continent are in a state of rebellion and daily resist German occupation.
 
Allied Position Stronger
The outstanding fact of Hitler’s position is that he remains locked, in the European Continent; he has been unable to cross successfully into other areas.
If the Allies succeed in driving the Axis put of North Africa, Germany and Italy will be completely ringed by opponents. From the military point of view this marks an enormous setback to German aims.
The United States is engaged more actively in the war. The waiting period is definitely over and from now on it can be expected that American forces will be fully involved in the military aspects of the war. Defections in the French Vichy ranks increase daily. Additional military strength from that quarter will undoubtedly strengthen the Allied position in North Africa.
If the French fleet joins the British and American, it will not only insure Allied control of the Mediterranean, but it will permit the strengthening of the Allied fleets in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. British and American sea routes will be shortened, thereby increasing the flow of war materials to their many fronts.
It is clear that the strength of the Allies is growing, while that of the Axis, if not declining, remains stationary. This has an enormous bearing on the war, its intensification and its length.
Already a great hope is felt among the people of this country and throughout the world that this latest action by the Allies will shorten the war and bring it to a speedy conclusion. Nothing in the military situation warrants such a conclusion and already President Roosevelt has found it necessary to warn against undue optimism.
The actions in the .African theater of the war may have something to do with the ultimate end of the war, just as every battle has something to do with it, but it is clear that the war is merely increasing in tempo. The battles promise to become larger, the struggles more intense.
 
Europe Is Main Front
The Allies understand that the war cannot be brought to an end unless the fight is brought to Hitler in Europe. The purpose of the occupation of Africa is to prepare an assault on the southern coasts of the Continent. Thus, if all of Northern Africa is occupied, a considerable period of time will be consumed in preparing such an invasion. Such an invasion from the South may be a feint to draw off German forces from other part of Europe to permit an attack across the Channel, or by way of Norway, or it may be part of a simultaneous assault on various parts of the European coast.
But the occupation of North Africa cannot lead immediately to an invasion of Europe. It is part of the preparation for a spring offensive.
For the moment, at least, the initiative lies in the hands of the British and Americans. They are now fighting offensive warfare. How long this will last, how soon Hitler will attempt a counter-attack on a large scale, is difficult to determine. But it is clear that Europe is the main front of the war in Allied strategy. The African war is not the second front. It is the preparation for such a front.
On the anniversary of Armistice Day, 1942, the world is an armed camp; the capitalist nations are at each other’s throats; humanity is being slaughtered. The war moves on! It promises to be long and deadly!
 

Gates: Stalinist Diplomacy and the War (November 1942)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Stalinist Diplomacy and the War
A Review of an Important Book
(November 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 10, November 1942, pp. 309–313.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Of the endless stream of books on the world political and military situation contributed by correspondents returned from their respective journalistic safari, few have genuine merit. At best they are descriptive narratives of locales and personalities, the latter generally pictured as the moving forces of history. Occasionally there appears a book that endeavors to give more fundamental explanations of the political, economic, social and military events of the past several years. One of the better books recently published is Duel for Europe [1], written by the son of Scott Nearing, the author of semi-Stalinist analyses of “Russian Communism” in the popular vein for American readers.
John Scott’s book is an amanuensis of Russian foreign policy from the period of the Munich pact up to and including the Russo-German war. It is written with acute awareness of the diplomatic intrigue of these years and it was a fortuitous circumstance which gave him access to first-hand information of the events he describes. Scott lived in the Soviet Union for ten years. He was employed in Magnitorsk, married a peasant girl and settled down to live a Russian life, learning its language, the habits of its people and the life of the masses under the “Holy Father” in the Kremlin. Having lost his job during the purges, Scott found a position with the London News-Chronicle, where his knowledge of the Russian language served him in good stead. He was able to study the development of Stalinist policy at first hand, without the need of interpreters. He had good contacts and has written, in the opinion of this reviewer, a reasonably objective book.
Duel for Europe confines itself to the struggle in the eastern part of the Continent between Germany and Russia, which he personalizes as the struggle between Hitler and Stalin. Thus he writes in the preface:
This is the story of the duel between Joseph Stalin and Adolph Hitler for the continent of Europe. It is the story of the maneuvering, intrigue and deceit whereby each tried in advance to win the war against the other and against other lesser enemies in this wolf-eat-wolf world of ours ... It is not a nice story. Lying and blackmail, brow-beating and beguiling, these are the stock in trade of contemporary diplomacy. Those who try other means often come to no good end. Our own President Wilson tried to introduce fair play (!) into European diplomacy a quarter of a century ago, and ended up a brilliant failure internationally and a defeated and broken man at home. Stalin did not make Wilson’s commendable mistake (!) ... I want to make it clear that this story has very little to do with the Russian people, the hard-working and patient Mishas and Mashas ... They were busy working in mine and mill, behind desk and plow ... A few hundred, or at most a few thousand, men in Moscow were lying and bluffing, deluding and circumventing in the name of two hundred million simple, kindly men and women who were too busy ... It is an ugly story, one unworthy of the Russian people.
He hastens to add, however:
Yet it is the true story of a logical policy conceived in the interests of the Russian nation and carried through to its logical conclusion with relatively few mistakes.
In the very last statement one will find the answer to many “mystifying” aspects of Stalinist policy. The answer, as we will endeavor to point out in a further elucidation of the material contained in Mr. Scott’s report, is to be found in the bureaucratic nationalist self-interest of the present ruling class of Stalinist Russia, a self-interest that has not a single relationship to socialism and socialist internationalism.
 
Prelude to the Storm
As an essential introduction to the main theme of Russo-German relations, Scott refreshes one’s memory by a brief résumé of the Munich period as seen by a resident of Moscow. The story is old, but worth repeating.
Hitler came to power in Germany as a result of a combination of economic and political factors: an acute national crisis, direct material aid of the German financial and industrial ruling class; assistance from a section of the British ruling class which sought, in its system of “checks and balances on the Continent,” a counterweight to French domination; collusion between a section of the French ruling class and the German reactionaries, and finally and most important, the failure of the proletarian organizations in Germany to prevent Hitler’s ascension to power, the militant communist section, at the behest of Stalin in order “to retain peace and the status quo.”
Once in power, this agent of German imperialism proceeded to prepare for war, to bring about a change in the relationships between the powers, to obtain hegemony over the Continent and thence, world economy. The military rearmament of Germany, made possible by the circumvention of the provisions of Versailles, was carried through without opposition from the Anglo-French alliance, the latter willing to nip in the bud a prospective threat of war from Germany, the former giving assent to Hitler in order to achieve the afore-stated “checks and balances.”
In addition, the British “appeasers” were quite willing to see war between the Soviet Union and Germany, in the hope that they would “devour each other” to the advantage of the British Empire. British policy sought to fortify Hitler’s “Drang nach Osten.”
Clearly, if Hitler was to engage in any campaign against the Soviet Union, it was necessary to solve the central European question, i.e., to secure the necessary geographical and material bases for such an attack. But it is necessary to bear in mind at all times, if one is not to lose sight of the Realpolitik, that Hitler’s enemy was not Russia alone, but, in the last analysis, the Anglo-French and later the Anglo-American bloc. It was necessary to solve the central European question in relation to them also. And while it is impossible to know everything that transpired on Wilhelmstrasse, it is clear that once Hitler began to sweep up central Europe he was prepared to take his stand against France and England before trying his hand at the Soviet Union.
The history of these European events cannot be explained by saying that Hitler was more daring or a great deal more far-sighted than his opponents. It would be more correct to say that he was more desperate. The position of German economy under world capitalism dictated his course. His early strength lay in his determination to open the offensive before the terrified British and French ruling classes could arm for a desperate war. When he took Austria, signed the Munich Pact and then proceeded to break the pact with the seizure of Czechoslovakia, he was then aware that he had nothing to fear from an England led by Chamberlain, or a France led by Daladier. Moreover, he was convinced that he could defeat them in an immediate war. And he was certain too, after so easy a triumph in Austria and in Czechoslovakia, that Poland was his for the taking. The foregoing “conjecture” is borne out by the succession of events.
At this point, new, strange and feverish diplomatic exchanges take place between Germany and Russia, not unknown to the British and the French. And here is where the Scott story unfolds itself.
 
On the Way to the Pact
After the Munich Pact, Stalin began to “explore the possibility of making a deal with Germany.” A special representative, Kandalaki, was sent to Berlin for the purpose of making contact with Hitler. “In February, 1939, the Soviet military attaché in Germany said to General Keitel at a luncheon: ‘If in the course of events Poland collapses, we cannot be expected to remain indifferent to the fate of our fellow Russians and Ukrainians in Poland.’ It was the first real hint at a partitioning of Poland, Keitel reported the matter to Hitler, who ordered it hushed up. It was not a new idea.”
The collective security policy having collapsed, Stalin made a turn in his diplomacy. Unprepared for a major war, he turned toward an alliance with Hitler. In his March report to the 18th Party Congress, he made no attack upon Germany. Stressing the Russian aim of peace, he launched into an attack upon France and England for trying to push Germany into a war with Russia. It was the famous “pull their chestnuts out of the fire for them” speech.
From then on the Soviet-German rapprochement moved rapidly. Astakhov, counselor of embassy in Berlin, “was already working on the outline of a Soviet-German agreement.” The date: April 1939! Kandalaki, the man sent to see Hitler, was apparently wiped out in the purges. According to Scott, Astakhov and Count von der Schulenberg, the German ambassador to the Soviet Union, laid the groundwork for the eventual alliance, naturally, at the specific instructions of their governments. At the same time, formally in any case, the Stalinist regime, through Litvinov, continued to call for collective security. And it is clear from what transpired that this was, at one and the same time, subterfuge and a safeguard, just in case Hitler did not come across.
The British, becoming aware of the negotiations in Berlin and Moscow, hastened to repair some broken fences, but in that diabolically clever British manner – they sent some second-rate diplomatists, in no position to guarantee anything, to seek some agreement with the Russians, yet at no time willing to come to a military alliance with Stalin, even though the French made a last-minute plea for such an alliance.
On April 19, Russia proposed a triple alliance against Germany, a system of mutual guarantees against attack. While the French ambassador urged acceptance, the British procrastinated, seeking a less costly bargain. But on August 23, when Ribbentrop arrived in Moscow to seal “the pact of blood,” the British hastily announced that they were ready to accept the Russian proposals. Russia, however, signed up with Germany, believing that she had obtained the best bargain.
Between April and August, when the Russo-German pact was signed, the Russians had negotiated large trade pacts with Germany. Litvinov was removed from office as a gesture of friendship to Hitler. After all, he was the outstanding advocate of collective security! In this interim period they had also raised the question of the Baltic States, the matter of Russia’s defense and how necessary it was that these countries become Russian “spheres of influence.” Obviously, this question was part of the discussions with Germany. The closer the date of signing of the German-Russian pact, the more intense became the negotiations between the military missions of the British-French and the Russians, but the former suddenly felt something completely hopeless in their labors. Relations between the Russian and German diplomatic staffs were uncommonly warm and friendly – as a matter of fact they seemed too exuberant. Their attitude to the French and British became sharper and even arrogant. It was precisely while the military missions were meeting that the pact was announced!
But, says Scott: “The Soviet-German pact obviously did not result from the breakdown of the Anglo-French-Soviet staff talks, as the former had been initialed before the Anglo-French military talks were even well under way ... The Soviet-German pact had been initialed since the sixteenth of the month. Scott reports that “from August 16 on it was just a question of playing the Anglo-French missions for as much as they were worth.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
It seemed certain during these fateful months that there was no escaping war in Europe. No other intelligent explanation is to be discovered for the intense speed of negotiations carried on by the two contending imperialist camps with the Soviet Union. According to Scott, the British were ready in August to agree to any pact with Stalin. What, then, drove Stalin into Hitler’s arms? The belief that England and France were incapable of thwarting Hitler’s ambition, a conviction that they were unable to resist effectively the military might of fascist Germany. Stalin, in addition, believed that a pact with Hitler would permit him to stay out of the war while the Western powers engaged in mutual destruction. In the beginning at least he had faith in Hitler’s assurance that, between Germany and Russia, there was no conflict of interest and that the two countries could co-exist to their mutual economic benefit.
The love feast that followed the pact seems incredible today. But it is only incredible to those who view capitalist diplomacy as an honest profession. For Hitler, the pact was a convenience; for Stalin, a vain hope that it would last for many years. But the real significance of the alliance is that it gave the German butcher a green light to open the war in the West. The Polish partition had already been decided upon. Hitler’s eastern frontier was made safe. The holocaust began!
 
The New Allies at Work
Duel for Europe traces the right-about turn of Soviet policy subsequent to the signing of the pact. Now it was Great Britain which was the war-monger. France became the aggressor. The United States was behind these two bandits, waiting only to pick up the economic plums. The world was told by Moscow and her satellites throughout the world that it was not Germany which threatened the peace of the world, but Great Britain. Germany, we were informed, was a peace-loving nation. Nobody was going to force war upon these two friendly neighbors.
What did Russia gain from the pact? In the immediate sense, a little time. It also gained part of Poland and the Baltic states, Latvia, Lithuania and Esthonia. The stony seizures of these countries is a lurid tale of power diplomacy in the best tradition of imperialist politics. But the interesting thing about the seizures of these territories, says Scott, is that they were part of a Russo-German agreement on a division of geographic interests! The unpublished Molotov-Ribbentrop agreement provided for the partition of Poland, the occupation and incorporation into the Soviet Union, by means of a plebiscite, of Lithuania, Latvia, and Esthonia. In each instance some insignificant “insult” was discovered as the reason for occupation. In the case of Esthonia, the escape of the interned Polish submarine Orzel was the cause célèbre which led to the “invitation,” much in the manner of Hitler calling Schuschnigg to Berchtesgaden, of the Esthonian Foreign Minister to Moscow, where he was told the fate of his country.
In the case of Latvia, Pravda accused that:
British politicians not only sought to utilize Latvia as a drill-ground and place d’armes for the plan of aggression against the USSR, they also tried to convert her into a colony, into an agrarian appendage of industrial England.
The incorporation of these countries naturally led to a bureaucratic “socialization” of their economies and their attachment to the Soviet economy. This “socialization” was hailed by the Stalinists (and some Trotskyists) as a victory for the international proletariat.
When the war broke out, Germany and the Soviet Union solemnly issued a joint declaration and put the blame upon England and France. Thus they thought they had given the verdict of history on the origin of the Second Imperialist World War. Moreover, the two governments announced that they would stand for no interference in eastern European events from England, France or any other power which had no business in that part of the world! Says Scott: “The Kremlin was convinced more and more every day that an era of prosperous Soviet-German cooperation was dawning.” Relations between them could not have been better. And the building of Soviet fortifications in the West, Scott ascribes to Stalin’s natural suspiciousness and “that at the time old Uncle Joe was mainly concerned about a British attack in case of a German defeat, or a combined attack after a negotiated peace.” The villain in the drama was at all times England!
 
Prologue to the Finnish Débâcle
The crowning achievement of the Hitler-Stalin attack was the Russo-Finnish War. The general story is fairly well known. But Duel for Europe contains some interesting material that was not hitherto available. The original demands made upon Finland were predicated on the needs of Soviet defense. It asked for territorial concessions and special military rights for the Red Army. Stalin believed, after the way the Balticum was seized, that the Finns would surrender to any demand. But to his surprise, the Finns said nothing doing. What is more, they made it clear that they would resist any attempts by Stalin to achieve his demands by forcible means. In order words, the Finns were ready to go to war.
Scott shows first, that the Finnish masses backed the régime to the limit because they feared, above all, incorporation into the Soviet Union and life under Stalin. Truly, a beautiful testimonial to Stalin’s internationalism! But the author also adds that the Russian masses were completely indifferent to the subsequent barrage of charges in the Soviet press against the Finns; they believed them all to be lies!
How did the Russian leaders interpret Finnish resistance? It is only possible for the Finns to resist because some power or powers (England and France) have given them assurance of aid. That must be it because Germany would stand behind the Russians against the Finns. Scott is of the opinion that Stalin did not hold entirely to this thesis because he had less faith in the Soviet-German pact than did most Soviet officials. This, however, is conjecture, because Stalin never differentiated himself from the others in this stage of German-Russian relations. Moreover, the Germans gave practical proof of their support to Russia as the war unfolded in the North.
What did the bureaucracy expect from such a war? An uprising of the people and a mass welcome by the Finnish people of the Red Army. But the Finns mobilized their forces in reply to Moscow’s further pressure. Then came the propaganda campaign to convince the Russian masses that Stalin was fighting a Finnish threat to the Soviet borders, particularly to Leningrad. Press attacks on the Finns appeared daily. There were attacks on the bourgeois Finnish leaders, gingerly spiced with many personal insults. Meetings were organized throughout the country to mobilize mass support. Hundreds of anti-Finnish resolutions were passed, but Scott relates:
... These resolutions were written by the central authorities and sometimes not even voted on at the meetings. The Soviet workers were and continued to be uninterested in Finland. I heard many plain Moscovites expressing shame at the recent Soviet-German partitioning of Poland and waxing indignant over the press demands for intervention in Finland. The Soviet people felt they had their hands full without fighting wars on someone else’s territory.
Then Stalin resorted to a stale stratagem. Since the Finns would not accede to all the Soviet demands, it was necessary to invent some “incident.” So it was charged that Finnish artillery had fired shells upon Soviet troops, killing three and wounding nine. A demand was made that the Finns withdraw their troops a distance of twenty or twenty-five kilometers. The Finns delivered a note in reply stating that an inquiry established that no shots had been fired from their side and that no Finnish guns “were within range of Mainilia,” the scene of the firing. The Finns offered to cooperate in a joint investigation and were ready to discuss a mutual withdrawal of troops.
 
How the War Broke Out
When the Finns were convinced that the Russians meant war, they sent a long telegram to their legation, acceding to Stalin’s demands. But before this telegram was completely translated and delivered into the hands of Vice-Commissar of Foreign Affairs Potemkin (a matter of a single night), he informed them that diplomatic relations had been severed “because of continued Finnish attacks on Soviet troops.” During the same night the Red Army invaded Finland at several points. “Finnish appeals for reopening of negotiations fell on deaf ears.”
How did the Russian masses react to this war? Scott writes:
All this was received coldly by most of the Soviet population. I heard many Russians saying: “We know about this artillery firing,” with cynical significance. There was grumbling and sneering even in streetcars and in queues in stores. The workers assembled in meetings to pass fiery resolutions were indifferent. There had been too much provocation employed internally by the Soviet authorities during the purge of 1936–38.
Months later I was told by a Red Army man who had been stationed near Mainilia that no one in his unit had heard of the reported incident on the twenty-sixth. From the standpoint of Realpolitik, it is unimportant, however, whether seven shells were fired at all or whether they came from Soviet or Finnish guns. The significant fact was that the Soviet public at large did not believe the government assertions.
This tragedy was followed by its farce. On December 1, from the fishing village of Teroiki came the announcement of the formation of a “Finnish People’s Government” headed by Otto Kuusinen. “Within a few hours a pact was signed between the Soviet Government and the ‘People’s Government of the Democratic Republic of Finland.’” Note, not the Finnish Soviet Republic, but the Democratic Republic of Finland! Here again Scott gives us an interesting picture of the reaction of the Russian masses:
The whole Teroiki fiasco was so transparent and crude that the simplest Moscovites were skeptical, even amused, when Pravda front-paged a photograph of Stalin and Kuusinen after the signature of the pact. There was no radio station in Terioki which could have broadcast the declaration of the new government; Kuusinen had not been in Finland in two decades, and until quite recently had headed the Anglo-American section of the Comintern; and the Terioki government was laughed at by most Finns. These facts were widely known among Moscovites. It was the only instance I can remember in nearly a decade in Russia when large numbers of average Soviet citizens actually laughed at Stalin’s government. At various times Stalin had been praised, maligned, worshipped, cursed, feared and hated, but the Teroiki performance made him an object of ridicule for many street car conductors, plumbers and other ordinary citizens.
The Moscow reply to the League of Nations, which subsequently expelled it from that body, explained; The Soviet Union was not at war with Finland or the Finnish people; it maintained peaceful relations with the “People’s Government of Finland; Helsinki no longer represented the Finnish people, and all matters had been settled by the Moscow-Terioki pact.” (!)
The war itself was a débâcle for the Russians. Ill-prepared, cocksure, disorganized, they suffered terrible defeats. The disorganization behind the lines gave expression to enormous inefficiency of the bureaucracy. A sharp crisis was registered in Moscow and Leningrad. Eventually overwhelming preponderance won for Stalin, but not without severe Soviet losses which greatly outnumbered those of the Finns.
What part did Germany play in this side-show to the main war? Trotsky had stated that the invasion of Finland was started in agreement with Hitler. Scott gives this analysis a qualified support. In any case he points out that it was within the accord of the Molotov-Ribbentrop agreement.
He writes that, while the Germans gave no formal assistance to either side, “unofficially they were reported to have supplied the Red Army with the plans of the Mannerheim Line casemates and equipment installed by German firms.” The Germans were anxious to avoid friction with the Kremlin because “Soviet oil and wheat deliveries to Germany were made as per schedule and other undertakings were fulfilled to the letter.” Germany warned Norway and Sweden not to permit the passage of any Allied units or they would be faced with immediate occupation by Germany. On February 28, 1940, “the German Minister to Helsinki rendered further aid to Russia by informing the Finnish government that a formal Finnish request for military aid from the Allies would be followed by immediate German military action against Finland.” And this was all the assistance Stalin, who feared direct Anglo-French intervention, wanted or needed from his German allies.
The Helsinki regime sued for peace and the Terioki farce was played out. It was a tragedy for Kuusinen. The peace was negotiated between Helsinki and Moscow, i.e., with a government Stalin had “liquidated” and had refused to recognize. The Terioki government disappeared without a trace, unmourned and unwept.
Thus ended one phase of the war. Stalinism alienated another working class through the bureaucratic pursuit of an anti-proletarian policy to “increase its power, prestige and revenues.” (Trotsky)
 
Preparation for a New and Bigger Straggle
The Finnish war showed what dire consequences resulted from the army purge; it compelled a drastic reorganization of its structure, leadership and training. The mobilization of the military forces and a little diplomacy in the Balkans preceded the outbreak of war between Russia and Germany. In June 1940, France fell and with that came the collapse of the Allied armies in Western Europe. Hitler’s victory came with astonishing ease and great surprise even though his attempted knockout of England through an air assault failed dismally.
The victory of Germany in the West shocked the Russians, who believed that the war there would last for many years. When the struggle against England began to drag, indicating that no great battles would be fought, that the struggle would be protracted, the Kremlin became uneasy. Scott speaks with confidence that this marked a turning point for Stalin and began the immense preparations for war with Germany. At the same time the Russians continued to do everything in their power to placate the Germans. They lived up to the provisions of the pact by supplying Germany with many of her needs on time and in great quantities, much to the pleasant surprise of the Germans themselves. A list of materials sent to Hitler included wheat, rye, barley, oats, corn, oil, seeds, beans and peas, oil cake, starch products, sugar, dressed poultry, fish, leather, manganese ore, asbestos, magnesite, soda, wool flax, petroleum products, pharmaceutical and chemical products, zinc ore, wood, cotton and cotton waste, and copper. There is no doubt that these shipments constituted no small reason for enabling Hitler to carry on the war.
If the victory in the West marked a change in Stalin’s policy it also meant a change for Hitler. He could not remain at the Channel endlessly. If he could not invade England, he was certain that England could not invade the Continent. Hitler began to look toward the East, especially when he noted the extended preparations made by Stalin for war. Russian seizure of Bessarabia, Bukovina, the pact with Jugoslavia and the pact with Japan, which was topped off by a “drunken” scene of friendship between Stalin and Matsuoko at a railroad station only served to hasten Hitler’s attack on Russia. Russian economic overtures short of turning over parts of Russian economy to Hitler were rejected by him.
As part of the campaign to prepare for war, Stalin put Timoshenko at the head of the army. The absence of proletarian policy is further indicated by the “reforms” introduced under Timoshenko’s direction. Scott reports the following changes in 1940:

June 23: Order that the men must salute their officers on or off duty, a practice which was discontinued with the victory of the October Revolution.
 
June 23: Order for tightening up guardhouse discipline “in order to make violators of army rules feel that they were being punished.”
 
May: The establishment of a special commission “to award the ranks of general and admiral,” which had been abolished under the regime of Lenin and Trotsky, only to be reinstated by Stalin and Timoshenko.
 
August 12: Political commissars were abolished “as having fulfilled their function.”
 
September 3: The five marshals received thirty-one-karat diamond stars “which rivalled in splendor anything worn by the officers of the old Czarist army.”
 
September 23: Following military maneuvers throughout the country, Pravda wrote in praise of the Red Army that it was “following the best traditions of the great Russian armies of Suvorov and Kutuzov.”
 
Early January 1941: “Timoshenko issued an order providing for the reintroduction of the sword as part of the uniforms of Red Army generals and commissioned officers – a move calculated to raise the authority of these commanders.” This was followed by an editorial in Red Star reporting on an order, which was not publishing, “giving commanders the right to use physical force in disciplining enlisted men.”

For the Stalinist regime, for the bureaucratic collectivist class, these measures were necessary in order to prepare for war. Yet this is what the Cannonites call “Trotsky’s Red Army.”
 
The New Stage in the War
The rest of Scott’s book covers more familiar material leading to the outbreak of war between Hitler and Stalin. Hitler, master of the Continent, had one job to perform to insure that his one remaining border was guaranteed, i.e., to invade Russia and to destroy her colossal armies. After a year and a half, he is still engaged in that task. But the attack on Russia altered the line-ups in the war. Stalin is no longer the blood brother of Hitler. Now England is no longer responsible for the outbreak of war. Now Hitler has become the arch-enemy of humanity, while Stalin has become a great democrat allied with the “great democracies” of Great Britain and the United States. Now, the Red Army is fighting for “Mother Russia,” for national independence, for world peace, for democracy. Now the imperialist war has become a “people’s war.” Now Russia has entered an alliance with her “arch-enemies” to re-establish the pre-war status quo.
What stands out in Scott’s analysis of Soviet diplomacy and foreign policy is that indirectly he establishes its relationship to domestic policy. There is not a shred of socialism in Stalinist conduct; there is not the slightest trace of internationalism to be found. The theory of socialism in one country has found its fruition in Stalin’s “national war.” Given this condition, built upon fifteen years of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution, the Soviet Union in the war is indistinguishable from her allies, either in her conduct of the war or in her war aims. That is so clear and has become so “natural” that nowhere in his extremely interesting and valuable survey does Scott find it possible to make any reference to the socialist policies, socialist thinking, or socialist aims of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Only self-deception can enable people to say that Stalin is “fighting the war of the workers,” for the truth is concrete.

Footnote
1. Duel for Europe, by John Scott. Published by Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston; 381 pages, $8.50.
 

ar and the Colonial Peoples (April 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
War and the Colonial Peoples
(April 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 3, April 1942, pp. 67–69.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Nothing has so laid bare the reactionary nature of imperialism as the war in the Far East. Since the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the United Nations have suffered uninterrupted defeats, surrendered one possession after another to a foe striking with great speed and unrelenting in its haste to gain as much as possible in the shortest period of time, i.e., before the superior material resources of the Allies begins to make itself felt in that sector of the World War.
The Japanese forces simultaneously attacked in a multitude of directions, the Philippines, Guam, Wake, Malaya, Singapore and the Dutch East Indies. In each instance, it is true, they employed superior military arms, more troops, larger air forces, greater naval squadrons and auxiliary forces. Despite the assurances by Churchill that Singapore could be defended and would be held for six months at least, it fell quickest of all. Only in the Philippines, and now (for how long, no one can tell) in Burma does resistance continue, but in the latter country the struggle is doomed, if only for the reason that the native population turned on their British overlords. Examine the military campaigns on these various fronts and one fact stands out: the only place where a genuine resistance continues is in the Philippines, but that is the only country in which a native army, equal or greater in size than a foreign ally, is in the field battling an invader. The Philippines enjoyed a pseudo-independence, yet even such limited independence did not obtain on the other fronts.
 
A Defense Without the Natives
War strategists and the “expert” commentators in the United States have written a great deal to point out that British imperialism was less benevolent than the Dutch and for that reason were unable to bring themselves to arm the native populations of Malaya and Singapore to help them in the struggle against the Japanese. They had forecast that the situation would be entirely different in the Dutch East Indies because the Dutch were more intelligent (!) colonizers, or, stated in another way, a less rapacious exploiter. But this was not true in any way. The imperialist prerogatives were just as firmly applied by the Dutch in defense of their possessions.
Let us assume for the moment that Sumatra, the Celebes, Timor and Borneo were, from a military point of view, indefensible (this is only another way of saying that the enemy had military preponderance). But the Dutch and their Allies continually proclaimed that Java, the richest and most populated island of the Indies, was defensible and that the defenders would give an excellent account of themselves. Moreover, the military staff in Java had made public the fact that the Dutch military strength was concentrated on that island in order to insure a real defense. However, when Java fell, the reason given for this new catastrophe was the same as in all other cases: military inferiority.
Admitting for the moment that the real sources of Allied military strength were thousands of miles away from the South Pacific waters, the reasons given for this series of defeats overlooks the most important element: the indifference of the native populations in face of a new invaderl In Malaya, the native population did not give the slightest aid to some 50,000 to 75,000 Empire troops battling a superior force of Japanese. In Java, the defenders numbered from 50,000 to 100,000 troops, but never were more than 50,000 effectives in a position to join battle. Here, too, superiority in numbers gave the Japanese an easy victory.
Why did this situation obtain? Why did the native population of the Malayas remain immobilized and indifferent to the new invader? Why were there only a handful of defenders in the Dutch East Indies with a population of more than 60,000,000 people? Why was it impossible to mobilize a vast army in Java, whose population numbered about 45,000,000 people?
 
Why the Colonials Are Indifferent
In each instance, the British and the Dutch proceeded to map defenses of lands which did not belong to them. In each instance, the British and the Dutch worked out defenses which ignored the presence of the peoples of these lands. Think of it! Java, inhabited by 45,000,000 people, was defended by a handful of troops! Such a situation could obtain only because the Allies conduct this war in an imperialist manner. On the eve of the fall of Singapore, a thousand Chinese natives were armed with pistols and rifles! Not even such a gesture was reported from the Dutch East Indies.
Those who support the Allied powers in this war on the ground that it is a war for the freedom of all peoples, four freedoms, no less, for genuine democracy in all countries, for the right of self-determination of all subject peoples, are troubled. They are confused, not because of these defeats, but because it is clear that none of these things are applicable, in the minds of the leaders of the United Nations, to the colonial world. Imperialist ideology dominates the Allied policy.
Consider Burma for a moment. The “liberal” mind thinks in the following way: it is true that the British have been cruel exploiters of the Burmese. Japanese domination, however, would be a far worse evil. Therefore, it seems reasonable that the Burmese people should support the British in repelling the Japanese. But a considerable number of Burmese are aiding Japan to drive out the British. The liberal is heartsick and even a little bit hopeless about it all. At a distance of some 8,000 to 10,000 miles away it does not occur to the liberal intellectual that the native peoples cannot distinguish between one imperialist and another. Exploitation and foreign domination, no matter what the garb, no matter which country is the interloper, cannot make a fundamental difference to a subjugated people!
What has made the situation worse is the manner in which the British and the Dutch have conducted the war in their possessions. They have refused to arm the people! They have refused to involve them in the defense of their own countriesl They have asked them only to give support to the British and Dutch rulers! To put it in its sharpest form: The native peoples were not permitted to defend their own countries! In the minds of the colonial peoples, their lands were fought over by foreign powers. But this fighting was not in the interest of the native peoples, but of the imperialist wealth and possessions of these foreign powers! Not a single promise of freedom was given them by the British or Dutch in exchange for their aid in the fight against the Axis. Not even the promise of an alleviation of the cruel conditions of their existence after the war! Nothing, absolutely nothing! Is it any wonder, then, why the colonial peoples are indifferent to a war which involves their future?
The real impediment to an arming of the colonial peoples is the fear of Britain and the Netherlands that, with weapons, the native may strike out for their complete freedom from all foreign domination! Rather than face this prospect they have pursued a course which doomed in advance a powerful defense of those possessions won by the Japanese.
 
The Case of India
This brings us to India, the most important colonial country in the world, with enormous resources and an inexhaustible population. India is the basis of the British Empire; its more than 350,000,000 people are ruled by a nation of about 45,000,000! For more than 150 years the British have drained the wealth of this immense country, kept its people divided, imposed a terrifying exploitation upon them and resisted every effort of the nationals for independence. There is no need here to recount the history of this colonial adventure. The New International last month published a brilliantly written thesis of the British conquest. This issue contains additional sections on the situation there prepared by the Fourth Internationalists of that country.
The present situation is very simple. The British Empire cannot pursue the same policy in India, now threatened with a Japanese invasion, as they did in Burma and Malaya. The loss of the latter countries is as nothing compared to the loss of India. Furthermore, England knows that it cannot defend India unless the struggle is supported by the Indian people.
But she is also acutely aware that this support will not be forthcoming unless India obtains her freedom, or some rotten compromise is reached between Downing Street and the native bourgeois rulers (the Native Princes appointed in London, and the bourgeois leaders of the Nationalist movements). It is abundantly clear, however, that England rejects the very thought of Indian freedom. For many decades the British have rejected any genuine measures which might finally secure this independence. It has persecuted all independence movements, including the harmless compromisers. In each instance, force was employed to beat back the most intimate desires of the peoples of India. And yet, the imperialist contradictions are such that now, at a moment when the complete loss of India is threatened, the Empire itself has come forward with proposals which she hopes will bring the enormous potential strength of India to bear in the war against Japan.
 
The Nature of the British Proposals
What is it that the British propose? Namely, that India shall have a dominion status after the war in exchange for an unqualified support of the war now. Gandhi has described this proposal as a “post-dated check” which could be rejected or not. This is the proposal in general. Specifically, the British are prepared to allow an increasing development of administrative functions by Indians! We shall see exactly what this means in a moment. After the war India shall draw up a new constitution and call into existence a constitutional assembly, proportionately represented by members of the existing provincial legislatures.
The proposals contain clauses which permit the secession of various Indian states – a new type of dismemberment – and a division along religious lines. All of these proposals contain a joker. No provisions are presented allowing for a true democratically constituted assembly of the people. In contrast, however, there is an assurance that the Native Princes, appointed by the British, shall retain their power. The proposed constitutional convention will be made up of representatives from provincial legislatures for which less than five per cent of the people have voted! As a dominion, India would have the optional right of withdrawal from the British Empire.
There are several significant features in the present situation which deserve special attention. The proposals from London are proposals of despair!Churchill was driven by the state of the war to make what he regards as a world-shaking concession to the Indian people. The political situation in England coincided with the war situation to force this “concession.” Sir Stafford Cripps, riding the wave of mass dissatisfaction with the way in which the hidebound conservatives were conducting the war, employed his reputation as “a friend of India” to wrest this “concession” from a reluctant Churchill. Obviously the aristocratic and conservative British ruling class, thoroughly saturated with the imperialist tradition, feel that they have made a tremendous sacrifice in the cause of liberty: they propose to give, after the war, a measure of freedom to more than 350,000,000 people, whose land they have usurped, whose wealth they have taken, whose liberty they have stolen! So cynical and reactionary has the liberal and democratic mind become that this farce is hailed as a harbinger of a truly new world!
Thus, the New York Times informs India that this is not the time to quibble over such abstractions as freedom and independence – Japanese guns might make such discussions ludicrous. As an imperialist newspaper The Times does not advise Britain to give India freedom; it advises India not to argue with the Empire and to accept its offer in good faith even though the grounds for such good faith are non-existent.
 
What Britain Fears
But the British conservatives are not so simple. They know that they have made no immediate concession. They hope for the best in the future. This was evident in the whole manner in which the proposals were made to India. They were kept secret for two weeks. Why? Because an announcement of them would have met with immediate rejection even by Nehru and the other bourgeois nationalist leaders. Instead, Sir Stafford Cripps was despatched to India to deliver the proposals in person and to employ his reputation as a friend of Indian freedom to push through the acceptance of this bogus program. Thus the issue of the independence of India was reduced to the reputation of a Stafford Cripps and the respect he enjoys in some Indian circles. The British ruling class knew that they could not bring about their acceptance – they employed a person with a “left wing” reputation!
The proposals, which may have been a concession in “principle” in the collective mind of the British ruling class, do not alter the economic dominion of British capital. The economic control of British monopoly capitalism would remain unchanged after the war. Indian foreign trade and Indian defense would remain. British controlled.
But what of the present? What would be the task of the Indians? To handle the administrative task of mobilizing the native population behind the war effort! The government in London understands only too well that it has not the power to win the support of the Indian people to the war and this is the only reason why it is even willing to consider a native administration for this job. Only a native administration can garner such support and make possible the employment of vast numbers of Indians as troops and other effectives in the war. To turn the defense of India over to the Indians would create the condition for the expulsion of Great Britain and the achievement of complete independence. As a matter of fact, given a more militant and determined leadership, this could be achieved without serious resistance. It is the fear of the consequences of such a situation which deters the British from offering anything of a substantial nature which could lose everything or destroy forever the power of British capitalism to exploit and profit from control of India.
 
The Reaction of India
In contrast to the manner in which the British proposals were hailed by the Allies is the almost thorough rejection they have met even by those leaders in India who were believed to be the ones most amenable to their acceptance. Gandhi was the first to make known that he had little or no faith in the conditional freedom offered by Churchill. And when he counselled India to reject any proposal for the use of a scorched earth policy against the Japanese, he struck fear in the hearts of the British only because they regard that statement as indicative of a certain spirit which, if it represents the feelings of the Indian masses, would make a Japanese invasion rather easy. But Gandhi’s pacifism in relation to the question of the “scorched earth” merely approximates, from another angle, the policy pursued by the British in Malaya and Burma, where the British landowners and capitalists, dominated by the “instinct of private property,” permitted vast stores of military supplies, plantations and some factories to fall intact to the Japanese. This counsel by Gandhi, moreover, could mean that the Japs would not face a fierce resistance by the native population.
The Indian leaders, even those who would prefer to accept the British proposals, do not have much faith or trust in Great Britain. They have learned through bitter experience that the British never meant to give India the slightest freedom. They remember, too, that during the last war, similar promises were made and never kept. They recall how every practical measure employed by the Indians in the post-World War period to wring concessions from London was met by the armed resistance of their overlords. But, above all, they know that the masses in India are not ready to accept much longer crumbs tossed them by the British. And their present rejection of the British “concessions” is based primarily on their knowledge of the temper of the masses who, by their knowledge of the objective situation, realize that now is the time to obtain freedom and independence – now, when Britain is weak, when it cannot successfully cope with their mass strength. They know too, that after the war, in the event of an Allied victory, it will be more difficult to win democratic rights from a victorious Empire.
It is difficult to forecast exactly what will happen in the next period. At the time of this writing the Japanese have landed forces only loo miles from India’s borders. The military situation, the influence of Cripps, the pressure exerted from the outside by the United States, the liberal world, the absence of a mass militant party of Indian independence, the absence of a mass revolutionary party of socialism – all these are factors militating against a complete rejection of an understanding with Britain, or, put in another way, create the conditions for compromise.
 
An Imperialist Impasse
The situation in India is the living proof of the decay of the social order of capitalism. All that is rotten in this system of war and fascism is expressed there. More than 350,000,000 people are held the subjects of a power which proclaims its struggle for freedom and democracy. Yet this power cannot grant a single genuine democratic demand to this country even while it faces a military defeat of colossal magnitude. For a military defeat of Great Britain in the struggle over India would lay the grounds for a German-Japanese junction in Asia and at worst spell the doom of the United Nations, at best prolong the war for many, many years.
This prospect, dark as it is, does not appear strong enough to bend the imperialist will of the Empire. It is not a question of ill-will or of desire, even though these may be factors in the situation. It is the fundamental inability of imperialism to act as a progressive forcel Imperialism cannot grant freedom to colonial possessions without destroying its own base. That is why the Empire, faced with a total defeat in Asia, cajoles, debates, resists and then retreats, hoping for the best of various bargains. In the end the inevitable and irresistible surge of the colonial peoples will triumph and true freedom and independence will be theirs. The present state of affairs is temporary. As the United Nations suffer uninterrupted defeats in Asia, the sense of power and dignity will grow upon the oppressed peoples. They will realize that freedom is immediately possible if only they will take it. And it is this same condition that will make it impossible for Japanese imperialism to gain what it hopes – a new and grand Asiatic empire which it can exploit without end and without mercy.
 







Dear Editor:
Your readers will doubtless be interested in the following letter which I have sent to The Nation.




 


Albert Gates,
Editor,
The New International





Dear Sirs:
In the March 21 issue of The Nation there appeared a letter from Dwight Macdonald regarding the Stalinist attack on left-wing refugees in Mexico, and a reply by the editors. It goes without saying that we agree completely with Macdonald’s letter. We regard the Stalinist attack on these anti-fascist fighters as only another instance of GPU methods in dealing with political opponents within the general working class political movement. I was, therefore, happy to read that you rejected the Stalinist charges against Serge, Regler, Muniz, Gorkin and Pivert.
In reply to the specific question which Mr. Macdonald asked you, i.e., whether one becomes a tool of fascism “if one opposes the present conduct of the war as imperialistic,” you have made a questionable distinction between a tool and an agent. You say that opposition to the present war on any ground whatever, makes one a tool of fascism – but you add “a tool is not an agent.” The distinction you make is too fine to involve a fundamental difference. The reason the distinction is made in the first place, is because The Nation would like to distinguish between fascist opponents of the war and the position of international socialists, who are opposed to all imperialist war. Otherwise, the distinction would not be necessary. But on the same grounds as The Nation rests its case. Hitler would say that an international socialist is an agent of Roosevelt or Churchill.
I write this letter to you, however, to sharply dissent from your basic point of view. Revolutionary socialists are, above all, internationalists. Surely The Nation knows that our opposition to this war as imperialist obtains from our opposition to world capitalism and from the conviction that there is no hope for humanity, not only in the United States, but in the whole world, so long as capitalism, that is to say, imperialism, continues to exist. The fact that three totalitarian states are in alliance against two capitalist-democratic states, one totalitarian state, one military dictatorship, etc., cannot fundamentally alter the point of view of international socialism that this very war and the alliances could not exist except under the social order of capitalism.
Socialism, as the editors of The Nation well know, seeks to eradicate the basic causes for war, unemployment, poverty and fascism, which it knows are the products of capitalism. No matter what the outcome of the war no matter who wins, on the continued existence of capitalism, none of these phenomena will be abolished. The Nation proceeds in its thinking obviously on the theory of the lesser evil. That British or American imperialism, or Stalinism, now that it is no longer in alliance with Hitler, is a lesser evil in comparison with Hitler.
As a revolutionary socialist and an ardent anti-fascist, I am only too well acquainted with the barbarism of fascism and the imperialist aims of Hitler and Co. But I, together with thousands of other international socialists, sought to prevent the victory of Hitler in Germany long before he came to power, at a time when the German Social Democracy and the German Stalinist Party refused to unite in a common struggle against the scourge, when the democratic-imperialists did everything in their power to aid and rearm Hitler. One of the most powerful “ideas” making certain this victory of Hitler was that of the lesser evil (Bruening is a lesser evil as compared to Hitler; Dolfuss is a lesser evil as compared to the Nazis). This theory destroyed the resistive powers of the German and Austrian working class. International socialists oppose this theory because it insures the continued existence of the social order which breeds and brings to power the fascist political system. I emphasize “political system” because Germany, Italy and Japan remain capitalist-imperialist nations. International socialists are for socialism, not only in the United States, or Great Britain. We are for world socialism as the only way to abolish all the evils of modern class society. Whether this war ends in a stalemate or whether the United Nations win, the crucial social problems which prevailed prior to the outbreak of the war and which continue to prevail in the very midst of the war, will remain only to bring about conditions for a new war. That is why we stand for socialism now and that is why we dissent so vigorously from your editorial comment, to wit, that a socialist opposition to the war makes one a “tool of Hitler.”
 



The position of the American Negro as an exploited, subjugated and persecuted minority in the United States was never a matter of doubt. It was one of those phenomena of a peculiar American democracy which everyone acknowledged with a shrug of the shoulder, and some even gleefully. Discrimination, Jim Crow, and lynching are the most obvious expressions of the position, of the American Negro in this country. It takes the form of periodic physical assaults upon this minority race – and every such event is quickly hushed up by a conspiracy of silence on the part of the boss press.
Nothing new has happened to change the position of the Negro people since the United States entered the war. But the character of the new situation, the alteration in the lives of the people as a result of the war program; the attempt to build a mass army and the transformation of industry on war basis, has only aggravated the conditions of the Negro people and made more intense the persecution and discrimination against them.
The Roosevelt Administration declares that it has entered the war to fight aggression, totalitarianism; racialism and, for the second time in twenty-five years, to make the world safe for democracy. But it is obvious that the rulers of our country do not thereby mean that these things shall apply to the Negro people.
At a time when industry is completely engaged in war production and requires a great mass of skilled and semi-skilled labor, discrimination against the Negro worker is widespread. It makes no difference what his qualifications may be. He has the greatest difficulty in obtaining a job. Only the unskilled and menial jobs are for him.
No adequate housing program exists for the whole working and poor population. But this applies even more to the Negro race, which is the poorest section of the population. On the other hand, in the Jim Crow neighborhoods where the Negroes live, they are gouged by grasping landlords who enrich themselves on the sweat and blood of the colored peoples.
But the outstanding act of Jim Crow and discrimination against the Negro is in the armed forces now being raised to wage “the war for democracy.”
The Navy is the worst offender against the Negro people. No Negroes are taken into the Navy except as mess boys and latrine cleaners. There is no subtlety used by the Navy chiefs in the discrimination against the Negro. They speak plainly and bluntly: They don’t want “niggers” in their organization. Naturally, they are not at all squeamish, nor do they suffer any pangs of conscience when they with one hand take the money donated to them by Joe Louis and with the other say to the Negroes: You aren’t allowed in the Navy unless you want to clean toilets or mess around galleys.
Many papers, especially New York’s PM, point out how different the Army treats the Negro. Yet is this really true? Certainly the Army does not make public its discrimination and Jim Crow policy against the Negro. But there are not mixed regiments. The Negro is very often given laboring jobs in the Army, hauling equipment, cleaning work, etc. He has no genuine equality.
The Negro soldier in the Army feels his discrimination in a thousand ways. On more than one occasion, shootings have taken place in which Negro boys were the victims of white mounted police, who evidently regard as their main task the ordering of Negro boys about while they hold their guns with itching fingers, which often shoot.
The latest incident broke out in Alexandria, La. Seven thousand Negro soldiers had congregated in the Negro neighborhood after pay day. A riot broke out between the Negro soldiers and white mounted police over what is reported as an attempt by the police to arrest a Negro soldier. It appears that the mounted police, aided by the police chief and 300 of his men, won out. The payoff is this: thirty-one Negroes were injured; three of them seriously. The Negro boys came from Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey. They are encamped in the South!
Army officials promised a statement on the fight. None has yet been issued. Obviously, it doesn’t do any good to have more than 12,000,000 Negroes learn that all the evils of capitalist life are carried over into the Army.
The Negroes are a subject race and as long as capitalism exists, freedom and democracy for them is an unattainable goal. The future of the Negro race lies in socialism, a society of real freedom and democracy.
 

nquilah Zindabad! (September 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Inquilah Zindabad!
(September 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 8, September 1942, pp. 229–230.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

The United Nations are in a muddle. The muddle is India. From the moment that India rejected Churchill’s messenger, Sir Stafford Cripps, and his “post-dated check” for Indian freedom, the British government proceeded with its characteristic policy to beat that country into submission. The dull-witted British ministers sit on a social powder-keg and blissfully announce that everything is fine and dandy in India, and the situation is completely under control. But Time magazine, hurling the lie at the British, wrote in its issue of August 24th:
Having clapped all Congress leaders into jail, the British were prepared to deal with rioting. The Raj even hoped that prompt action would break the back of the Congress Party once and for all. Optimistically, government officials announced that resistance was virtually under control. Immediately new riots broke out in Madras, where four men were killed trying to attack a railway station. Ahmadabad mill closed. A Karaikkudi mob tried to free an Indian being jailed. Calcutta brooded restlessly, heard threats of work stoppages at vital war plants. Poona, Nagpur, Cawnpore, Wardha reported fresh riots An airplane dropped tear gas on a crowd of Bombay mill workers. The New Delhi town hall was burned.
In general, the American press plays the British game. The tenor of its articles and editorials is to defend, somewhat critically, it is true, the position of the Churchill government because Great Britain is an ally of the United States. They, too, paint a quiet India, an India resigned to continued British rule. But the truth lies elsewhere.
Louis Fischer, writing in The Nation of September 5, reports a strike of 50,000 Tata munition workers who demanded Gandhi’s release. “The strike wave in India is spreading,” writes Fischer, illustrating the mass participation of the Indian proletariat in the struggle for freedom. Behar, Madras, the United Provinces, the Central Province and the Bombay Presidency are scenes of the struggle for independence; the movement is spreading.
In reply to the Indian masses, the British authorities have reintroduced the whipping post – democratic masters with cat-o-nine-tails! The machine gun, the carbine and the sword are in readiness and in use to convince the Indians that the British really mean business, this business of fighting for democracy.
 
Winston Churchill Speaks Out
Somewhat overdue, on September 10, came the statement of His Majesty’s Prime Minister, the Honorable Winston Churchill. I use the word overdue, because the Prime Minister has never failed to express himself bluntly on colonial affairs in general and on India in particular. The imperialist Churchill remained true to himself and his class. His statement on the Indian situation was compounded of distortions and plain falsehoods. It even lacked his customary rhetoric, which seems to paralyze and hypnotize the world liberals and misleaders of labor. This is what the Prime Minister said: “The course of events in India has been improving and is, on the whole, reassuring.” He then proceeded to prove that the Congress Party represents a small minority of the Hindu people and by implication “proved” that more than 235,000,000 of the population support the British, or at least reject the current struggle induced by the Congress rejection of Cripps. Without a blush of shame, Churchill, the magnificent representative of British finance capital, describes the Congress Party as a “machine sustained by certain manufacturing and financial interests” (native bourgeoisie). To prove what? That Britain is justified in its imperialist rule over the country!
In support of his declaration that the situation in India is “improving and is, on the whole, reassuring,” the Prime Minister declared: “Less than 500 persons have been killed over this mighty area of territory and population, and it has only been necessary to move a few brigades of British troops here and there in support of civil power.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
With the customary obtuseness of the imperialist, Churchill concluded: “I therefore feel entitled to report to the House that the situation in India at this moment gives no occasion for undue despondency or alarm.”
 
The Old Churchill Is the New
This is the real Churchill speaking and it is in keeping with his past. As early as the Simon Commission and afterward, it was he who protested most vigorously any negotiations with the Congress leaders as “beneath the dignity of an imperial Britain.” In 1930, he declared: “Sooner or later you will have to crush Gandhi and the Indian Congress and all they stand for.” In December 1931, he stated: “I did not contemplate India having the same constitutional rights and system as Canada in any period which we could foresee.”
In retrospect of World War I, during which India participated in the British war effort against the Kaiser, Churchill said (January 1931): “No one has supposed that, except in a purely ceremonial sense in the way in which representatives of India attended conferences during the war, that that principle and policy for India would be carried into effect at any time which it is reasonable or useful for us to foresee.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.) Great Britain is in a new war fighting for its life. This time, it is Churchill, as head of the government, who has offered India participation in the war effort on the same basis as in World War I – and with the same promises, never meant to be honoredl Only the situation in India is different. Nobody there believes Churchill or the British government. The Indian masses want freedom now! It is the pressure of these masses which forced the Congress leaders, who had hoped for a “decent” compromise, to reject the imperial proposals. Why should they believe Churchill now? There is no reason whatever.
The Indians remember only too vividly the attitude of the British to the Japanese invasion of Manchuria and what it meant for them. At that, time, the Honorable Leopold Amery, Secretary for India, opined:
I confess that I see no reason whatever why, either in act or in word or in sympathy, we should go individually, or internationally, against Japan in this matter.
Who is there among us to cast the first stone and to say that Japan ought not to have acted with the object of creating peace and order in Manchuria and defending herself against the continual aggression of vigorous Chinese nationalization.
Our whole policy in India, our whole policy in Egypt, stands condemned if we condemn Japan. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
There in a nutshell is the British position, under new conditions. It is fundamentally imperialist. And that is why, in the words of Churchill, the Four Freedoms of the Atlantic Charter have “no application to India.”
But, despite Churchill, a great deal of “despondency” and “alarm” are reflected in his speech. The hope that he might “appease” the Indians was shattered by imperialist determination to retain the colony as the basis of the British Empire. The disappointed liberals in England and America, seconded by the constantly protesting Chinese, in loud chorus now turn to Roosevelt. Only Roosevelt can save the situation! They are convinced that there is nothing to be hoped for from Churchill. They know, too, notwithstanding the lies about conflicts between the Hindus and Moslems and others, India has never been so united as now in the struggle for freedom. And this despite the fear of the Indian bourgeois nationalist leaders that the struggle for freedom may take the revolutionary road of a workers’ and peasants’ government.
This demand for intervention by Roosevelt is widespread in the ranks of the United Nations. The Chinese government asks for it. The liberals in America ask for it. Lord Strabolgi, Labor peer, has also asked for it, stating “we should swallow our pride and invite the President of the United States to arbitrate on India.” What a commentary on the United Nations, fighting a “democratic war” for the right of the national independence of all oppressed peoples! What a commentary on the bankrupt position of the British Empire in this bloc!
 
A Complex Situation
The apologists for British imperialism are having a hard time of it reconciling the word and the deed. Thus, the notorious Bertrand Russell, justifying the British position to all Americans, offers this imposing opinion in his letter of August 27 to The Nation: “The question of India is much more complex than it appears to many American liberals.” This is the stock answer of British imperialism: the Indian situation is complex; the problems are many; independence for India cannot be achieved quickly. The only thing that is complex about the Indian situation is that independence for that enormous country would destroy the investments and profits of the parasitic British ruling class, which enjoys its good life on the toil, sweat and tears of the many millions of Indian workers and peasants. That is why the British have remained in ‘India for more than 200 years, suppressing every struggle for independence.
The will to freedom of these oppressed peoples is strong. It will take more than the whipping-post, Churchillian rhetoric, the imperial troops and the Indian misleaders of the native bourgeoisie to halt this inevitable march to liberty for almost 400,000,000 workers and peasants of an oppressed colony of the second great power in the “democratic” camp. Support to that struggle is the duty of every worker, for its victory will hasten the freedom of all oppressed people from economic, political and social servitude.
 

he Fourth Year of the War (September 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
The Fourth Year of the War
(September 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 8, September 1942, pp. 227–228.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Three years of World War II have already been fought. No decisive victory has yet been won by either o£ the two camps in the struggle. While it is true that the German armies have swept deeper into the wide areas of the Soviet Union and now fight in the environs of Stalingrad, their battle victories, important as they are, have not brought the fascist hordes to the end of the war. The Russian armies, with their seemingly inexhaustible manpower, fight on through constant retreat as the war approaches its second winter in that sector.
In the Pacific and the Far East, the Japanese have also won military victories. Malaya, Singapore, the Dutch East Indies, the Philippines, New Guinea, Burma – they have served to stretch the battle and supply lines over enormous territories and tremendous seas, but they have drawn Japan deeper into the war without any prospect of a conclusive triumph over the United Nations in these areas.
The great powers in Europe now face the fourth year of the war and the bloody carnage seems endless to the peoples of the Old World. But for the United States, the war is only beginning. Everything is still in the state of preparation. It is true, there have been some important engagements involving American forces, naval, land and air, but no one will claim that the United States is fully engaged, nor ready to be so engaged. The rapidly expanding navy, air and army forces point to an impending mass use of American forces to turn the tide of a war which is universally acknowledged to be still going in favor of the Axis. American economy has not yet been completely converted into a war economy. The movement in that direction gains momentum every day, but it does so in fits and starts, with great inner stress, yet slowly but surely the American ruling class, profiting mightily from war production, is gaining mastery over the working class with the aid of the New Dealers and the labor skates, in order to complete a war economy which is dependent upon a veritable enslavement of the proletariat.
For Americans, the war is less than a year old and everyone understands that this is only the beginning. No one knows how long this war will last – two, four, seven or ten years. How large an army the United States will need in this war is also a subject of conjecture. Those presumably in the know have made estimates of anywhere from seven to fifteen million men. Nobody really knows. But one thing is certain, even in the opinion of the leading bourgeois authorities, the war will be a long one, its destructive effects incalculable, its casualties enormous. One admiral estimated at least five million American casualties! If this is a reasonable assumption, and we believe it is, the world magnitude of this bloody carnage becomes somewhat clearer. In the First World War there were ten million dead and twenty million wounded over a period of four years, confined to the area of Europe. The global character of a mechanized Second World War, the infinitely larger forces engaged in battle, holds out greater fears – there should be at least three times the number of casualties! If anyone doubts this possibility, he need only turn to Europe, where an excellent beginning has been made in military and civilian casualties.
If the prospect for Americans is a seven year war (or ten), what of those nations which have been at war for three years already? For them a ten or thirteen or fifteen year war is in the offing!
That the present war is merely the continuation of the imperialist slaughter of 1914 is verified by the manner in which it is fought, i.e., its purely military character. The objectives for which the war is fought are crystal clear: colonial hegemony, world market control, cheap labor supply, profits and enslavement of the world masses to capital. The dispute is over who shall prevail. Shall it be Germany, as the dominant power of the Axis, or the United States, as the dominant power of the Allies? This is the essential explanation for the inability of the United Nations to wage an ideological war against the Axis.
Allied war aims, given expression through the Roosevelt-Churchill Four Freedoms, have had no effect upon the peoples of the world. Every concrete act of the United Nations has served to convince them that the Four Freedoms is merely verbiage. Nothing has really changed. Colonial enslavement remains a paramount aim of the United Nations (re-establishment of the lost empires); economic, political and social supremacy of the white race. Any tendency that would lead to a weakening or destruction of the principles of private property, profit and the right to exploitation is resisted by the combined might of the capitalist classes in all bourgeois nations. The growth in profits of the bourgeoisie, the lowering living standards of the masses, the treatment of racial and national minorities (India, Negroes, etc.) are only the concrete manifestations of this imperialist war. The apologists for imperialism are running out of explanations for the patent failure of the United Nations to make out a better case for themselves. The only difference between the two camps in the war are the political regimes in some of the contesting powers. In a number of instances the régimes are identically or similarly totalitarian (Greece, Soviet Union, Brazil, China, Yugoslavia, Rumania, Hungary, Germany, etc.) But even in the genuinely bourgeois democratic nations, the prevailing historical tendency is toward totalitarianism, toward an economic and political consolidation of the rule of finance capital.
It is with this understanding that the Workers Party declared in March of this year that: “Neither side is capable of winning the war by destroying the enemy politically, that is, by conducting such a political campaign as would result in undermining the social foundations of the enemy’s régime or in depriving it of social support to such an extent as to make further military struggle futile. There remains to both of them only physical struggle as the means by which the war can be won, that is, by continued economic pressure (blockade) and by direct military combat.”
The prospects for world humanity, under such conditions, are bleak indeed. It has become more dear than ever that there is only one hope for all of mankind, in the advanced countries as well as in the colonial, in the United Nations as in the Axis dominated countries, and that is socialism, sweeping away the bankrupt, destructive and reactionary social order of capitalism.
 

he Roosevelt Message (September 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
The Roosevelt Message
(September 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 8, September 1942, pp. 228–229.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

In April of this year, President Roosevelt set forth his economic program to prevent inflation and bring about an “equality of sacrifice” by all the classes in the conversion of economy to a war basis. The program he then presented was over-all; it covered taxation, price ceilings, the stabilization of wages and farm prices, increase of bond sales to drain off additional millions from the people, nationwide rationing of essential consumer commodities, the cessation of installment buying and the paying off of debts and mortgages.
From April until September 8, when the President made his fireside chat instructing Congress to act on his program lest he be compelled to use his extraordinary war powers to enforce individually such economic measures as he considers essential for the prosecution of the war, the legislative bodies did nothing or next to nothing. To say that Congress did nothing during these six months is not precisely correct. It did everything within its power to fortify the enrichment of the American bourgeoisie as a result of the war economy and concerned itself solely with placing the entire burden of the war on the backs of the American workers and poor farmers.
While there is general agreement between the Administration and Congress on the need to increase taxes on almost everything, Congress has been pondering on legislation designed to make the payments of the financiers and industrialists as light as possible, and those of the poor as heavy as the burden will carry. Everyone must pay taxes, say the reactionary congressmen, otherwise an unfair burden will be placed on those fortunate enough to own enormous fortunes. Thus, the person earning $is a week must be judged as economically responsible as the “captain of industry” earning |g,6oo a weekl The difference between the reactionary Congress and the New Dealist Administration is one of degree – how much to tax the low income population!
 
Six Months of the War
Price ceilings under congressional supervision and administrative control have been a farce. Here again, the working and lower middle classes have been the worst sufferers. There have, in truth, been no genuine price ceilings. Too many commodities were not given ceilings to begin with. Those under ban were unenforceable because no real instruments of control were devised (trade union and consumer committees).
Under the whip of the congressional farm bloc (the rich farmers) no action has been taken on farm prices to effect a genuine ceiling accruing to the interest of the poor farmer and the worker of the urban centers. Thus, the most important consumer commodities (foodstuffs) have continually increased in price, once again reducing the real wages of the workers.
Widespread rationing of essential commodities has not yet begun, but in this sphere too, no genuine controls are proposed with a view of creating a genuine equality in those goods most certain to be rationed in the coming months.
Pressure for the buying of war bonds increases and measures are now planned for enforced savings and buying bonds.
Curbs for installment buying have likewise been passed and are already in effect. These curbs will be made more stringent as consumer goods continue to decline.
In each instance, however, the Presidential program; if carried into effect, will result in a constant decline in the living standards of the masses. The President’s objection to congressional action, or lack of action, is political! He desires an “equality of sacrifice” under conditions where inequality reigns. He desires to “equalize the burdens” of war, where no equality is possible. Does he understand this? Indeed, he does. Therefore, he wants his program to look as palatable as possible. Therefore, his program for wage stabilization is predicated upon the stabilization of farm prices (food). Unless such stabilization or ceiling is achieved, Roosevelt knows there is trouble ahead. The workers are restless. Already they have assumed the real burden of the war program. They work long hours; they sacrifice everything for the war! A wage ceiling is in effect in practice. Consumer goods become scarcer. Vacations, with or without pay, are eliminated from industry. Double time for overtime work on Sundays and holidays has been canceled out. They have given up the right to strike, their conditions of labor, their union gains.
The workers know that the capitalist class and the rich farmers suffer not at all; they have given up nothing of importance. Union papers are afraid to publish figures on profits and earnings of the officers and directors of the large corporations for fear that the rank and file would become uncontrollable.
 
Contrasts Between Capital and Labor
Leon Henderson estimates that for the year 1942 corporations will earn $20,000,0000,000 (four times greater than 1939) and that after the payment of taxes they will have a net profit of $8,000,000,000 (two times greater than 1939)! Recently published reports of individual earnings by officials of the giant corporations leave one aghast at the tremendous individual fortunes being made out of the war. And this despite the promise of the President that “no one shall profit from the war.” Moreover, in the promulgation of heavy taxes against industry and finance, provisions are being made to rebate a portion of these payments after the war! To date, no proposal has been made to return to the workers a portion of their taxes after the war! And no action has been taken on the Presidential proposal for a limitation of income to $25,000 a year. Nor is such action likely.
The rising cost of living strikes hardest at the workers. Figures show that wage increases have not kept pace with the rise in prices. These are constantly out of proportion, a disproportion favoring the increased costs of all commodities. But this is only the beginning. The Cleveland Trust Co. Business Bulletin for September 15 points out that:
Conversion to war work is not confined to manufacturing industry. It is progressively continuing throughout almost all forms of business activity, although it is not always recognized for what it really is. Transportation, banking, construction, agriculture, engineering, medicine and higher education an rapidly becoming subsidiary agencies of our national war effort. War has already became our chief business, and the degree of its preponderance will continue to increase as long as the struggle lasts.
The war budget by the month of August reached the staggering amount of 223 billion dollars. Less than one-fifth of this amount has been spent and only a little more than halt of this amount has been “committed by contracts or letters of intent.” But already the national economy has been drastically altered. A full realization of the program means a drastic destruction of the “American way of life” – for the masses only!
The President’s effort to make more palatable the destruction of the living standards of the masses will be unavailing. His director of OPA has already indicated what is coming when he declared that “it is probable that in the next twelve to fifteen months we will get a civilian standard of living equivalent to 1932, which was the low of all lows during the depression.”
Given the continued existence of capitalism, the Workers Party has offered a partial program seeking the maintenance of the living standards of the masses during the war. It calls for a capital levy to cover the costs of the war and the confiscation of all profits! It calls for the conscription of all war industries under workers’ control! It calls for the expropriation of the “Sixty Families”! This sharply contrasts with the Roosevelt program. But the Roosevelt program, in its essence, is the “reformist” war program of the financial and industrial ruling class. The program of the Workers Party is the program of the masses.
 



We learn from the New York Times of October 14 that the Bank of International Settlements, more commonly known as the World Bank, continues to function and carry on its business despite the war. Even though the nations which are members of this institution are at war and their armies seek to destroy each other, we find that representatives of these same countries conduct their business in virtually the same way as before.
The matter of the World Bank arose in the British House of Commons when G.R. Strauss, a Labor representative from Lambeth, asked that the British sever all relations with this body. The debate brought out the following interesting facts: The Bank of International Settlements is now under control of the Germans. Of the sixteen directors of this bank, two are neutral, two are British and the rest either Germans or representatives of countries dominated by the Nazis. The president of the bank is Thomas H. McKittrick of the United States, in whose neutrality (in the midst of the war!) Sir Kingsley Wood, British Chancellor of the Exchequer, has the greatest confidence. Says Sir Kingsley:
“The banks are so pledged that actually no transactions have taken place or can take place under the present arrangements which would confer any economic or financial advantage on any belligerent nation to the detriment of another. There have been no meetings of the board since the outbreak of the war and they have had no contact, direct or indirect, or any association with the enemy directorate ... The bank carries on only what might be called routine business.”
One can imagine what this routine business is about, for the Chancellor pointed out that Great Britain had, according to the Times, “substantial interest in the bank under the International Trust Agreement among the various governments and there was a British deposit amounting to between two million and three million pounds.” In addition, the Bank of England had a sharehold of 4,000,000 pounds, of which 25 per cent was withdrawn. And now we come to some of the routine business, again quoting the Times’ remarks of Chancellor Wood:
“Britain’s association with the bank, he insisted, had brought no advantage, economic or financial, to the enemy, adding that it was significant that Germany paid interest to the bank, and from the bank’s assets whereof these dividends formed a part, Britain had received a dividend.”
Perhaps this dividend wasn’t much but big business, in England, as in all other countries, will go a long way before it gives up anything resembling a dividend. It’s the principle of the thing, don’t you know!
But the Labor representative pointed out that the World Bank in its report had set forth proposals for post-war economic reorganization, and declared that:
“There’s some form of collaboration between the Nazis and the Allies and that somewhere in this country appeasement still lives.”
What the Laborite meant to say is that even though there is a war on between Great Britain and Germany, the capitalists of both countries still find a way to work together to insure their post-war existence and profit-making. And that’s not strange. It happened in the last war; it is happening in this one.
 

iscussion on Congress (October 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Discussion on Congress
(October 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 9, October 1942, pp. 259–260.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

For a considerable period of time, Congress has been the subject of public discussion. Political theorists, news commentators and political columnists have expounded their views on what is good or bad about Congress as the representative legislative body of American democracy. As a rule these discussions merely concerned themselves with the individual and collective stature of Congress as a legislative body in the midst of the war. It has become clear that from the point of view of America’s imperialist interests in the war, Congress has been found wanting.
Congress is certainly a curious body, to say the least. Its political, educational and human level is fairly low grade. Both the Senate and the House are dominated by a group of reactionary bourbons and legislative servants of big business. The dominant congressional figures take pride in the fact that they know nothing, are narrow-minded bigots, reactionary to the core. Their greatest boasts are that they have succeeded time and again in defeating any and all legislation having the slightest taint of progressivism or liberalism, however faulty, incomplete and insoluble those proposals may have been. Congress is almost as completely subservient to big business and its lobbies as it is generally impervious to the influence of the liberals and labor.
There are plenty of millionaires and direct representatives of big business in the congressional halls. They are the most influential group in the representative body. Behind them stand a solid phalanx of smaller business men, large landowners, brokers, corporation lawyers, insurance agents and professional politicians, whose essential aim in life is to remain in office. In contrast, there is not a single representative of labor to be found in the Senate, or in the House with its several hundred members. It is this latter fact which epitomizes the Seventy-seventh Congress.
By its very nature, Congress is a body wracked by contradictions. Dominated by the ideology of the bourgeoisie in general, responding to its over-all interests, its representative form gives expression to the inner-class conflicts of the American bourgeoisie. It also reflects the pressure of the petty bourgeoisie, of sectional economic interests, of special group interests and, at times, given certain objective conditions, reflects the pressure of the organized labor movement. But it is by no means the representative of the people; it is not a truly democratic institution. Congress is today a hierarchical political body composed of electees of the two bourgeois political parties.
 
How Much Democracy for the People?
What real intervention is possible for the people in the selection of the congressional candidates? Representation at best is indirect. The candidates are picked by the party bosses. The parties are dominated by big business. In the South, Roosevelt’s party is directed by the genius of racialists, landowners and bourbons, whose ideological development is on a par with the old slaveholders and feudal lords. In the urban centers of the North, political machines decide, if not the presidential candidate of the party, then most offices below it. The masses have no power except to vote for machine candidates selected in the smoke-filled halls of the political factions. For the truth is that the early nineteenth century American democracy of agrarian and commercial capitalism has disappeared. It faded from the scene with the industrialization of the country and the triumph of monopoly capitalism. What is left is a residue, more precisely, the democratic form of popular election. How this has redounded to the benefit of the economically dominant ruling class is evident in another fact, i.e., the inferiority of the American electoral system to that which exists even in aristocracy-ridden Great Britain.
Who runs the political parties? Boss Hague, Jim Farley, Kelly-Nash, Senator Byrd, Senator Tydings, Senator Connally, to name a few of the Democrats. Or Col. McCormick, Congressman Joe Martin, Senator Taft, to name a few of the Northern bourbons who run the Republican Party. However much Roosevelt, Wallace and the rest of the New Dealers may crack the whip, and even get obedience, with the exception of Roosevelt, they are regarded by the party bosses as political crackpots, visionaries and despoilers of the American system of “free enterprise.” The latter do not, for example, guide the Democratic Party.
Congress is run by tradition rather than intelligence. Otherwise it could not be, even in the Senate and the House, that so many nincompoops could head all the important congressional committees. But seniority rules and thus the Southern bloc heads a majority of the important committees. Take the Senate Finance Committee as an example. It is composed of the following: Senator Harry Byrd of Virginia, a millionaire apple grower; millionaire Peter Gerry of Rhode Island; millionaire Robert Taft of Ohio; Joe Guffy of Pennsylvania, an underling of the Mellons; millionaire Jim Davis of Pennsylvania, and the well-to-do conservatives, Josiah Bailey of North Carolina, Walter George of Georgia and Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan. This is not an exceptional case. Most committees follow this pattern.
 
It Is Not Merely Low Esteem
When William Hard writes in the Readers Digest of October that; “Public esteem for the Congress has been falling, and today it is probably lower than ever before in history,” he is stating a fact. His proposal that Congress improve itself by hiring technically trained experts to advise its committees, or to educate itself, of course, misses the whole point. It is not merely a matter of the low caliber of Congress. What we are really observing is a bourgeois democratic parliamentary crisis and its day-to-day decline as an institution. Even under the best circumstances, with an improved composition of this bourgeois parliament, it would be faced with its own degeneration.
This degeneration is indigenous to the general decay of the social order, of which the war is the most striking expression. The totalitarian character of the war, the needs of the Administration in prosecuting it, tend to make more acute the parliamentary crisis. At no time has Congress actually directed a war involving the United States, but at no time was it so lowly regarded by an Administration. This is a sign of the times.
The recent Roosevelt message ordering Congress to act on his seven-point program of last April or face a presidential decree enforcing such a program above the heads of the Senate and House, accentuated the Administration-congressional conflict. Roosevelt said: You pass legislation by October 1 concretizing my program or I shall do so myself. Was anything more contemptuous of Congress ever uttered? This demand by the President was a reflection of the extreme urgency of the war, but it was also the reflection of the unmistakable totalitarian direction which the state is taking.
Roosevelt is completely aware of the meaning of his ultimatum. He referred specifically to the dictatorial nature of his demand by stating that the war made inevitable authoritarian actions, but he was giving his personal guarantee that when the war had reached its successful conclusion, the democratic rights of the people would revert to them. Yet the most dangerous significance of the President’s request for authoritarian control of the most decisive domestic program he has ever presented is to be found in the manner in which the “liberals” and professional democrats have acclaimed his action. This is a symptom of the times. In their minds, Roosevelt’s order to Congress, while not strictly democratic in content and aim, is nevertheless to be acclaimed for its purpose: gearing the country toward a more efficient prosecution of the war. And since they are in accord with the war and its aims they applaud every action taken by the Administration, no matter how undemocratic it may be so long as it serves war aims. Thus the “liberal” world becomes party to the indicated totalitarian drift of the present war Administration.
 
Totalitarian Dangers and Labor’s Awakening
Few writers who commented on the President’s speech understood is fundamental import. Raymond Clapper, one of the more astute political writers, grasped its essential meaning. In his syndicated article of September 25 entitled Listen, Congress, he warns Congress that unless its met the demands of the time, “we are in the danger of going over to dictatorship.” To give emphasis to his warning, he adds: “I don’t mean the temporary, quasi-dictatorship that war always brings to a brief life. I mean dictatorship, period.”
There is a concurrence of events which makes this likely: totalitarian war which influences the economic, political and social life of the country; the complete domination over the war economy by big business, which would like nothing better than a totalitarian regime to strengthen its present domination, and most important, the absence of the only genuine democratic instrument which could fight the encroachments of dictatorship, an independent, courageous and militant party of the workers – a labor party – as the first organization of a politically awakening American proletariat. Such a party, representing the best interests of American labor, of the poor farmers, of a devastated middle class, is an urgent need.
This is the real task of the day, for the breaking away of the American workers from dependency upon the political parties of the economic ruling class would weaken the political rule of reaction, strengthen the progressive political tendencies of American labor and hasten the development of the mass movement for socialism.
 

Gates: Current Economic Developments in Germany (October 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Current Economic Developments in Germany
(October 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 9, October 1942, pp. 268–272.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

It used to be the custom of many social “theorists” during the peace years of Hitler’s reign in Germany to describe that fascist-totalitarian state as a new society based on new economic and political principles and upon new class relations. We were told that the bourgeoisie no longer ruled socially; that the position of the proletariat in German society was altered to that of a slave class and that the government bureaucracy, in the guise of the National Socialist Workers Party, was the new social ruling class. The successive stages of the war economy which began even before Hitler became Chancellor were described as a “new economy” by professionals who apparently forgot all the economic lessons of the First World War and, having forgotten them, were unable to understand the demands which would be made on economy in the present war.
Germany’s efforts to break through the Anglo-American monopoly of the world market by the production of cheap goods, the employment of “unorthodox” financial practices, and her militant war-threatening seizures of European territories, were described as a “Brown World Revolution.” No real efforts were made to study the all-impelling economic reasons which drove Germany to “fight the whole world” in the interest of her monopolist capitalist class ‘because the “democratic” theorists, reflecting the mood of the “democratic” empires were slovenly-minded, contented and alarmed, bellicose and meek, strong and weak, and above all bewildered and confused. That Hitler would dare to carry out the program of Mein Kampf seemed unjust, unworthy and, above all, unreal. Living in nations content in their domination of the colonial areas of the world and the international market, they could not conceive why Germany would go to any limit to bring about a new “redivision of the earth.” Hitler’s cry, “We export or we die,” was regarded in many circles as a rhetorical pacifier of Germany’s financial and industrial ruling class, whom Hitler was supposed to have destroyed and made his servant.
When the war came and the overwhelmingly superior German war machine began its series of astounding victories culminating in the fall of France, a veritable hysteria was recorded in the Allied nations. The social “theorists” above referred to were then certain that the easy German victories could only result from the fact that a new social order prevailed in that country and, more than that, a superior social order. We learned, among other things, that the basis for the German victories was to be found, not in its military preponderance, but in the superiority of its “managerial society.” The blitzkrieg was explained on the basis of this superior social order, and in some quarters we learned that it was due to the liquidation of the profit system, the internal market and, above all, by the liquidation by Hitler of the world market! No more, no less!
After three years of a war which has engulfed the entire world, the conjunctural phenomenon of the blitzkrieg disappeared and has been replaced by a war of position and attrition. But it had already become clear after the first year of the war, or to be more exact, when Great Britain routed the Luftwaffe in the air over England, that this war was really not so strange and that it exhibited, despite new means and weapons of warfare, the same fundamental strategies which prevailed in the First World War. The war is no longer “startling” and saner analyses get a better hearing these days. The truth about German society under Hitler has become clearer: Hitler is the agent of a small group of the most powerful financial-industrial overlords of German economy; German economy in the war has reached the highest development of monopolist-capitalism. No fundamental class changes have taken place; the bourgeoisie has become a more concentrated class accumulating greater wealth; the middle classes are being wiped out, the proletariat is more intensely exploited.
The war has solidified the main economic tendency within Germany and the conquests of the German armies now enable us to see how this tendency takes effect in the conquered countries. The main tendency within the country is toward a greater concentration and rationalization of industry to meet the ever-increasing needs of the new phase of the war. Definite material is now available to demonstrably prove that, in the conquered areas, the bourgeoisie follows the path cut for them by the military victories to gain control and ownership over the whole of European economy. It is these two aspects of economy development which we wish to deal with now.
In the June 20 issue of the Foreign Commerce Weekly there appeared the third installment of a study on German wartime economic policies. The title of this particular review is Concentration and Rationalization of Industries in Germany. It proceeds to an elaborate analysis of a German economy which it described throughout as a private property-profit economy dominated by a group of monopolists. Nowhere in the entire review can one find a single allusion to a collectivized property under state control. Thus at the very outset we learn that ...
One of the outstanding economic results of the National Socialist régime in Germany has been a sharp acceleration in the trend toward economic concentration. The rearmament policy, with its definite emphasis on substitute materials which could be produced only by the financially strong concerns, the rationing of raw materials, labor and transportation and, finally, the tremendous economic demands of the war, have compelled the government to concentrate a very large part of the country’s production in the large and efficient plants.
It should not be difficult to understand this tendency, which is deep-going in Germany, because we observe the same development in the United States. The great demands of the war make it inevitable that the heavy industries, the highly concentrated and centralized combines will benefit from the war orders of the government. In the interest of military victory, the effect of this process on the small manufacturer, i.e., the large middle classes, is unimportant. If the German rulers are more callous than the Americans when they prepare the doom of these elements in the economic structure, the result is all the same. The longer the war lasts, the more intensified becomes this tendency toward concentration and rationalization.
The article in question quotes from a résumé on this particular problem contained in the German press which we believe is instructive. The résumé says in part;
The year 1942 will be characterized by a higher degree of concentrated utilization of all production means to further the conduct of the war. Since the beginning of the new year, the placing of the national economy on a total war basis is in the process of being realized. The intent is to give maximum industrial support to the Army at a minimum loss of production capacity and with a minimum use of manpower ... This can be attained by two methods – rationalization and concentration ... It may be necessary to that end to eliminate smaller and medium-size plants and concentrate production in a few larger ones, which could be particularly adapted to manufacture rationally. It is, however, not the intention to sacrifice unnecessarily small and medium concerns if they are able to cooperate economically ... As stated, in the new phase of economic war development, a further restriction in the production of consumer goods cannot be avoided, or the immobilization of those concerns which are of no direct value to national war economy ...
Where will this begin and whom will it eliminate? Concentration begins among the already highly concentrated mass industries and elimination continues among the small enterprises where liquidation of enterprise has been going on for a long time or where subsidized idleness has been the rule since the war began. The firms to be retained are naturally the most efficient in the employment of labor, machinery, fuel and raw materials, those “capable of sufficient standardization of output to produce articles whose manufacture is worth while only if they are produced on a large scale.” They will be the large monopolies, firms with the most modern machinery. For example, in a field where sixty-five firms exist the three largest and most efficient will be maintained, the rest either to be swallowed up by the three, or eliminated entirely. Thereby, the process of consolidation, an inherent tendency of monopoly capitalism, is intensified by the demands of the war and aided by a state régime completely in accord with the dominant steel, coal and chemical monopolies. The new combinations will further the merger of finished goods producers and those making and trading in raw materials and semi-finished goods. In each instance, the big monopolies will be the winner and that is why “the large concerns are apparently only too ready to cooperate with the state in achieving this concentration ...”
Near the close of 1941 the following combinations took place: An agreement between Siemens & Holske (AG) and the Allgemeine Elektrizitätsgesellschaft (AEG) involving the redistribution of certain subsidiaries; the formation of Phrix-Zellwollkonzerns; the establishment of Francolor, allying the German chemical trust (IG) with the French dyestuff industry. At the beginning of this year “the Metallgesellschaft and the Ver. Aluminium-Werke exchanged their participation in the Ver. Dt. Metallwerken and the Ver-Leichtmetall-Werken.” And now we have had the amalgamation of Hoesch (AG) and Machinenbau und Bahnbedarf (AG). The Allegemeine Elektizitätsgesellschaft (AEG) has absorbed the Gesellschaft für Elektrische Unternehmungen. The magnitude of this merger is demonstrated in the fact that GEU in assigning its holdings to AEG received shares amounting to 100,000,000 marks.
The State Society for Mutual Aid (another body allocating government aid to business) which has already been helping closed factories, will be called upon to further aid defunct institutions. This organization “undertakes to maintain the buildings and machinery of a factory which is closed down, pay the rent and interest on debts and in some circumstances provide for the subsistence of the owners of the factory if there are no possibilities of reemploying them.” The society, which was founded in February 1940, paid out until May 1941 benefits to business men totalling 8,000,000 marks. This subsidy was henceforth increased to roughly 20,000,000 marks, and an enlarged subsidy is expected in view of the new prospects of concentration and the elimination of thousands of other small enterprises.
 
The Relation of the State to Business
In all of these developments, the state plays an inordinately integral part. The state passes the legislation; it has set up the bodies for effecting its decisions. Thus the process of continued and accelerated concentration and rationalization in industry will be carried through with the aid of such governmental bodies as the Reich Industrial Group, commissioned by the Ministry of Economics, the Office of Economic Direction, the Agricultural and Labor Offices, jointly with the Ministry of Economics, the Ministry of War Economics and the Ministry of Munitions. The article in question goes on to say:
It is intended that private business shall be coordinated to an extent never before undertaken. Private economy, insofar as it still remains a part of the “civil section,” will be drawn, it is stated, to even a greater degree under the control of the state, and private interests will be subordinated more than ever to public welfare.
One might conclude from the above that there is truly something fundamentally new in German state-industrial relations. Only a superficial observation permits such a conclusion. For, in fact, what exists in Germany is a situation similar to that in all the warring countries. By their direction of the war, the national states conduct the most colossal venture in all history. Economy is completely subordinated to the needs of war; the market is the state and all production takes place on the basis of the requirements of that market: production of war goods, consumer goods consonant with the maintenance of the national population upon whom war production is dependent, and the production of all necessary auxiliary goods. Public welfare means doing everything necessary for a successful prosecution of the war. But in none of the bourgeois states, especially Germany, has any fundamental change taken place in property relations and, therefore, production for the profit of the dominant economic class, the bourgeoisie. This is why the above review comments:
The whole process, it is maintained, however, cannot be achieved entirely by government decrees. It is contended that it must primarily have the full support of industry. Emphasis is placed on the execution of the plan through the application of the self-government policy of industry. Not orders from above, it is stated, but only the initiative of responsible entrepreneurs can achieve a further real increase in output. Those who are placing the armament orders, namely, the officials of the German government, it is pointed out, must also show the ability to accommodate themselves.
If we were to accept the theories of the champions of the new social order in Germany, we could never understand why a state which has presumably liquidated all classes, or at least reduced them to impotence, is unable to proceed with its managerial prerogatives other than by asking the indulgence of big business. Why, for example, would not a decree be sufficient? It is in the Soviet Union. But in Germany we find that it is necessary for the state to issue its decrees and then depend upon the competing sections of the ruling class to adjust themselves to such decrees and to carry them out as independent financiers, industrialists, or, as the article says, entrepreneurs.
The truth is that in Germany you have the classic development of fascism as the final form of monopolist-capitalist rule. It is being acknowledged by an ever-widening group of observers that Hitler is merely the tool of the dominant monopolistic combines, the steel, coal, iron and chemical groups.
which, through the fascist state they helped to create, have finally eliminated or weakened rival capitalist groups They sit in the council chambers of all the important state ministries. They initiate the main economic decrees. They receive the essential benefits of Hitler’s victories in concrete economic gains, as we shall shortly prove.
The problem of the dominant monopolist groups in German economy is to bring about the elimination of competitive and small industries, to control labor, raw materials and prices. There is no need to control the market, because through the state they dominate the market too. But the fascist state is the instrument through which the other classes and strata are controlled and cajoled into accepting the economic rule of the dominant group of the bourgeoisie.
The point to be remembered is that this singular process is followed in Great Britain and America without, as yet, the need of such a totalitarian regime. The bourgeois need for a fascist state in Germany is to be explained entirely by the pre-war position of that country in world economy and inner-class relations. In Germany the state is truly the servant of the dominant economic class. Observe in the following how the various aspects of economic conduct have served the interests of the top layer of the German bourgeoisie.
 
Some Inner Features
Cartelization in Germany, which preceded other countries, has developed intensely under the Nazi regime, resulting in even greater power for the large monopolists. This cartelization is the antithesis of state nationalization, or collectivization. The “anti-capitalist” elements of the Nazi Party have long been liquidated. Germany’s war, as we pointed out in our dispute with Dwight Macdonald in 1941, is the war of the German monopolists fighting to win world economic hegemony.
Just as in the United States, most contracts are with big business, and these are “ruled mainly by the ‘cost-plus’ principle,” a system by which the bourgeoisie profits enormously.
In the pre-war years of Hitler’s reign, production in Germany (essentially for war) nearly doubled. In this same period, wages and salaries increased 66 per cent, but other incomes increased 146 per cent. The figures in Maxine Sweezey’s The Structure of Nazi Economy show that profits of corporate industry has not only been recovered but approximates the high years of the pre-Hitler era. As compared to a more than 10 per cent loss in 1931, profits rose in 1937 to 6 per cent. Almost immediately after Hitler’s rise to power, i.e., with the destruction of the proletarian organizations, their resistive strength and, consequently, their already impoverished standard of living, profits reappeared for the bourgeoisie. Profits have again increased during the war, but this increase is to be recorded almost entirely for the heavy industries. This, however, is not atypical a monopoly capitalism, finally, inequality in income and wealth, as a fundamental feature of capitalism, has been intensified.
The continental aim of the German bourgeoisie (sensationalized in Booktab’s Sequel to Apocalypse, a study written to prove that Hitler is the agent of Farben, Krupp et al.) is to reduce Europe to a colony of German industry, to agrarianize the other countries, expropriate their industries and enormously expand German industry on the basis of an all-European market. Thus, just prior to the outbreak of the war, general production increased to 135 (taking the year 1929 at 100). Of this increase, consumption goods rose from 76 to 120, while investment goods (principally armaments) jumped from 34 to 147. The monopolist concerns profit from these increases. The “Aryanization” of business was merely another form of capital accumulation through the elimination of Jewish concerns. Private capitalists and Nazi Party leaders took over these firms. In both cases, friendliness for the fascists and “heroic” party deeds were rewarded. In each instance, the maintenance of private property was guaranteed by the state.
The Hermann Goering Works began as a state institution to engage in the costly manufacture of low grade ores. The reason for this governmental venture was to socialize the losses attendant upon such production – to make the masses pay for it. But when the German armies began to march and the Goering Works took over the profitable heavy industries of other countries, almost immediately the private monopolists sat on its directorates and increased the specific weight of private capital in this enterprise. The Nazi marauders found them indispensable to aid the organization and conduct of a business now purported to be the world’s largest monopoly.
In an examination of what has happened to Germany’s middle classes we see another aspect of the monopolist-capitalist character of German economy. There was a “large-scale massacre of small businesses” (The Economics of Barbarism, by Kuczynski and Witt), a process now taking place in the United States also. Taxation and the curtailment of raw materials, a product of the war economy, served to destroy the small producers. The state enacted measures for the liquidation of these concerns. In 1937, over 10,000 independent retail business were liquidated in the Brandenburg Province alone. In two years, from April 1936 to March 1938, “one hundred and four thousand small independent craftsmen had to close their businesses,” Just prior to the outbreak of the war, this figure rose to 200,000 and we are reasonably certain that in the past three years this figure has been left far behind. The disappearance of these businesses served the interest of big business, which absorbed the labor, raw materials and contracts of these concerns.
 
Basic Class Relations
The condition of the German proletariat is well known. The standard of living of these masses is maintained only at a point which permits continued labor and reproduction of the race. There is only the limit of physical endurance which decides the length of hours which the industrial proletariat labors and the conditions of this labor. Food and clothing are of poor quality and they are rationed. The sixty-four hour week is the rule, although large numbers of workers labor seventy-two or eighty-four hours a week. In one particular locality, a 104-hour week was provided for through a “collective agreement.” In general, physical, moral and spiritual degeneration of the German people follows.
Another phenomenon produced by the war, more precisely, by German victories, has been the forced mass movement of conquered peoples. Hitler plays a game of checkers with these peoples. The main purpose behind these shifts is to meet the economic requirements of Germany’s war production. The number of foreign workers employed by Germany is an indication of what has taken place on the continent. The German bureaucrats, by their own admission earlier in the year, have transported more than two and a quarter million workers to work in German industries and farms. This figure has been enormously increased in recent months.
In sharp contrast to the conditions of the German masses and the conquered peoples is the position of the German bourgeoisie. It is not necessary to measure the wide gulf between these classes in terms of loaves of bread. One can deduce it from empirical evidence present in bourgeois society as it exists in the “democratic” United Nations.
The German monopolists are not awaiting the conclusions of a victorious war to gain their spoils. They have enriched themselves now, in the very midst of a war which has not approached a conclusion and where victory is terribly uncertain. But we are in a position to demonstrably prove by the following, how intimate is the relationship of the German state to the German bourgeoisie and how slavishly it serves the latter.
The German rulers, i.e., the dominant bourgeoisie and their state bureaucracy, have employed several methods in dealing with the economy of conquered countries. They have either taken over the most important sectors of these economies, obtained controlling interest, or destroyed them entirely. In each case, however, the fundamental aim of the victors has been to subordinate everything to German requirements.
 
How Big Business Is Enriched
The Hermann Goering Works, the one important government business and the basis upon which many “theorists” based their analysis of the new social order, has been altered by the German victories. It is no longer a state institution for the production of iron and steel from low grade ores. It has become a colossal monopoly whose capital has increased from 5,000,000 marks in 1937 to 400,000,000. The capital increase of this concern was accompanied by an invasion from the private monopolistic interests, principally Ruhr industrialists, who were enamored of the new sources of wealth of this enterprise.
With the invasion of Austria, the Goering Works obtained control of the Alpine Montangesellschaft, the Veitsche Magnesitwerke, an oil-distributing agency, Fanto AG, and “numerous iron and steel concerns.” Upon the occupation of Czechoslovakia, it obtained control of the great Skoda works, the Brno armaments concern, and other iron and steel companies.
French capital in these Czech organizations, mainly the Schneider-Cruzot interests, “sold out to the German monopolists, who paid them off with Czech gold held by the Bank of International Settlements.” But, in turn, the same German monopolists have obtained control of the Schneider-Cruzot combine. The Goering Works also took over the Koenig and Laurahuette mines of Poland.
Sudeten German mines were unified either by expropriation or the buying out of the large shareholders. German industrialists then organized the Sudetenländische Bergbau AF, which in turn organized the Sudetenländische Treibstoffwerke AG, one of the largest producers of synthetic oil.
The German monopolists really went to work on Poland. The policy there was simply to destroy the national economy or to Germanize it. Through their organization, the Haupttreuhandstelle Ost, they expropriated within one year 294 big industrial works, 9,000 medium-sized industrial works, 76,000 small industrial enterprises, 9,120 big mercantile companies and 112,000 small ones. The iron works of Koenigs-and Laurahuette were given to the German Roechling company. Krupp was given the Bismarckhuette coal and iron business. The Fuerstengrube concern was given to I.G. Farben.
The great landed estates of the Wirek Kopalnie were split three ways and given to three great estate owners of Eastern Germany: Herr Schaffigotsch received 50 per cent, Herr Ballestrem 30 per cent, and Herr Donnersmark 20 per cent. The combined wealth of “these three estate owners and industrialists is estimated to be ... over 100,000,000 marks. (Quoted from Die Zeitung, in The Economics of Barbarism)
The Kattowitzer Lokomotivfabrik of Chrzanow, Poland, was given to the German locomotive manufacturers, Henschel & Co., AG.
German policy in Poland is one of confiscation. Former owners receive no compensation. In this way the German industrialists have been enormously enriched to the extent of hundreds of millions of dollars in capital wealth (mines, factories and machinery). This, then, is the fruit of the Polish conquest. And it is for this that the German youth have sacrificed their lives – for the enrichment of the top layer of the German capitalist class.
The methods pursued in other countries, France, Belgium and Holland, are different. In these countries, “the factories and concerns belonging to one industry are grouped together into one economic unit – a syndicate, a holding company, a ring, and so on.” For this type of arrangement, the Germans usually place a collaborationist at the head of the new organization (usually one who has had dose relations with German big business prior to the war and one who is usually a fascist or near-fascist). These organizations function as native combinations in name only. They really serve their German masters. Thus, the National Committee of Economic Collaboration in Holland, headed by the fascist Rost Van Tonnigen and Dr. Fentener Van Flissingen, former president of the International Chamber of Commerce (!), is actually engaged in solidifying the control of the German monopolists over Dutch economy.
The German Vereinigte Stahlwerke, through the above set-up, took over the iron and steel works of Ymuiden Co. and Van Leersche Iron Works. These companies were amalgamated under the ostensible head of the above Van Flissingen. But the real power is the Ruhr industrialist, Ernst Poensgen, who, together with four other German industrialists, make up the majority of the directorate. Dutch power stations are now being technically linked to German stations in the Ruhr. German banks have taken over the Dutch Koopmans Bank, Amsterdam, N.V. Rijnsche Handelsmanschappij, Handelstrust West N.V., retaining only their names.
In France, the German policy is rather well known. There, many comités d’organization have been formed of native fascists, collaborationists and profit seekers, to facilitate German control of French industry, or to link French concerns to German. The Germans seek to recoup their losses of 1918, and more. The ore resources of Lorraine and the de Wendel companies in Lorraine are now part of the Goering Works. A combined administrative committee of the Hermann Goering Works, the Vereinigte Stahlwerke and Kloeckner Works act as a trust for other plants in this region. In return, German coal and coke is to be supplied to these “French” organizations.
German banks play a similar rôle to that of the large industrial combines with which they are intimately associated and which they in large part already control. Thus, German influence in the French banks of Lazard Frères, Crédit Lyonnais, Banque de 1’Union Parisienne and others is very strong. Through these banks the Germans manage to influence or control other French industrial organizations. (The precise extent of German banking influence and control in France is not yet entirely clear.)
The French automobile industry has been reorganized and has established an “understanding” with German and Italian concerns. At present these companies work almost entirely for Germany. The Cuttat machine-tool company of Paris is now under control of the Leipziger Machinenfabrik Pittler AG. The French chemical and dye industry, reorganized into Francolor, a single monopoly, is controlled by the German dye trust, which owns 51 per cent of its shares.
The same situation holds for Belgium. The Otto Wolff AG, heavy industrial “promoters,” have obtained large shares in the iron concern of d’Ougree Marihay. The Vereingte Stahlwerke “acquired” shares in the John Cockerill Co. Kloeckner and Stinnes have also invaded the Belgian field, as have German banks. This “pattern of economic conquest” extends to the Scandinavian countries and in the Balkans. Everywhere, the Germans seek the expulsion of British and American economic interests and thus corral the whole of European economy. So far, their military victories have made possible unbelievable economic gains, all of which go into the hands of the German bourgeoisie.
We have touched only briefly on some of the main developments of German economy since the war began. But even such a cursory examination is sufficient to demonstrate the unmistakable imperialist-capitalist nature of the war and of German society in particular. The presence, for example, of state officials on some of the new monopolies, is no evidence of a new social order as it is a living proof of the fact that the fascist state is the best servant of the monopolists. These officials do not represent the state in their industrial positions as much as they insure the rights of big business. They become, in fact, business men themselves. Therein lies the main attractiveness of a state career under fascism. It rewards the loyal and “capable” party men with pecuniary gains – they become industrialists!
How soon the whole story of German society will be available, we cannot tell. But the historians of the future will be able to record how the victory of Hitler in Germany marked the triumph of monopoly capitalism over the German working class, middle class and rival capitalist elements and how it enabled this same group to enrich itself through the early victories of the German war machine. It will be a tale so simple and lurid in its description of plunder and self-enrichment that one will regard people as queer who overlooked the actual simplicity of this primitive accumulation and called it a new society and an anti-capitalist society at that.
 

Gates: The War Mobilization Plan (1938)








Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

M.J. Michaels & Albert Gates
The War Mobilization Plan
(November 1938)

From New International, Vol. IV No. 11, November 1938, pp. 337–340.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS in the modes of production have revolutionized the instruments of warfare as well as of peace. The rifle, the bayonet and the man have lost much of their importance. In their place have been substituted heavy artillery, machine guns, airplanes, tanks and gases, all of which must be constantly replenished and fed with a continuous supply of munitions, and which, of course, requires a high rate of production on the part of industry. Throughout, and even before the war, industry must be organized and mobilized for this purpose.
Trotsky has described this problem in an article entitled, Disarmament and the United States of Europe, (The Militant, December 7, 1929) in the following words:
“The issue (the outcome of the next war) will be determined by the respective powers of production of the two camps. This means that the war fleets of the powers will not only be supplemented and renewed but in great measure created in the very course of the war ... We have seen how England and America in the very course of the war created gigantic new armies and armaments infinitely superior to the old armies of the European Continent. It follows that the soldiers, sailors, cruisers, cannons, tanks and airplanes, existing at the outbreak of hostilities only constitute a point of departure. The decisive problem will depend upon the measure in which the given country will be able to create under the enemies fire cruisers, cannons, soldiers and sailors ...”
It thus becomes evident that the arena of modern warfare extends from the battlefield to the industrial centers of the warring nations with every factory engaged in the production of war materials a sector of the battle front and every worker a soldier.
For these reasons the United States, with its vast industrial superiority over all other nations, has realized since the World War that it was better prepared for the next than any of the others. It could, at disarmament conferences, complacently agree to scrap many war ships which it had built during the last several decades and to limit the number which it would build, knowing that it could rebuild its fleets in a shorter period of time than its rivals. False too, is the notion propounded by Washington that America’s peaceful intentions are confirmed by the smallness of its standing army. As a matter of fact, it is technically better prepared than any other nation to produce almost instantaneously vast quantities of cannon, tanks, airplanes, machine guns and munitions. The army is maintained at a high standard of technical equipment at all times. A large standing army during peacetime, in the absence of frontier problems, would at present be an unnecessary burden on the capitalist class and would not materially advance war preparations. Moreover, American man power has become well-trained by its highly developed industries to make the most efficient use of mechanized war equipment. Mobilization of troops for the war is not the most important phase of the preparations.
With these things in mind the United States quietly began its preparations on the industrial front as far back as 1921. Since then, under the professed aim of taking the profit out of war, the War Department has been continuously engaged in perfecting an industrial mobilization plan. At various times these plans have been publicly announced. And at the time of the sinking of the Panay by the Japanese, when war feeling had been stirred up by the Roosevelt administration to such an extent as to insure the passage of the billion and a quarter dollar navy bill. The Shepard-Hill bill which had been pending in Congress for some considerable time, became the subject of congressional interest and nation-wide discussion. As the war scare subsided public interest in the bill also subsided. Nevertheless, the bill as well as the entire industrial Mobilization Plan lies ready for immediate enactment and application when war becomes imminent, and they therefore deserve the most careful consideration of the labor movement.
 
The Nature of the Mobilization Plan
The Industrial Mobilization Plan known as the preparation for M-Day (the War Department designation for the day of the outbreak of hostilities when the mobilization of all the national resources is to take place), consists of several parts. In the field of legislation there is the Shepard-Hill Bill introduced into the Senate and the May Bill introduced in the House of the last congress. There has also been prepared by the War Department a bill for drafting men which is ready for introduction in Congress whenever war is considered imminent. In addition, there is a detailed plan for the mobilization of industry which has been worked out by the War Department and is officially known as the Industrial Mobilization Plan. Finally, there are a great many orders and regulations which have already been prepared by the War Department and they will become effective immediately upon the outbreak of hostilities.
 
The Shepard-Hill Bill and the May Bill
For all practical purposes these bills are essentially the same, differing only in the method of taxing war profits. The former proposes a tax of 95% of all profits above the preceding three-year average, while the latter proposes in general terms “that taxes during the war shall absorb all profits above a fair normal return to be fixed by Congress”.
The bills are the result of intensive study and preparation by various committees and commissions working in conjunction with and most likely under the domination of the War Department. They provide the legal basis and general framework for the application of the War Department’s Industrial Mobilization Plan and are sufficiently innocent on their face to permit their introduction in Congress and a public discussion even before the outbreak of war, whereas the War Department’s Industrial Mobilization Plan, although not entirely a secret, is not designed for public consumption.
Upon the declaration by Congress of the existence of war or a national emergency, the bills delegate to the president complete authority to do the following: to regulate prices; to proclaim control, over the material resources, public services and industrial organizations; to license practically all business; to determine priorities of various industries and businesses in the resources of the nation; to register all persons engaged in the management and control of industry and place them in the government service; to reorganize, if necessary, all executive branches of government and create the necessary agencies and commissions, and finally, to draft into the military service all males between the ages of 21 and 31.
 
War Profits
By giving the president the power to control prices it is claimed that war profiteering will be eliminated and the burdens of the war will be equally distributed between capital and labor! Even if war profiteering could be eliminated the burdens of a capitalist war could never be equally shared by capital and labor. The workers actually pay with their lives and bodies at the front and by a more intense exploitation in the war industries. Aside from this, however, is it true, as the proponents of the bills maintain, that war profiteering can be eliminated through the control of prices?
The experiences of the last war in which the government also attempted to control prices to some extent, particularly in the establishment of government contracts for war materials, have shown the utter impossibility of preventing profiteering through the control of prices. The tremendous fortunes amassed in the last war demonstrate this to be the fact despite any effort which may be exerted to the contrary. The War Department, to excuse its inability to curb excessive profits during the last war, has given the following reasons:

the personnel which is to regulate prices comes from big business, owns stocks in the leading corporations and is inextricably interwoven with the owners of industry;
 
accurate information as to costs lies largely in the hands of these industrialists and financiers;
 
Capital had gone on strike and refused to invest in war industries unless it obtained the exorbitant prices it demanded, and
 
the practical difficulty of auditing the books of all the companies whose prices must be regulated, is almost insurmountable.

The experience of the next war will no doubt be the same and these alibis, already manufactured in advance, will again be used to excuse huge profits. But price control will be rigidly exercised in relation to wages. Although the bills do not expressly give the president the authority to fix wages they could easily be construed to contain that power under the authority to fix “rates”, “compensation”, and the “compensation for services”. In addition thereto, the numerous war industries boards, arbitration boards and labor boards, together with the restrictions on the freedom of the labor movement which have been planned by the War Department and which we shall discuss later, will act as effective brakes on the rise of wages.
The cost of living will undoubtedly rise in the course of the war. Wages will also rise slightly, but by no means as rapidly or in proportion to the rise of the cost of living. During the last war the government made some attempts to regulate wages but its power to do so was not as firmly fixed as is true in the case of the present bills. Nevertheless, we found the cost of living rising much faster than wages, and real wages rising only slightly. For example, by 1918, although the cost of living had risen by 70% over 1914, wages rose only 63%. It is reasonable to expect that in the next war this will be true to an even greater extent because the war will be more expensive and American capitalism will be less able to pay the costs of the war than it was in 1917, so that the workers will have to bear an even greater share of the burden.
  
The Draft and the Unorganized Militia
No matter how great the hysteria created by the war propaganda machines, the masses do not respond in sufficient numbers to appeals for enlistment in the armed forces. To overcome this condition, bourgeois governments resort to compulsory draft acts. Although the bills with apparent innocence authorize the president to draft into the military service males between the ages of 21 and 31, the actual draft law which has been prepared, is much more drastic. It provides

for the registration of all males over the age of eighteen;
 
that all registrants between eighteen and forty-five be subject to military service and become automatically members of the “unorganized militia”;
 
that the president may defer the military service of any registrant whose continued employment is essential to the national interests, and,
 
that the president may, when in his discretion the national interests require it, call into the armed forces any registrant liable to service, no matter how classified.

Under the bills no male between the ages of eighteen and forty-five is exempt from military service. It is even likely, in the event of a long war, that the maximum age limit would be raised substantially above forty-five as was true in many countries during the last war and is also true for some countries at the present time. Instead of exemptions there are only deferments, which may be canceled at any tune if the individual should cease to be “continually and usefully employed”. This method of canceling deferments from the draft has been devised as a substitute for the conscription of labor and its full implications will be more thoroughly discussed below.
The extent to which the government intends to go in marshalling the forces of industry and business is demonstrated in the licensing provisions. Practically all business, with the possible exception of newspapers, will be subject to being licensed. The government’s power to regulate and prescribe the terms under which business shall operate is virtually unlimited. Only the veto of the Supreme Court seems to limit this absolute power and the likelihood of such a veto in a period of war, as our experience in the last war showed, is remote.
A war bureaucracy will be organized on a basis which may prove to be permanent. The reorganizations will make possible the constant surveillance of labor, business and military bodies, to insure the carrying out of the government’s war acts and to “unify” the country in pursuit of victory.
These essential provisions of the bills appear to represent the normal preparations of a capitalist government for war. They are however, as we have already indicated, the legal covering for the more drastic plans of the War Department. The full extent of the danger to the working class and its organizations becomes apparent only when considered in conjunction with the War Department’s Industrial Mobilization Plan.
 
The Industrial Mobilization Plan
The paramount aim of the Plan is to insure an adequate supply of labor during the war. By an “adequate supply”, is, of course, meant the continuous and loyal employment of workers in industry throughout the duration of hostilities and the stifling of the natural anti-war sentiment of the masses—to prevent its expression in an organized opposition to the war. How is this to be realized?
The instrumentality designed is the War Labor Administration, to be directed by an “outstanding industrial leader”, known as the War Labor Administrator, and appointed by the president. Labor is to be represented only in an advisory capacity, by four out of ten members of the Advisory Council. They are to be selected by the president, not by labor and are to meet only when directed by the War Labor Administrator. The type of “outstanding industrial leader” to be selected by the president can easily be imagined, and, although he cannot be named in advance, there can be no doubt that he will represent only the interests of the American ruling class. The War Department says he “should be an outstanding citizen who is thoroughly familiar with the problems entering into the relationship between employer and employee and who is capable of dispassionate (!) judgment in their solution.” This formula has often been used in the past to sell the working class a gold brick.
The functions of the War Labor Administrator in the subtle language of the plan are:

To determine labor requirements;
 
To fill the requirements of bringing together the job and the worker, and
 
To keep together the job and the worker.

There is no doubt that the War Department has already substantially performed the first of these functions by having made a more or less complete survey of labor requirements for war industries, determining the number of workers necessary in the chief industries, the skill required, their location and their wages, hours and conditions of employment. As war becomes more imminent, the survey will become more complete and the WLA will have the task of completing and using the information.
The second function, that of bringing together the job and the worker, embraces the idea of the registration of all labor and virtual assignment to the various industries. The provisions of the draft law whereby all males over the age of eighteen (with no maximum age limitation) shall be registered already provides the WLA with its industrial census. Using these records, together with the survey of the War Department as to labor requirements, the WLA will be in a position to make its assignments.
And, lastly, the WLA will regiment the workers by “keeping the job and the worker together”. This means that the worker will be restricted from changing jobs, industry or location.
Naturally, the application will not be as forthright as we have indicated. Other divisions of the War Labor Administration have been provided to help realize these aims. For example, the Public Relations Division will have the task of manufacturing patriotism, war hysteria and atrocities stories. The employment service, unlike the employment agencies in peacetime, considers its task that of distributing workers into places in industry rather than making places available to workers which they may accept or reject. The War Department has already stated that in war time it is not possible to permit workers free movement and choice. The method will in effect be that of assignment. Cancellation of deferment from military service will also be a method used to “induce” the worker to take and keep a job.
The War Department has devised a fairly clever scheme to insure that labor will fulfill its tasks in the prosecution of the war. In the last war several of the European countries found it necessary, at least to some extent, to conscript labor. The American plan for the next war finds this a little too crude and wholly unnecessary. In place of conscription of labor the plan calls for a system of cancellations of deferments from military service.
In essence it will operate as follows: As a preliminary all males from the ages of 18 to 45 are made part of the unorganized militia by the draft law, which we have already discussed. This immediately subjects them to military service at the call of the president speaking through the various draft boards. However, all such males cannot immediately be taken into the military service, first, because this would too greatly disrupt industry and production and second, they would not be required immediately for military purposes. Nevertheless, no provision is made for any exemptions from military service as was the case in the last war. Instead the Plan provides that anyone’s liability to military service may be deferred by the draft authorities on the basis of their needs to industry, business or government agencies. This deferment, however, is subject to cancellation whenever an individual ceases to be continually and usefully employed. The War Department has stated, “A deferment once made is not final ... and any man can be reclassified and called when circumstances require.”
The bourgeoisie and their government require a state of class peace in war time to insure the prosecution of the imperialist war and the continuous war production in industry. Any outbreak of class struggle, strikes, sit-downs, or stoppages, tending to impede the progress of the war must be avoided by any means at hand. Cancellation of deferment is therefore held as a threat over the heads of militant workers as individuals or as members of revolutionary organizations.
 
Control of Public Opinion
For the purpose of enlisting mass support to the Industrial Mobilization Plan and the War, the Plan sets up a Public Relations Administration. Without going into the details of the methods which this Administration will use, it would be sufficient to recall the mass of propaganda issued by the infamous Creel Committee, organized by the Wilson Administration to obtain nationwide support to America’s entry and participation in the World War. The press, the movies, the radio, the schools, the churches and every other medium of propaganda at the disposal of the capitalist state will be chained to the war machine. As in the last war, the bourgeois press will be asked to assume a voluntary censorship of its publications. But a rigid censorship will be enforced upon all revolutionary and labor press. Antiwar propaganda, of course, will not be tolerated, and will be prosecuted by Espionage and Sedition laws.
What will be the nature of the capitalist state in the period of the war? Will it be democratic; fascist; military dictatorship; or perhaps some new form of state?
Regardless of the name ascribed to such a government, the general character of the regime and the methods it will employ have already been described. It will strictly control all labor organizations, deprive labor of its elementary democratic rights and at the same time exercise a certain degree of control over industry itself. In these respects, it will closely resemble the totalitarian states as we now know them. In fact, the strain of the war on the economic system and the necessity of the ruling class to maintain its power, already dictates the regime’s nature. In the final analysis, however, the outcome of the struggle between the classes will determine the nature of the regime. As the war becomes extended the opposition of the masses to the war must lead to organized revolt of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie itself in order to end the war. The tempo, the sharpness and the strength of this revolt will depend upon the power and program of the revolutionary organizations in the leadership of the working class. As such revolutionary organizations gain strength of their own and the following of the majority of the working class, despite the restrictions and repressions by the government during the war, the conflict must sharply take the form of a struggle for the workers’ state and socialism against fascism and capitalism. Thus the period of the totalitarian regime will be defined by this struggle.
 

Gates: Illinois C.P. Backs Kelly's Man for Senate (April 1938)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Illinois C.P. Backs Kelly’s Man for Senate
Apes Labor Non-Partisan League in Democratic Primary Fight
(April 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 17, 23 April 1938, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

CHICAGO. – The Democratic Party put on another show in the Chicago and Illinois primaries which were completed April 12, holding the stage from the first day of the campaign to the last – much to the discomfiture of the Republicans who sought to recoup their losses as a result of the sharp inner-party struggle that invaded the Democratic organisation.
No one paid much attention to the campaign of the Republicans. The real circus was elsewhere.
 
Democrats Split
Just as in the 1936 presidential elections, the Democratic Party was split between the down-state machine, with Governor Henry Horner at its head, and the Chicago machine directed by those two, notorious political gangsters, Mayor Edward Kelly and National Committeeman Nash.
The struggle between these factions, originating in the Cermak area, came to a head following Cermak’s death, when the Chicago machine sought unsuccessfully to eliminate Horner, running for a second term as governor in 1936. But when the elections took place, the two machines united to defeat the Republicans. The struggle soon began to revive, however, and the old line-ups were re-established. The Kelly-Nash machine was determined to avenge its defeat in 1936 and Horner and his down-state machine were equally determined to take over control of the Democratic Party.
 
Scene of Struggle
Thus the 1938 Democratic primaries became a scene of violent struggle. Kelly-Walsh sought the removal of the incumbent County Judge Jarecki in order to insure elections in the future by controlling the ballot boxes and at the same time retain their leadership of the party. They nominated Judge John Prystalski against Jarecki, principally because his Polish name would run well against Jarecki, also a Pole. For the United States Senate, the Kelly-Nash machine nominated Michael L. Igoe, the U.S. District Attorney. Horner nominated Scott Lucas, Legionaire and down-stater. Lesser posts were also divided between the two factions, but not so sharply, and in many respects there was complete agreement as to candidates.
The show was on! Igoe, identifying himself with the Kelly-Nash machine, lost his opportunity of nomination. He stood well in the party, down-state and in Chicago. He had what is generally considered a good labor record. Lucas was a down-stater, an organizer of the American Legion, not always certain in his support of Roosevelt, a small-time rah-rah boy. But he was not a Kelly-Nash man, and the Kelly-Nash machine is a discredited machine.
 
Mud-slinging Match
Both sides entered the campaign with the slogans: Against Bossism! For Roosevelt! They heaped insults upon each other. They accused each other of the vilest sins, of graft, bureaucracy, bossism, machinism. They delved into each others’ personal history and went into the field of psychoanalysis.
Sectionalism played a strong part in the campaign. Chicago already had a senator and it was wrong to have two senators from Chicago, said Horner. It was a matter of ability, pointed out the Kelly-Nash adherents. Courtney, the labor-hater, wanted to insure an “honest” election, but Kelly’s police commissioner took Courtney’s personal police from him because they were needed to “guard” the ballot boxes! Jarecki declared that he was rejected by Kelly-Nash because he would not resort to stealing election’s. Prystalski, his opponent, called Jarecki dishonest and charged him with cheating the local government out of well-earned property tax monies.
In the midst of this great battle inside the Democratic Party, there entered two outside forces. They arrived late on the scene, but not too late to do their filthy bit in deluding the voters of the state that in this struggle over spoils within the Democratic Party, a rehearsal of the struggle between fascism and democracy, progress and reaction was being fought.
The Communist Party and Labor’s Non-Partisan League entered into the campaign with great vigor. The old Gompers practice of “rewarding your friends and punishing your enemies,” by which means the American Federation of Labor confused its members and tied them to the tails of both capitalist parties, was here changed only in words. Now, the candidates supported by Labor’s Non-Partisan League and the Communist Party were labor’s choice based upon the support of progressive candidates as against reactionaries!
 
Only One Dilemma
Labor’s Non-Partisan League came out in support of Igoe as senator, on the theory that he was and is a friend of a labor, a progressive candidate. There was only one dilemma to be explained away: He was the candidate of the Kelly-Nash machine which distinguished itself in the massacre of the steel strikers last Memorial Day. On the other side, they supported Jarecki because he was “honest and clean” and opposed the Kelly-Nash machine. They picked various “progressives” for other state and local posts, notwithstanding their machine affiliations. By and large, the majority of the candidates were old-time ward heelers, party hacks, professional job-holders, whose prime interest in politics is the spoils to be gained.
But Labor’s Non-Partisan League was outdone by the Communist Party. If ever a party pretending to be a revolutionary party, a workers’ party, played a foul and traitorous role, it was the Communist Party. It entered into the primaries as if the candidates were nominated at a C.P. convention. And well they might have been. The Mid-West Daily Record, one of the three sectional newspapers of the C.P. issued to help propagate its new reformist and anti-revolutionary ideas became the mouthpiece for Igoe, Jarecki, and a host of others. Sympathizers (it is rumored even members) of the C.P. entered the primaries to help make the fight a political one and to elect progressive candidates. The Record carried a daily box indicating “labor’s choice”! But the C.P. was also in a quandary. Igoe, the “progressive” candidate, the true Rooseveltian, was taken in by Kelly-Nash. The only thing wrong with Igoe was that he ran on the Kelly-Nash ticket. They supported him, nevertheless. They supported Jarecki and the other “anti-Kelly progressives.” But they also supported the Kelly-Nash judiciary candidates! But, you see, only “the most progressive.”
 
C.P. Opposes Lucas
The C.P. carried on a vigorous campaign against Scott Lucas, as senator, on the ground that he was an “isolationist” candidate, and not a genuine Roosevelt supporter. He was opposed, at least so he declared, to any foreign war, and would not vote to budget a single penny to send our boys to a foreign country to engage in war!
In an editorial on April 9, the Record declared:
“If you are for President Roosevelt’s progressive policies, you will vote for Michael L. Igoe.
“If you are against the progressive features of the Roosevelt program, you will vote for Scott W. Lucas ... On Tuesday, the Democratic voters have no cause to be deceived as to how they should cast their ballot for the senatorship.”
When this editorial appeared, Lucas charged that Igoe was being supported by the Communist Party and that Browder so declared in a Chicago speech. The C.P. denied that Browder made such a statement. Budenz declared that the Record had incorrectly reported Browder’s speech. Morris Childs, the state secretary of the C.P. made similar denials.
However, on April 9, the Record carried an interview with Childs, in which he gave the reasons for supporting, together with Labor’s Non-Partisan League, Igoe and Jarecki. He termed Lucas the arch enemy, and went on to say:
 
“The Chief Task”
“Real revolutionists (!) must take the lead in influencing people, in organizing them and leading them in the fight against the camp of reaction, keeping in mind that the chief task is to defeat fascism. In line with the policy of our party, we are already fully entered in the election campaign, supporting and endorsing candidates who stand for democracy and peace, who will fight for the needs of the people, in cooperation with other progressive forces and groups in the state.”
In the Illinois Workers Alliance a motion to support Igoe-Jarecki and other Democratic candidates was introduced by the C.P. leader Foley. This motion was defeated due to the fact that the I.W.A. is affiliated with the Labor Party of Illinois.
Following the primaries in which Lucas and Jarecki, along with the majority of Horner candidates won out, the Record hailed their victories, with one exception. The C.P. deplored the defeat of Igoe and alibied it on the grounds of his association with the Kelly-Nash machine. In its editorial of April 14, entitled Ballots vs. Bosses, the Record rejoiced over the defeat of Kelly-Nash and the great achievement of L.N.P.L. in supporting so many winning candidates.
 
Divided Victory
Aside from the leading posts, the victors were equally divided between Horner and Kelly men. L.N.P.L. and the C.P. supported indiscriminately the machine men of both camps.
With the primaries concluded, everyone points to the elections in the Fall. Already, Big Jim Farley is coming to Illinois to unite the party for the Fall elections. “Party unity” may be achieved. Although the elections marked the decline of the Kelly-Nash machine, they are not out by a long shot. There is plenty of life in a machine that controls almost a million voters in the Chicago area. Unity will be achieved to put over the entire Democratic slate against the Republicans.
What will the C.P. and L.N.P.L. do in the Fall? It is not hard to guess. They will support the “reactionaries” on the ticket along with the “progressives,” in order to “defeat the forces of fascism in the guise of the Republican Party.” Unless, of course, the C.P. suffers another change of line, which seems hardly likely. Its course is charted ever more to the right.
 

Gates: Judge Wham Fines Illinois Miners for Alleged Conspiracy (January 1933)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Judge Wham Fines Illinois Miners
for Alleged Conspiracy
Says 3-Year Strike Damaged Business
Precedent a Menace to Labor If Upheld
(January 1933)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 5, 29 January 1938, pp. 1 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Organized labor was dealt a severe blow in the far-reaching decision handed down by Federal Judge Fred L. Wham, sitting in East St. Louis, Illinois, when on January 13th he ordered the Progressive Miners union to pay $117,000 in damages to the United Electric Coal Company in a suit arising out of a long and bitter strike at the company’s Red Ray mine near Freeburg, Illinois.
The United Electric Company instituted suit against the PMA for $400,000 claimed as losses to the company as a result of the strike. The strike, beginning on April 1, 1933, lasted for three years. Those assessed for damages as a result of this decision, were seven locals of the PMA and 66 individual members.
In handing down his decision Judge Wham found that the company was entitled to actual damages only. The figure was arrived at in the following manner: $70,000 for net profits that would have been made had the mine operated; $22,000 overhead losses, and $25,000 shutdown expenses.
 
Words of Camouflage
Judge Wham made sure to announce that his finding was made not because there was a strike but because there was a conspiracy on the part of the union and the workers to harm the effective operation of the company’s business. The Judge declared that his decision in no way questioned the right of workers to engage in strike action provided that strike action is legal. That was the least he could have said in the light of existing laws upholding the right to strike.
The right to strike is a right acquired by the workers in struggle. Legislation permitting the right to strike and picket is the result of the continuous pressure of the workers in the strike waves of recent years and to the legal recognition of an existing fact.
From coast to coast the workers have struck on the job in order to obtain recognition of their union organizations and an improvement of their working and living conditions. By their mass action, they have rendered anti-strike legislation ineffective and influenced the new trend in labor law developed in the reformist period of the Roosevelt administration.
 
To Cripple Strikes
The boss class, compelled to accept reformist labor legislation, now seeks to cripple the strike movements of the workers through other means, and one of the means utilized is to sue a union and its members for damages arising out of “illegal” strikes and violence occurring in strikes as a result of the “thug and fink” policy of the financial and industrial rulers.
Federal Judge Wham declares that his decision does not violate the right to strike; it is only directed against those who, engaging in “a conspiracy to inflict violent injury upon an employer or upon his property or business and in furtherance of the object of the conspiracy do, by violent and other unlawful conduct, inflict injury upon the property or business of such employer, or by such unlawful means do obstruct its business or prevent it from conducting its business – ...” He concludes then that a union, its members and sympathizers will all be held liable for money damages.
Who is to determine the legality or illegality of a strike ? Who is to determine how and why violence arose in any given strike?
 
Bosses Provoke Violence
It is common knowledge that the traditional policy of the boss class is to provoke violence in all strikes by the employment of thugs, stool-pigeons, deputy sheriffs, and others of the same stripe, in order thereby to obtain legal refuge for strike-breaking. Judges are notoriously anti-labor. It is they who will determine whether a strike is legal or not, whether violence attends a strike and how this violence is caused. But instead of openly finding against the right to strike and the right to unionization, they will find conspiracy against business as the motive for strikes and seek to cripple the unions by returning verdicts in money damages for the companies.
A strike will not be rendered illegal as such, but will be held illegal on conspiratorial grounds. Workers will go to jail, union officials will be incarcerated for failure to pay judgments to companies so suing a union or group of strikers.
How does it operate in the case of the PMA? While the union is appealing the decision, the company has already taken the following steps to secure its judgment in the event Judge Wham’s decision is upheld: When the Judge signs the decree, it will attach the property of the state organization of the A.F. of L. affiliated at Gillespie, and of the 13 locals in Madison and St. Clair counties. In the event the funds of the union do not satisfy the judgment, the company will levy against the property of individual members who were defendants. The attorneys for the company likewise are considering a garnishment of the dues of the union members which are held by the mine operators under the check-off plan and which ultimately find their way into the union treasury. The company will also be in a position to collect on the bond put up by the union in this case pending its appeal.
 
Dangerous Precedent
The precedent set in this case is extremely dangerous. In various parts of the country attempts have been made by companies to secure money damages from unions and striking workers on the ground of a “conspiracy to injure business.” Judge Wham’s anti-labor decision is certain to encourage such actions against other unions.
 

Gates: The Myth of Isolation (1938)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Myth of Isolation
(September 1938)

From New International, Vol. IV No. 9, September 1938, pp. 265–267.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

IMPERIALIST EPOCH of capitalist development is characterized by the immense growth of productive forces through the triumph of large-scale and mass production industries, and relegating agriculture to a secondary economic position; by monopolization and trustification in industry and the establishment of a financial oligarchy; the displacement of the home market by an international economy and the constant search for new fields of capital investment; finally by the growth of international antagonisms in the struggle of the powers for the division and redivision of the immense territories of the earth.
There never has been an hermetically sealed national development of the leading nations under capitalism. In all stages, a nation was compelled to engage in intercourse with other nations, in one form or another. In the pre-imperialist phase, however, the preponderant form of development was national, the determination of frontiers, the construction of industry and the development of the new classes.
Politics is the by-product of economic policy. In the stage of development of a world economy, politics has become international in substance. It is, therefore, false to regard the question of American isolation from the point of view of being for or against such a matter of state policy. One may as well ask: Are you for or against gravity? The answer would have precisely as much point or significance. Isolation is not and cannot be the result of desire. Essentially a relative question at best, it is, in the final analysis, determined by the scope of a nation’s economy and its share in the world market.
The United States, with its tremendous and far-flung economic interests, does not pursue a course of deliberate isolation and has not pursued such a political course for many decades. This country is intimately involved in all major international political developments and in many instances is the initiator of these phenomena: the Young Plan, World Court, League of Nations, World Economic Conference, etc.
In spite of that, it is impossible to deny that the subject of isolation is a much debated one in American political life. There is a genuine mass sentiment favoring so-called isolation, i.e., freedom from foreign alliances and entanglements based upon a sincere desire to avoid war which is always associated with “foreign politics”. This sentiment was given impetus by the experiences of 1914–18, and is exploited by sectional economic interests (The Middle West). Recently, however, a new force, led by the American Stalinists, has been organized to champion the cause of anti-isolation. They propose active intervention by the United States in world affairs for ... collective security and the war for democracy against fascism!
The whole manner in which the subject has been posed and discussed is responsible for the great confusion that now prevails. The isolationists, for example, turn with pride to Washington’s farewell address as providing the fundamental thought on American foreign policy. Washington had said:
“The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is, in extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as possible ... It is true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it.” (Emphasis mine – AG)
The statement is clearly a qualified one. Washington did not inveigh against any and all alliances. Mindful of the precarious existence of the republic, he warned against permanent foreign alliances. He understood, however, that “isolation” was intimately bound up with commercial policy. Obviously, he foresaw something of the future development of the United States as an industrial nation and the concomitant participation by it in the affairs of the world to an ever-increasing degree.
The struggle for independence itself was marked by “interference” from foreign powers interested in the outcome of the conflict between the Crown and the Colonies. No little reason for the victory of the revolutionists was due to the aid rendered it by France and other “foreigners”. But the favorable geographical location of the new country in addition to the agricultural character of its economy made unnecessary “foreign entanglements”, except those created by the limited American trade and its territorial expansion.
Territorial expansion took on a national character, proceeding from the Atlantic seaboard westward. Lack of communications, separation from the center of civilization and economy in Europe by several thousand miles of water, made geographical isolation possible and enabled the country to concentrate entirely upon national expansion. The absence of industry obviated a vast international activity and the limits of its trade and commerce did not interfere greatly with its insular development.
 
2.
Up to the time of the Civil War, this country continued to experience an unfavorable balance of trade, importing largely manufactured goods and exporting agricultural products and raw materials (cotton, furs, lumber, etc.). Industrialization proceeded forward slowly. The country was a debtor nation and destined to remain one until the World War.
But the expansion of the United States was vigorous and militant. It purchased territory where it could (Louisiana Purchase); it went to war where purchase was either impossible or disadvantageous (Florida, Texas, California). Whatever means were available, they were employed to add new territories to the country and to push its constantly expanding frontiers to the Pacific Ocean. Precisely this concentration on national territorial expansion altered the form of development of America from other possible directions and forestalled its earlier transformation to an industrial nation. Nevertheless, it made this development more certain by the acquisition of vast new territories rich in raw materials, metal ores, agricultural areas, and gold. Prior to the Civil War industry was growing by giant strides. In 1850 there were 123,000 [1] manufacturing establishments with a total production value of $1,019,000,000. By the year 1860, manufacturing establishments had grown to 140,000 with a production value of $1,885,862,000, a growth of 17 thousand establishments and almost a billion dollars in value within ten years. While the country was still predominantly agricultural, the tendency toward industrialization was plain.
The results of the Civil War hastened this. In the next decades the United States plunged headlong into industrial growth. Urbanization of the population accompanied the rise of industry. Whereas in 1790 only 3.3 per cent of the population lived in the urban centers, in 1860 it had grown to 16.1 and in 1930 to 49.1. The occupational census illustrated the same trend. In 1870 there were 5,920,000 farmers and 6,586,000 otherwise gainfully employed. The 1910 census showed 11,463,000 farmers while there were 25,779,000, otherwise gainfully employed. In the space of forty years industrial workers far outstripped those engaged in agriculture, although both recorded absolute increases. Yet, by 1930, when the United States had entered the crisis, there was reported 10,472,000 farmers and 38,000,000 workers, or otherwise gainfully employed. Here one notes for the first time a decline in numbers of those engaged in agricultural and a continued sharp increase of those engaged in industry. The transformation of the United States from an agricultural to an industrial country is sharply reflected in the growth and character of its foreign trade. In millions of dollars, for the years 1861–65, exports stood at 170.2 and imports at 255.4. Even bearing in mind the economic dislocations brought about by the Civil War, the relations of exports and imports are properly represented. At the time of the World War and the post-war period (1915–1920), exports stood at 6,416.5 and imports at 3,358.4. For the years 1926–30 exports declined to 4,687.8 and imports to 4,033.5. Since the rise of the United States to the most powerful capitalist nation in the world it has enjoyed an uninterrupted favorable balance of trade.
 
3.
At the end of the 19th Century, the United States had become a world power, an imperialist nation. Conscious of its new power, it entered the world arena in struggle to obtain a greater share of the world market, colonies, sources of raw materials, and cheap labor. The growth of the American Empire resulted in struggles with the other imperialist nations of the world and was testimony of its tremendous material resources. Isolation, hitherto the result of the agricultural character of economy became a myth in the imperialist epoch.
The methods pursued in the establishment of the empire differed in no essentials from those of Great Britain, France, or Germany. The United States became a first rate military power and this was necessary for its world expansion. World intervention became the rule of conduct of Republican and Democratic administrations alike in their faithful representation of the interests of the new ruling financial oligarchy.
In review, let us examine some of the methods employed:

The establishment of spheres of influence (in China, through the application of the Open Door policy);
 
Political regulation (Hawaii, Panama, Mexico);
 
Armed intervention (Santo Domingo, Haiti, Nicaragua);
 
Acquisition without annexation (Cuba), and
 
Conquest and purchase (Philippine Islands, Virgin Islands).

The year 1898 was the most active year for American imperialism. The war with Spain laid the basis for the colonial empire. In that year, Hawaii was annexed, a protectorate was established over Cuba in response to the demands of the American sugar interests, Puerto Rico was annexed, as were the Philippine Islands and Guam. In 1899, Samoa (Tutuila) was annexed by treaty with Great Britain and Germany.
With the turn of the century another period of growth of America’s colonial empire was to be observed. In 1903, a general supervision over Panama was established. Supervision of the finances of Santo Domingo was obtained in 1907, and in 1918 a military administration began to dominate all affairs of that country. Haiti came under the control of this country in 1915 through supervision of its finances which was later followed by more direct methods of intervention. In 1913, a protectorate was established over Nicaragua which was strengthened in 1916 through the granting of canal rights and the use of this country’s territory as a naval base. The subsequent attempt of the Nicaraguans to free themselves from American domination led to its vigorous suppression by the Marines. In 1917 the Virgin Islands were obtained by purchase.
However small these possessions appear to be when compared to the gigantic British Empire they are extremely important to the United States for military strategic reasons as well as economic. Within a period of only twenty years, American imperialist policy resulted in the addition of over 281,000 square miles of territory and almost 18 million people. These territorial gains were buttressed by the increased intervention of the United States in the affairs of Latin and South America. A series of Pan-American conferences have by and large strengthened its position in the Western Hemisphere and at the present time the Roosevelt administration, quite conscious of its tasks, engages in tremendous promotional work to advance the economic interests of the ruling class in these countries.
The United States is not self-contained in spite of the fact that she is better fortified for self-sustenance than other countries. Her vast industries look to foreign fields for such highly important materials as rubber, jute, sugar, manganese, chrome ore, tungsten, vanadium, nickel, tin, silk, clothing, carpet wool, paper, and minerals. Even more important than that, the export of capital brought about by the rise of industry transformed America’s international relations. At the end of the World War, she had become a creditor nation to whom the leading European powers were indebted. In 1930 American investments in foreign properties and long term credits (not including war loans) reached the immense total of $15,400,000,000. In spite of the severe effects of the world crisis at the end of that year, foreign investments stood at the high figure of $12,600,000,000. These investments brought in an annual interest of $521,000,000. Foreign holdings in the United States in the same period were $5,000,000,000, with an annual interest paid out of $146,000,000.
While the percentage of American production entering the arena of world trade is not yet preponderant, it is steadily growing. The world market is the fulcrum of a normal and prosperous operation of American economy and that is why it is necessary for this country to involve itself in world affairs for the purpose of improving its position therein.
The foreign policy of the United States is based upon its economic interests in the world. The statistical citations above demonstrate why isolation is impossible, notwithstanding the large sentiment in its favor. Different administrations brought about varying emphasis in foreign policy, but the fundamental character of the imperialist policy has not changed since the rise of the American Empire. This is true for all administrations from McKinley to the present Roosevelt.
The financial oligarchy in the United States, intimately bound up with the government and directing the affairs of the State Department, has the decisive word in matter of its foreign policies. This section of the ruling class, the most decisive and conscious capitalist group, is the bitter foe of isolation. It understands that the only way the United States might achieve isolation is to surrender her international economic possessions. Assuming this was done, the whole structure of American capitalism would shatter. As long as this country maintains its dominant world economic position it will pursue a militant international policy, the direct antithesis of isolation.
However, in a declining world capitalism with a contracting world market, the antagonisms between the United States and the other powers will become more severe. The needs of American capitalism will compel it to intensify its international expansion in conflict with and at the expense of England, France, Germany, Japan and others. This is the unavoidable course of capitalist development and is to be observed now in Latin America, Europe and the Far East. The world powers are moving inexorably toward a new world war for the redivision of the earth and a reconquest of the world market. The United States is intimately involved in this process.
America’s geographical situation appears to lend favor to the desires of the isolationists. They believe that because this country is separated from Europe and Asia by great distances, isolation can be achieved through pressure and desire. Fearing war and its effects upon their economic position, the isolationists, already sharply exploited by finance capital and suffering the severe effects of the long-existing crisis, carry on a hopeless agitation to keep America out of foreign entanglements. But they cannot seriously affect the natural and logical foreign policy which emanates from the needs of American imperialism.
Revolutionaries cannot permit themselves to debate the question of isolation in the manner of the isolationists or the Stalinists. If the revolutionary Marxists demand that American imperialism refrain from intervention in Latin and South America, or, to withdraw the marines and navy from China, they do so not because they are advocates of isolation, but because they are enemies of imperialism and capitalism, and because they are opponents of capitalist wars. The policy of the revolutionaries stems from their opposition to capitalism and its economic, political and military policies.
When, however, the Stalinists enter the fold to champion the cause of anti-isolation, or conversely, to demand American intervention in foreign affairs, they do so on the basis of a pro-war policy which is the essence of their demand for collective security – the war of democracy against fascism. Motivated by the exigencies of Soviet diplomacy and urging the alliance between the United States and Soviet Russia, the American Stalinists demand that the government (!) take the initiative in world politics, to join hands with Great Britain and France for the purpose of isolating the fascist powers and securing the world for the beautiful life under “democratic capitalism”.
Where does such a policy lead? It compels one to become an active supporter of the financial ruling class of the nation. The Stalinists assert that isolation will aid the expansion of the fascist powers in Latin America at the expense of the United States. It means that the economic gains achieved by American imperialism through the employment of a brutal military policy by the government acting for the big banks and trusts, will be endangered.
Fred Brown, writing in the Communist of March, 1938 said,
“It is now when the aggressors of China are penetrating Latin America, Canada, are nearing the Philippines, that they must be stopped.”
The “aggressors” are attacking the economic interest of the United States. Whose economic interests? The economic interests of the House of Morgan, the Rockefeller domain, and Wall Street. How shall the aggressors be stopped? By a State Department bull? Or, perhaps a conference? They will be stopped by the military might of American imperialism.
The plea to stop the aggressors is a plea for war to determine the right of exploiting backward and colonial countries by the contending powers. This is true not only in the specific areas now controlled by the United States, but it is true for the entire world and for all imperialist nations. Judging from their position, the great fear of the Stalinists is that a redivision of the earth may take place at the expense of the United States. Their attempt to identify the interests of the financial ruling class of this country with that of the working class and other exploited groups is characteristic of social patriots.
“Cooperation (collective security) means peace”, the Stalinists contend. Why should cooperation insure peace? Genuine international cooperation is possible only upon the overthrow of capitalism. Cooperation under capitalism cannot be anything else but a temporary cooperation of one set of imperialist bandits against another. In 1914 you had precisely this kind of cooperation between the Allied powers and the Central powers. It was collective security, a form of international cooperation for both sets of powers. But it was collective security and cooperation for war. The present developments in the diplomatic relations between the powers approximates the pre-war jockeying for alliances, all aimed to secure the best position for victory.
When Harry Cannes says in the Daily Worker of January 29, 1938, that “Playing into the hands of the Japanese fascist-military foreign policy is every brand of isolation advocated in the US”, he is asking for direct intervention by American imperialism in the Far Eastern War. He divides the isolationists into two groups: the shortsighted but honest isolationist peace sentiment, and the out and out fascist intrigues assisted by Trotskyite-Lovestoneite hatred of the Soviet Union and their desire to defeat its collective peace policy.
Unquestionably, should a war between Germany and Italy on one side and Great Britain and France on the other take place, the former would endeavor to strengthen isolationist tendencies to keep America out of such a war; the latter would seek to involve this country on their side, or vice versa. In any case, America’s economic interests would not permit it the luxury of a neutral position. The very presence of the war would be a signal for American war industries to plunge full force into trade with the belligerents. This is assuming that America will not be a participant in such a war, an unlikely prospect.
An active anti-isolationist policy can only lead one into the camp of Wall Street. The ruling financial oligarchy is adamantly opposed to isolation. They are not interested in the slightest in the Soviet collective peace policy. They are interested in the cold proposition of preserving their interests in the world arena by an active policy on the part of the Administration, buttressed by a big navy, the world’s greatest air force, and the best equipped army that modern industry can create. The logic of the Stalinist policy leads them into the camp of the war-mongers, the imperialists. Their present denunciation of Wall Street is so much straw in the wind. In the impending international crisis and the subsequent outbreak of war they will be found on the side of the vested interests.
That is why the war-mongers, Republican and Democratic, the financial oligarchy, and the Stalinists have so loudly applauded the foreign policy of the Roosevelt Administration. Roosevelt is a blatant imperialist and militarist. Under the direction of Secretary of State Hull, American foreign policy is extremely militant in the defense of its imperialist possessions. Even the bitterest critics of Roosevelt’s domestic policies have come forth publicly to declare their solidarity with the actions of the Department of State.
War will unite the factions of American capitalism in the struggle to advance its economic interests. The plans of the War Department already insure the organization of industry and personnel for the prosecution of such a war. All opponents of the war will be denounced as enemies of the nation in the pay of the adversary. In the front line, advocating the prosecution of the war and the persecution of its opponents will be the Stalinists acting as the bloodhounds for the ruling class and its military machine.
Revolutionary Marxists cannot seriously debate the question of isolation which is answered by the nature of the economy of the nation. They recognize that it is impossible in a capitalism advanced to its imperialist stage, the stage of world economy and world politics. We are opposed to foreign intervention because we are opposed to imperialism. We are against collective security because it means collective organization for war. Safeguarding the imperialist interests of the United States, which is another way of saying, the property rights of the monopolies and trusts, is not the problem of the working class or the revolutionary movement. We are interested only in the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of socialism. Any other policy must lead to subservience to the ruling class of the United States.
 
Footnote
1. These figures and others quoted are taken from A Graphic History of the US, by Louis M. Hacker, Rudolph Modley and George R. Taylor.
 

Gates: Browder's Two Roosevelts (1938)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Browder’s Two Roosevelts
(August 1938)

From New International, Vol. IV No. 8, August 1938, pp. 233–235.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE CURRENT LINE OF THE Communist Party of the United States is misrepresented as a continuation of traditional Marxist-Leninist policies. This fraud does not require a great deal of effort to expose. The entire program of Stalinism marks a back-sliding from the theory and practises of Marx and Lenin. We present some evidence of this fact in the attitude of the American CP toward Roosevelt in two distinct periods: at the end of the miscarriage known as the Third Period, and in the post-Seventh Congress years. In the former stage, Stalinism was an aberration of an ultra-left character. At the present time it represents the most extreme variety of opportunism, that is, social-patriotism and class collaboration.
It is not difficult to recall the mixed reactions to the election of Roosevelt and the subsequent endeavors on the part of his administration to institute the Industrial Recovery Act. He was hailed simultaneously as savior and menace. Both charges, depending upon your class point of view, were and are correct.
The attitude of the Communist party was absorbing, to say the least. The CP had entered the elections with an independent presidential candidate, who campaigned on a vigorous party platform under the general slogans of “Class Against Class”, and “The Revolutionary Way Out of the Crisis”. Receiving an extremely small vote, the Stalinists were bursting with pride because it was a “communist” vote based upon sharply delineated class issues emphasizing the socialist society as the immediate issue of the day.
Upon the election of Roosevelt, the CP at once sought the mobilization of united actions against the new administration on the ground that
“Roosevelt’s policies, as is already evident, are policies in the interests of the bankers and big industrialists and against the interests of the toiling masses. The dictatorial powers already taken by Roosevelt – already a step toward fascisization – are being used against the toilers. The militarization of labor, the economy program at the expense of the masses ... increased military and naval expenditures in preparation for a new war which the masses will be called upon to be the cannon fodder – this is the anti-working class program of Roosevelt.” [1] (Statement of the Central Committee, Daily Worker, March 30, 1933)
In the wake of this statement of policy by the Central Committee, a veritable barrage of anti-Roosevelt articles was unloosed in the Daily Worker and other party organs. All the leading party writers and specialists in translating CC resolutions were hauled into action.
First in line came a number of articles by a party hack, Harry Cannes. In a series entitled, The Keystone of Roosevelt’s New Deal and How It Hits the Worker’s Living Standards, Cannes argued that the entire program was a gigantic swindle of the working class in the interests of safeguarding the existence of decaying capitalism. On June 24, 1933, he wrote:
“Just as world capitalism drives to a new world war under the greatest flurry of peace banners ever assembled, so Roosevelt leads the present and prospective attack on the standard of living of the entire American toiling population, under the most powerful demagogic apparatus ever assembled by American capitalism. The machine that Roosevelt is building up for his attack is similar to that of a similar species of organizer of the ‘new age’, Woodrow Wilson.”
If it was easy to see through the openly reactionary attack of a Hoover, Cannes quite correctly illustrates that
“... it was not so easy, however, to blast through the more subtle manoeuvres of the sharper class contradictions behind the Roosevelt attack, an attack which must be more virulent against the workers, and which at the same time must be larded with defter lying phrases about the new deal ...”
Earl Browder comes upon the scene, to speak his piece as the leader of the party. In his article, The Roosevelt New Deal and Fascism (Daily Worker, July 8, 1933), Browder wrote:
“The ‘New Deal’ is a policy of slashing the living standards at home and fighting for markets abroad for the single purpose of maintaining the profits of finance capital. It is a policy of brutal oppression and preparations for imperialist war.”
Further on, in treating specifically the question of fascism, he declared:
“It is true that elements of fascism long existing in America are coming to maturity more rapidly ... First, it must be understood that fascism grows naturally out of bourgeois democracy under the conditions of capitalist decline. It is only another form of the same class rule, the dictatorship of finance capital ... The development of Roosevelt’s program is a striking illustration of the fact that there is no Chinese wall between democracy and fascism ... Roosevelt operates with all the arts of ‘democratic’ rule, with an emphasized liberal and social demagogic cover ... Yet behind this smokescreen, Roosevelt is carrying out more thoroughly and brutally even than Hoover, the capitalist attack against the living standards of the masses at home and the sharpest national chauvinism in foreign relations.”
By and large, the general historical character of the Roosevelt regime is aptly put, but the Third Period Browder continues. “It is clear that fascism already finds much of its work done in America and more of this is being done by Roosevelt.” In the extent that he may not be fully understood, and for the purpose of emphasis, Browder goes on. Denouncing the Industrial Recovery Act as “an American version of Mussolini’s ‘corporative state’”, he said, “It is one of the steps toward the militarization of labor. It is a forerunner of American fascism.”
Hot upon the heels of Browder came another eminent Stalinist scribbler, Jack Stachel, to declare in the Daily Worker of July 3, 1933, that
“... every act of the Roosevelt administration since its coming into office has been against the masses. The Roosevelt government no less than the Hoover government is a Wall Street government.”
William Z. Foster contributed his bit of wisdom to this campaign of enlightenment. In a series of articles entiled Who Is Roosevelt? (Daily Worker, August 29, 1933), he proceeded to inform all and sundry that
“... the policy of Mr. Roosevelt’s party is identical in all essentials [no less!] with that of the Republican Party ... Mr. Roosevelt is ... a lightning rod for capitalism to protect it from danger.”
Under a sub-head Roosevelt – Imperialist, Foster reiterates what all the others had written, namely:
“The election of Mr. Roosevelt would mean the continuation if not the intensification of the militant imperialism of the US in China, Latin America, Europe, – all over the world. His election would mean an intensification of the war danger – the greatest of all problems menacing the workers of the world.”
And finally, again Browder. In his article of September 9, 1933, the secretary of the CP wrote:
“Like the Fascist Hitler, he [Roosevelt] must use radical phrases to cover up the capitalist policy which he puts over even more ruthlessly than did Hoover.”
One could go on endlessly and quote similar gems from scores of other Stalinist writers, propagandists and agitators. Is there any doubt, however, bearing in mind its confusion on the subject of fascism, where the CP stood shortly after the election of Roosevelt?
The Stalinist line on Roosevelt was created in the first stage of the world offensive of fascism and reaction. Hitler was already in power. Fascism was on the rise in all European countries. In this respect, nothing fundamentally was altered in 1936, 1937 and 1938 to warrant (even for the sake of the argument) a new approach toward Roosevelt in the form of support to him. Certainly, there has been no basic change in the direction of his administration. A mellowing of attitude toward Roosevelt came, however, with the recognition of the Soviet Union by the United States. The Communist International was subsequently to embark on the course of “defending democratic capitalism from the fascist aggressors”. Collective security replaced the revolutionary aim long dormant in the Comintern. The immediate program in Europe has become the maintenance of the status quo among nations thereby barring any revolutionary action by the European proletariat. This hindrance to revolutionary action was fortified by the Franco-Soviet pact and the theory and practise of People’s Frontism. The slogan of “Class against Class” was relegated to the limbo of history by the leaders of the Communist International.
The May 1938 convention of the American CP officially ordained the social, patriotic and class collaborationist program. (See: The Stalinist Convention, by Max Shachtman, The New International, July 1938.) The Stalinists are now content to play the role of a loyal opposition to Roosevelt. The demands of the party in relation to domestic problems are extremely modest ones because “socialism is not a problem of today”. As a result, its program, hardly one whit different from that of the New Deal, shapes up as follows: Extension of the WPA with a monthly minimum wage of $60.00 (as against the prevailing $55.00 wage); unemployment insurance, minimum unemployment benefits of $15.00 a week; old age pensions of at least $60.00 monthly for all over 60; free hospitals and health services, abolition of child labor and complete equality for Negroes.
There are no half-way measures for the Stalinists. All the teachings of the founders of scientific socialism are cast aside in the interest of establishing a “democratic front”. Capitalist society is no longer divided by classes, but into “reactionaries and progressives”. The present crisis, according to Browder, is not due to the inherent contradictions of capitalist economy, but to a sit-down strike of “reactionary” capitalists. He emphasizes that point in his article, The Current Crisis: Its Cause and Cure. Therein he also declares that to reject the Roosevelt program is to “proclaim that to continue capitalism means to condemn millions of men, women and children to death by slow starvation”.
On May 2, 1938, the Midwest Daily Record, official organ of the CP in the Middle West, calls
“... for an extension of the postcard campaign in support of Roosevelt’s Recovery proposal ... The Midwest Daily Record also points to the need of unity of all the progressives in the congressional elections of 1938 – to the end that Wall Street may be defeated, to the end that recovery in the full sense may be achieved.”
In the New Masses of May 3, 1938, an appeal for the Daily Worker in lyric style informs us that
“A new spirit is sweeping across the nation ... surging through the cities and farms ... a spirit of hope ... awakened by the President’s recovery program”.
If Browder charged Roosevelt with representing incipient fascism in the United States, it remained for him also to absolve the President and his administration of that charge in the same preposterous manner in which it was made. In his Questions and Answers, prepared to clarify confused minds on the eve of the 10th National Convention of the CP, he raises hopes against fascism and war because “right here in the United States, although the majority of the people haven’t faced the issue of socialism, they have faced the issue of fascism [!] and they got the administration in Washington that’s handcuffing fascism”. As the reader will note, no date is given marking this transformation of the Roosevelt regime.
The main task of the CP today, according to Hathaway, editor of the Daily Worker, in his report to the plenary session of the CC and the National Party Builders Congress held in New York, February 18, 1938, “is that of mobilizing the broadest mass of the American people to defeat the forces of reaction in the election campaign”. He denounced the Republican “progressives” because
“... they were as vigorous in their denunciation of the policies of Roosevelt and the New Deal as were Landon and Hoover. Their ‘progressive’ phrases were only trimmings to conceal their attacks on Roosevelt’s progressive policies ...” (Emphasis in the original – AG).
Thus the Stalinists find themselves engaged in parliamentary activity on the side of the Roosevelt Democrats helping to select candidates in the primaries according to the designation “reactionary” or “progressive”, decided beforehand in the headquarters of the CP. The electoral support of bourgeois parties and candidates is “justified” on the grounds of the necessity of creating the aforementioned “democratic front” in the United States. So Hathaway reports:
“From this it should be clear to all of us that our job, the job of the whole progressive movement and therefore also of our party is to mobilize our forces to bend every effort, through every channel, to make full use of our strength and influence ... It means that now the party, from top to bottom, must be geared up for our participation in this campaign [the Fall elections] – .” (Emphasis in the original – AG)
This mildness in the sphere of domestic relations is in sharp contrast to the vigorous pro-war position and support to the outstanding militarist President in the history of the nation. The slogan, “Communism is Twentieth-Century Americanism”, paves the way for a new patriotic frenzy injudiciously fostered by the new revisionists at the helm of the party.
“The general line of policy guaranteeing our own peace and the world’s peace has already been proposed by President Roosevelt,” said Browder on May 11, 1938, in his Baltimore speech announcing his newly-discovered community of interests between “communists” and catholics.
“Such a policy is in the best traditions of our country. The people of America must rally to its support and demand its energetic application in life.”
The solution to the problem of war, he continues,
“... is the minimum program ... contained in the courageous and clear-spoken address of President Roosevelt in Chicago on October 5th. That is a program of concerted action by all lovers of peace to quarantine the war-makers ... President Roosevelt points out the only possible road to avert universal catastrophe of the capitalist world.”
In his debate with Frederick J. Libby, Browder denounced those who “place in the criminal’s dock the government of the United States and President Roosevelt alongside of the Nazi regime and Hitler”.
Apparently intoxicated with his own brilliance, Browder continued,
“What America needs today, what the world needs is a foreign policy based upon ... Thomas Jefferson [this in the period of the imperialist decay of capitalism]. The general line of such a policy has been proposed by President Roosevelt ... The whole country must be rallied to support it ...”
As if to mock Marx and Lenin, this great advocate of morality in relations between nation and individuals affirms:
“We declare that the time has come when the continuation of civilization itself, in America as everywhere, depend upon world organization to enforce a minimum moral standard among nations ... These first primitive conditions for a world organization of peace have been established in the Kellogg Pact ... Our neutrality advocates have cynically abandoned moral standards ... We appeal for the strengthening of moral standards.”
Not a word about the class struggle. No mention of socialism, the proletariat, the workers’ power. Nothing remains here but revolting petty bourgeois and pacifist platitudes that have ever been responsible for confusing and misleading the masses and, finally, betraying them to the bourgeoisie.
It is only logical that the next step, following such social patriotic doctrine, should be the advocacy of imperialist policy. The Sino-Japanese war offered the Stalinists precisely that opportunity. The New Masses has been extremely concerned over the Far Eastern situation and on more than one occasion admonished Wall Street to hasten to that war area in order to insure the territory for exploitation by the American financial oligarchy. Browder, as befits his role of leader of American Stalinism, is very concrete. In the Daily Worker of April 28, 1938, he wrote:
“The only prospect for profitable investment of American capital is China. But if the United States really wanted to put our 13,000,000 unemployed back to work, to put unemployed capital to work, the United States government [!] should invest about $5,000,000,000 in building up Chinese industry. We should by agreement with the Chinese government produce machines here, thus putting our unemployed back to work and at the same time building up their industry, which will enable the Chinese to ward off the fascist invasion.”
Profit is no object, you see!
And finally, the great difficulty, according to Harold Brown, in The Communist of March 1938 is that
“... the labor movement, by not having as yet taken a clear stand in support of Roosevelt’s peace policy, is still holding back the whole peace movement ...”
And we had always believed it was capitalism that prevented peace, and that peace movements divorced from the proletarian struggle against capitalism were good for nothing except surrender to the imperialists! But we live and learn.
It is not merely a change of line that is involved herein. The support now given to Roosevelt and his administration represents a complete revision of the revolutionary doctrines of Marxism on the struggle for power, the nature of the bourgeois state, the role of classes in bourgeois society, the character of capitalist economy. It marks the utter degeneration of Stalinism. Stalinism no longer even pretends to a revolutionary policy, to a struggle for socialism. It openly avows and defends its apostasy against all critics. Obsequiousness characterizes its attitude toward Roosevelt, the New Deal, capitalist society. The party and its sympathizing organizations strive with might and main to become “respectable” citizens, to be accepted in liberal bourgeois circles and to be regarded as true-blue Americans. Roosevelt is constantly referred to in terms of endearment: The President said in his great speech ... In his significant Georgian address ... FDR was dressed in ... The first couple of the land was present! And so on ad nauseam!
Organized Stalinism represents everything that is retrogressive and reactionary in the labor movement. The advancement of the interests of the working class, i.e., its emancipation from the pernicious exploitation of capitalism, from starvation, misery and war, is only possible by the overthrow of bourgeois society. But the first step in the realization of this aim is the annihilation of that corroding influence: Stalinism.
 
Footnote
1. Unless otherwise indicated, all italics are mine. – AG
 

Gates: First Youth Conference Was Held in Chicago in November 1929 (October 1938)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
First Youth Conference Was Held
in Chicago in November 1929
(October 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 46, 22 October 1938, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Our movement has traveled a great distance in the ten years that have passed since comrades Cannon, Abern and Shachtman presented their declaration to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the United States announcing adherence to the Russian Opposition. Prior to that, the great problems of the world movement and the sharp disputes inside the Stalintern never greatly concerned the C.P. Its decisions relating to these questions were formally taken in response to requests of the ruling bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. The struggle of the Russian Opposition was regarded as a "Russian affair"' which was a bothersome interference with the inane and permanent factional disputes in the American C.P. The Stalinist movement was struck with consternation to find that Trotskyism had found its way into the ranks of the Party. How could it be? It was already declared to have been irrevocably defeated and destroyed in a dozen different revolutions and in a dozen conferences, not least of which was the 6th World Congress. Yet, when the suppressed documents of the Russian Opposition and the writings of Leon Trotsky were made known to the revolutionary workers in the United States, the Left Opposition was born and began to attract around it a wide circle of sympathizers.
It became possible then to understand the reasons for the great defeats suffered by the Communist International, the stagnation of that once great body, the paralysis that invaded the whole international as a result of the stranglehold of the Stalin bureaucracy, and also, the nature of the factional impasse in the C.P. of the U.S.
 
Nationwide Expulsions
In all the leading centers of the C.P., organizers, functionaries, active rank-and-file communists, and above all, the youth, rallied around the banner of the International Left Opposition. Expulsions followed declarations of solidarity with the aforementioned three comrades. Physical violence, intellectual terrorism, political and moral bribery failed to stem the growth of our movement. The most heartening aspect in the whole situation was the manner in which the young revolutionaries resisted the pressure of the bureaucratic machine.
The first public declaration of our youth appeared in the Militant of April 11, 1929. It was a document addressed to the Young Communist League and it recited the nature of the situation in the world movement. The degeneration of the Young Communist International was traced to the invasion of the Stalin bureaucracy which transformed the youth movement into a factional instrument in the spurious struggle against Trotskyism. It showed how the American youth organization was deteriorating as a result of conditions in the Party and closed with a ringing call for support of the Left Opposition. This first document was signed by three members of the National Executive Committee of the Y.C.L. and thirty leading youth functionaries, representing six districts. New layers of supporters arose and the expulsions continued from coast to coast.
At the first conference of the Left Opposition, held on May 17, 18 and 19, 1929, the Communist League of America was formed. The conference was held on the far west side of Chicago, a city which has given birth to so many workers organizations. It was the first time that many of the comrades had met each other. Of the thirty-one delegates and thirteen alternates present, a large proportion were youth. They came by automobile, rode the rods, and hitch-hiked to Chicago. They were tired, hungry and broke. But these difficulties in no way effected the spirit of enthusiasm of the comrades who understood that they were engaged in the great task of revitalizing and rebuilding the revolutionary movement.
The spirit of the young comrades was contagious to all the comrades who came from different parts of the country with a variety of experiences and with years of service in the movement. These young comrades took an active part in the conference deliberations and were destined to play a key role in the future development of our organization. The presence of a large number of youth delegates and alternates (in some cities our organization was composed entirely of youth) made necessary the holding of a sub-conference to discuss the tasks of the youth.
 
The Youth Meet
Thus, our first youth conference was really in the nature of an adjunct gathering of the formation conference of the Communist League. We were concerned primarily with the manner in which youth work could be carried on under conditions where the main task was to firmly root the League and popularize the program and platform of the Left Opposition. At that time we still conducted ourselves as an expelled faction of the Communist Party, as a propaganda organization.
The youth conference, attended by about fifteen regular delegates and alternates, held a long and serious discussion of its tasks. We decided that our main task was the building of the Communist League. A separate youth organization was out of question. However, wherever forces permitted and the situation was favorable, the younger comrades were to conduct special activity among the Communist youth as well as detached and unorganized revolutionary youth.
Since that conference a good deal of progress has been recorded. Within a year, the question of a youth organization became a practical one. We began in New York with the organization of a Marxian Youth Club. Similar organizations were set up in other cities. In November 1931, Young Spartacus, the first Left Opposition youth paper made its appearance. With the paper as a base our youth movement continued to grow and in 1932 the Spartacus Youth League was formed.
Looking back over the past years, it is extremely heartening and gratifying to note that, with but few exceptions, all the young comrades who participated in the first conference and who aided in the founding of Young Spartacus and. the Spartacus Youth League are still with us. They are no longer engaged in youth work. But they are active and leading Party workers. An entirely new layer of young revolutionists have taken their place. Our early youth organization carried out its basic task It trained politically and organizationally experienced revolutionaries for Party work. This fact alone testifies to the tremendous vitality of the revolutionary ideas of our movement.
Our youth movement of the present is fortunate in many ways. It enjoys the heritage of ten years of long struggle. It is a revitalized revolutionary theory the theory of Marxism. The past two decades form a tremendous school of revolutionary experience which is theirs. And it is permeated with the glorious spirit of revolutionary internationalism.
But above all, our youth organization is fortunate in that it is associated with a Party which understands its problems and is prepared to lend genuine aid in their solution. The Y.P.S.L. can count upon the intimate comradeship of the Party and its leading cadre, so large a number of whom have themselves emerged from the revolutionary youth movement.
 

Gates: CIO Report Shows Validity of Labor’s Wage Demand (23 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
CIO Report Shows Validity
of Labor’s Wage Demand
(23 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 51, 23 December 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

LAST week the CIO made public its wage demands for the coming year on the basis of a special report prepared for it by Robert R. Nathan, former Assistant Director of Reconversion, who now heads a group of private consulting economists. The report strengthened the position of the labor movement that real wages had declined compared to the mounting cost of living at a time when profits have reached a record high in American economy. Nathan’s report contained three important contents on which the CIO bases its present demands:

“The purchasing power of by far the greater number of American families has been falling recently month by month. Meanwhile ... corporate profits after taxes, have risen about 50 per cent.”
 
“On the average, in all manufacturing, an increase of about 21 per cent in weekly earnings – without any increase in prices – would have been required in October 1946 to bring real weekly earnings back to the January 1945 level. By the end of 1946, with the present trend of prices, an increase of about 23 per cent will be required.”
 
“On and after taxes, basic ... corporate profits are approaching $15,000,000,000, fully one and a half times the level of the best war year.”

These astounding facts are not exactly new. The report of Economic Outlook which we reviewed in Labor Action last week, fully documented the facts about profits, wages, prices and the decline in the living standards of the majority of the people. The CIO, however, in order to forestall any charge that its report was “slanted,” hired the former government economists to prepare an impartial report on the economic situation in the country. The figures of the Nathan report are not at all refuted by industry, the daily press, or the leading pro-industry columnists. Instead, they slyly evade the real issues and quite hysterically seek to prove why the wage demands of the CIO cannot be granted.
 
Profits Hit Record High
Unable to deny that profits are at or near a $15,000,000,000 level, the profiteers and their spokesmen have marshaled a half-dozen reasons why the present wage demands should not be granted. The fundamental concept which guides the thinking of industry, the press and the reactionary “experts,” is that large and secure profit is basic to the health of the economy; the interests of the workers and the overwhelming majority of the people should and must be subordinated to the height of profit; labor should be thankful that such large profits do go to industry, otherwise the big plants would shut down and large-scale unemployment would follow. Thus, the interests of labor and the mass of people are tied to the well-being of the capitalist class.
In concretizing their opposition to the Nathan report and the CIO several lines of argument are taken which reveal the basic strategy of big business in the coming struggle over wages:

While profits are higher than they have ever been, they are not uniform for all industry. Some industries have higher profits than others, some have none at all.
 
If the present wage demands of the CIO are granted, these will be followed by price increases which will wipe out the increases, further heighten price levels and act as a barrier to increased production.
 
Marginal producers, low profit industries, small plants, unable to grant “justifiable” wage increases, will be driven out of business and start a spiral of unemployment.
 
The way to insure prosperity is to keep wage levels where they are, permit prices to fall by competition and increased production, and allow the natural process of readjustment to stabilize the present unbalance in the economy.
 

The “Plight” of Big Business
The fallacies in these arguments are immediately clear to the naked eye. No one has asserted that present high profits are uniform for all industries. The demands for higher wages are not based on such an assertion. Obviously, some enterprises have higher profit than others. By and large, however, the mass of profits are concentrated in the large monopolistic enterprises (which are the real enemies of small and marginal businesses), employing tens of thousands of workers, the majority of whom are on the payrolls of precisely those companies upon whom the CIO is making its demands. And even if some of these do not show as high profit as others, it should be borne in mind that it is not a question of the profit level of last month, this month, or the next, but of the conditions of monopolistic enterprise over a period of several years when profits have been high and constant, and when enormous reserves were piled up – all at the expense of labor.
The threat of industry that if it grants new wage increases, it will immediately increase prices correspondingly and thus shift the cost of wage increases on the workers and the mass of people, would mean the continuation of a basic capitalist policy. Up to now, big business has been acting in collusion with the government to rob the people. Last year when the 18½ cent raises were granted thousands of workers, these increases were swallowed by general price increases over arid above the highest wage increase granted. The “little-publicized” report of the OPA, reported by Philip Murray, pointed out that:
“For manufacturing as a whole price increases from January 1945 to September 30, 1946, averaged more than ten times the amount necessary to offset wage increases with no squeeze in profits.”
No squeeze indeed! On the contrary, profits were even larger. This fact alone shows why the general strategy of the UAW in the GM strike was absolutely correct. The struggle for wages today cannot be made without simultaneously including the demand that prices not be increased. The difficulty of the GM strike was that the rest of the labor movement did not get behind the UAW. Both Murray and Lewis, in steel and coal respectively, demanded their wage increases without the slightest concern about the price increases demanded by the steel and coal barons. Only those with short memories have forgotten how the steel and coal industries were given excessive price increases to overcome the pitiful wage increases they agreed to. If the CIO does not press the demand “wage increases with no increase in prices,” they will not have achieved their goal in the impending struggle. This demand has to become the watchword of labor in this period.
 

vis: Why McKenney-Minton Quit CP (23 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Third in Series on Dissension in U.S. Stalinism
Why McKenney-Minton Quit CP
(23 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 51, 23 December 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Of all the persons recently expelled from the CP, the most prominent were Ruth McKenney, author of My Sister Eileen, and Bruce Minton, magazine writer. They were expelled in a typical Stalinist totalitarian style.
The Norwalk, Conn., CP branch of which they were members asked them to report on the July 1946 National Committee meeting which selected Eugene Dennis as national secretary. Upon the presentation of their critical report they were forthwith expelled from the party.
The McKenney-Minton report is an exhibit of the Stalinist mind; it reveals the minds, morals, and political ignorance of people who have been saturated with Stalinism. In our previous articles, for example, we quoted the NCP Report (New Committee for Publications) call for a “Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalinist Party in ‘the United States,” in which they add:
“We wish to undermine confidence in the leadership of the CPUSA because this leadership is politically rotten. We wish to ‘shake’ the ‘unity’ of CPUSA, because facts have already fully demonstrated – for all who wish to see – that this ‘unity’ is based on support of capitalism and refusal to fight capitalism.” (Emphasis in the original)
 
Mckenney-Minton Endorse Duclos
The theory of all the expelled people is that the American Stalinist Party has departed from the “revolutionary principles” of the “defunct” Communist International and the teachings of Joseph Stalin. This, in their minds, is the difference between the CP in this country and the Stalinists parties in Europe, especially the French and Italian. The McKenney-Minton statement follows this pattern. Harking back to the Duclos article which prepared the ouster of Browder and signified that he had outlived his usefulness in the post-war period of Anglo-American-Russian relations, the statement says:
“A year and three months ago, when Ruth and I first read the statement by Comrade Jacques Duclos on the American Communist movement, we felt bitter shame. It was not enough to say that the leaders of the American party had betrayed our trust; it was not enough to recognize the special responsibility of those comrades whom we. With other members of the Communist Party, had chosen to organize and direct the fight for and of the American working class. As Ruth and I read the Duclos document, we knew that we had also been guilty. Long before Comrade Duclos spoke out, we had come to hate and despise the Browder policy of liquidation and treachery. But I had voted for the original Browder proposal to destroy the party when this proposal was first made by the National Committee; a few months later I was forced to understand the facts of this opportunism. Comrade McKenney did not vote to wreck the Communist Party; from the beginning she was opposed to the Browder betrayal. But neither of us spoke out. We thought discipline required us to be silent. When we read the Duclos statement, we knew we had been wrong – terribly wrong.”
Almost everything that is wrong with Stalinism is contained in this statement and we shall analyze it in detail. But first we want to summarize the rest of the McKenney-Minton statement. The gist of the document is that the ousting of Browder and his replacement by Foster’s leadership and the appointment of Eugene Dennis as national secretary has not really changed the line of the nartv; that the policies of the new leadership is fundamentally the same as Browder’s examples:

The document charges the party with a false struggle “to maintain world peace,” when as a matter of fact “there is a war in China.” The American party is charged with feeling “no sorrow for our brothers in China.” McKenney and Minton hold U.S. imperialism responsible for the war in China, denounce the party for opportunism on this question and demand a struggle against American imperialism. They say nothing about Russian imperialism and Stalinist interests in helping to instigate the Chinese war but adopt a position reminiscent of the early days when Russia and the Communist International advocated and pursued a revolutionary socialist policy. Twenty years of Stalinist degeneration has not been without its effects on McKenney and Minton.
 
The document charges the party with lacking theoretical leadership because it failed to analyze the nature of imperialism, war as an integral part of capitalism, and monopoly capitalism as the instigator of war. This theoretical poverty of the party, says the statement, is responsible for its present opportunism.
 
Dennis is taken to task for continuing a policy which purportedly originated with Browder: support of the Democratic Party in parliamentary activity on the ground that it embodies the “progressive policies of Roosevelt.” They say: “Throughout his report, Dennis talks about ‘pro-Roosevelt forces,’ about ‘the pro-Roosevelt committees and activities within the Democratic Party.’ So did Browder. What does Dennis mean by these labels? He never tells us. Does he mean the same forces that Browder discovered?

The fundamental reason why Dennis does not “differentiate,” is because there is no real “differentiation” unless the more militant and threat ening tone adopted by the CP in response to the new Russian foreign policy can be called a differentiation, and not what it really is: a Russian effort to blackmail U.S. imperialism into making concessions to it at the UN.
The statement quotes extensively from the stupid report of Dennis to prove that he actually carries out a line similar to Browder’s.
 
They Look to Stalin for Aid
4. In properly designating the CP policy as opportunist, the statement calls on Stalin for assistance and quotes from the “master” that “opportunism in our midst is like an ulcer in a healthy organism, and must not be tolerated.” Evidence of the opportunism of the party is revealed in its lack of hatred for capitalism, its refusal to advocate the struggle for socialism. McKenney and Minton say:
“In this crucial moment in history, the Communist Party has no defined, clear position on independent political action ... in this crucial moment of history, the Communist party approaches immediate tasks with petty-bourgeois confusion, with reformist premises ... In this crucial moment of history, the leadership of the American Communist Party does not expose sufficiently the dangerous role of the liberal bourgeoisie ... communists cannot accept, as the present leadership does, a position tailing behind bourgeois allies, or merging with them, or abandoning an independent class conscious, revolutionary position ... In this crucial moment of history, the reports of the National Committee express no angry hatred for the capitalist system. The leadership does not emphasize the great truth that workers must learn: Only socialism can make the people free.”
The statement then criticizes the selection of Dennis as secretary of the party, saying that this choice was hasty and made solely on Foster’s initiative because he was, in Foster’s words, “least affected by Browder’s revisionism.” In proving that Dennis was completely immersed in Browder’s revisionism, McKenney and Minton say that the choice of Dennis was light-minded in view of the experiences the CP has had with secretaries who have betrayed the party, naming in succession, Jay Lovestone, Ben Gitlow and Earl Browder. But what they fail to see is that the greatest . betrayer of all was the biggest secretary of them all and the man who placed the “secretary of the party” on the throne of all organizations: Stalin!
We have now dealt with the several viewpoints of the groups of people expelled from the CP. Whatever differences they may have with each other, they agree on the need for revising the whole course of the communist movement in this country. But what they understand by a revolutionary socialist position is diluted with Stalinism.
(To be concluded next week)
 

vis: Why McKenney-Minton Quit CP – 2 (30 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
The Last in Series on Dissension in U.S. Stalinism
Why McKenney-Minton Quit CP
(30 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 52, 30 December 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We have dealt with the several viewpoints of the groups of people expelled from the CP. Whatever differences they may have with each other, they agree on the need for revising the whole course of the communist movement in this country. But what they understand by a revolutionary socialist position is diluted with Stalinism. They are really radical third-period Stalinists without the tradition of the Leninist party and international. Their initial error follows from the belief that the American Communist Party pursues a policy independent of the Kremlin and which is in opposition to the policies pursued by other communist parties.
In criticizing Browder for the formal “liquidation” of the party, they forgot entirely that the proposal did not in fact originate with Browder but with Stalin, and followed the “liquidation” of the Comintern. Yet they never stop to ask themselves: if it was wrong to “liquidate” the party in the U.S., was it correct to “liquidate” the international body of Stalinism? And if they answer that the latter was necessitated by national Russian interests, they will be supplying the answer to why Browder at the same time, carried out his policy. It was not necessary for Browder to receive direct instructions from the Kremlin; the signal was given to him by the action on the Comintern. And, since the Comintern was “liquidated” without consultation with all the parties included, Without a congress, or the official action of a delegated authority, what was wrong with Browder’s action? The ex-CPers have not really begun to think about their problems or their political course.
 
Stalinist Solar System
But more important than this: Do McKenny and Minton really believe that the CP in the United States operates independently from Moscow? If they do, they are more naive than we suspected. How, then, do they explain the role of Gerhardt Eisler, the GPU agent, better known to readers of the Daily Worker as Hans Berger? Any member of the CP above the level of a rank and filer, anyone who has had a measure of leadership on a state or national plane, knows that policies of the Communist parties are laid down, not in the national committees of these organizations, but in the Kremlin – that is why there is a deadly uniformity of Stalinist policy in all countries irrespective of the different conditions obtaining. Thus, the “third-period” policy of a “struggle for the streets” was adopted by all parties in all countries notwithstanding the different national conditions which prevailed. That is why the- policy of collective security initiated in the Kremlin determined the policy of all parties on the question of war and peace. In the same way, the Hitler-Stalin pact resulted in an overnight change’ in attitude toward Germany in the war which the parties adopted by a signal from the Kremlin.
To bring the matter closer to home, let us examine the above quote from the McKenney-Minton statement on the Duclos intervention. Anyone with an ounce of political savvy understands that Duclos did not make his public attack on Browder on his own initiative; it was a premeditated attack which originated in Moscow. The basis of the attack was not that Browder had been following a policy which was in conflict with Russian aims and that of other parties, but that he had gone too far. The French Communist Party under Duclos carried out the same kind of patriotic policy. But it carried out the policy differently and more cleverly than Browder because its roots in the French working class was stronger. In the case of Browder, he had become so fully identified with the opportunist anti-socialist line of Stalinism, that the party could not turn to a pseudo-militant policy in the labor movement and in political affairs under his compromised leadership. Stalin needed a strongly organized, well-knit and disciplined party to carry out his new foreign policy. That is why the change the emphasis in the party line was followed by Browder’s removal.
The present CP policies are based on ifs and threats to the American ruling class. But these threats, in turn, are not based on independent revolutionary socialist policy, but solely on the needs of the Russian foreign office.
 
Uniformity or World Stalinism
Do the ex-CPers actually believe that the present policies of the CP are conceived of and put into operation independent of the needs, interests, and direction of the Russians?
Do the ex-CPers actually believe that the policies of the European parties are fundamentally different from the policies of the American?
In our first article we cited the monotonous similarity of the policies of all parties: alliances with reactionaries and fascists; support of Badoglio in Italy, de Gaulle in France, King Michael in Rumania, Roosevelt in the U.S., and so on; opposition to factory committees, strikes, workers’ control of industry and production, and workers’ power; opposition to the propaganda, agitation and struggle for socialism. Every word of criticism which all the opponents of present CP policy and leadership make, can be made with equal force against every CP and more particularly against the Russian leadership.
The basic, fundamental error of these ex-CPers flows from their attitude toward Russia which they continue to regard as a workers’ state, as the fortress of world socialism. But if they were to examine and relate Stalin’s Russia with the Russian revolution, if they were to analyze Russia objectively, from the point of view of the needs and interests of the workers of the world, the meaning of socialist policy, the theory and practice of Leninism, they could draw no other conclusion but that the Stalinist state is the anti-thesis of Lenin’s Russia, that it has nothing in common with the workers’ revolution of November 1917, and with revolutionary thought and practice, with socialism.
Under Stalin, Russia became a new exploitive state. It imprisoned the Russian working class; it created a new category of slave laborers numbering in the millions. It replaced the international socialist policy of the early days of the revolution with a counter-revolutionary, anti-socialist policy. It subordinated the interests of the working class of the world, the struggle for world socialism, to the national interests of the new class power in Russia. And this it did by destroying the Bolshevik Party, the trade unions, the soviets, the cooperatives, the Communist International, and the outstanding revolutionary leaders.
Every party in the International which succumbed to Stalin’s leadership degenerated into anti-working class, anti-socialist organizations. It is true that they use socialist phrases and play on the traditions of the early Communist International. But in practice they have rooted out every healthy manifestations of revolutionary, socialist internationalism.
 
Break with Totalitarianism
When the ex-CPers begin to understand this, they will find that the cause for this degeneration lies in the new class power of the Russian bureaucracy and the general secretary of the so-called Russian Bolshevik Party, Joseph Stalin. Browder was not responsible for this degeneration. He merely adapted himself to it and became a victim of a Stalinist political zig-zag as did so many others before him. If these people will seek for what is wrong with the CP in this country, they will search forever and never find it. And if they hope to reconstruct a revolutionary socialist party in the USA as a genuine “Stalinist Party,” they will continue to betray the interests of the working class.
The reconstruction of a genuine revolutionary socialist party requires a new beginning on the basis of a return to Marxist-Leninist principles and a rejection of Stalinism. It requires an endless struggle against the corroding influence of Stalinism. The best interests of Stalinism in this country are represented by the cynical Foster, by his agent Dennis, and not by NCP, or McKenney and Minton.
The first time they really stepped out of line, they found themselves expelled from the party. Their strange views, despite repeated announcements of allegiance to Stalinism, are incompatible with membership in a totalitarian party. If these people want to make any political progress, If they want to devote themselves to an honest and sincere struggle for socialism, they will have to come to the Trotskyist movement, the only genuine, revolutionary socialist current in the world today.
 

Gates: Business Profits Hit Record High; Wage Levels Decline (16 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Business Profits Hit Record High;
Wage Levels Decline
(16 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 50, 16 December 1946, pp. 3 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

IS THE American economy in a state of collapse? Have profits dwindled to the vanishing point? Are the workers making too much money? Do we now live in a state of economic chaos?
If one were to accept as gospel what the big business men say and what their press writes, or take seriously the mutterings of the less-than-learned politicians in Washington, the answer to the above questions would be “Yes.”
All the propaganda which gushes forth from these quarters in endless quantity has a simple purpose: to forestall and reject the just wage demands of the union movement. The old chestnut about the necessity of increasing productivity before wages can be hiked upwards is only another way the capitalists have of saying no to the wage earners.
The truth about the economic situation in the country is in complete conflict with the propaganda of big business. The latest report of the CIO in Economic Outlook bears out what Labor Action has been saying for a long time:
Pre-war standards of production, wages and profits, were broken swiftly by gains which began shortly before the war broke out in Europe and extended throughout the war years into the reconversion period. The real picture of the economic situation shows that big business is making greater profits than ever before, based on the highest level of peacetime production yet experienced. In contrast, the share of the wage earner in the national income declined at the same time that the cost of living has soared to new heights.
The graphs which accompany this article illustrate the precise relationship which exists between the owners of industry and the workers who produce the goods of life. But there is a section of the whole picture which they do not show: bonuses, special expenses, and high salaries, that go to the big businessmen and which are not counted in the profits. There is also a degree of distortion in the graphs which depict national income, for they include both wages and low salaries along with profits, dividends, etc. In the latter are included the incomes of company officials and their immediate subordinates who do not fall into the category of wage earners. Bearing such factors in mind we are in a position to describe the relationships between the classes in this country which grow out of the capitalist social organization divided between those who own the means of life and those who produce the means of life.
We will begin with profits first, not only because this is the best indicator of the state of things, but also because it is on this score that the profiteers wail the loudest. What they describe as a calamitous situation for the owners of capital is really a cover for the monstrous profits they have made during the war and are making now.
Profits before taxes are collected show a rise from $5.3 billion in the 1936–39 period to $25.9 billion estimated for 1947. These profits before taxes merely show the huge portion of production which goes exclusively to the parasitic class in capitalism. But in case the interjection is made that the capitalists pay high taxes we present the figures of profits after taxes have been paid to show that they are just as exorbitant:



All Corporations¹




1936–39 – $3.9 Billions




1942–45 – $9.5 Billions




1946 – $11.8 Billions (estimated)²




1947 – $16.1 Billions (estimated)³




¹ Source: Dept, of Commerce.
² Estimated on the basis of $185 billion
gross national product.
³ Estimated on the basis of $185 billion
gross national product.



The two figures described as estimates are based on figures for the greater part of 1946, as well as trends in production and employment which are indicated for the year 1947. It is true that the figures, as Economic Outlook points out, “fluctuate from industry to industry.” Some may not profit as high as others because of material shortages, or production bottlenecks for which they are themselves responsible. In the auto and electrical industries, for example, the manufacturers have themselves created conditions by their bungling management to prevent full production. But industry as a whole, especially those sections which overcame or had no reconversion problems, are enjoying “terrifically high profit returns in 1946.”
Two important facts contributed to these high profits and for both of them industry must thank its servants in Congress. First, excess profits taxes were eliminated on January 1, 1946. Corporations which had until then paid a maximum tax of 85 per cent on all income in excess of exemptions, now pay 38 per cent. They all received a five per cent reduction on their normal tax. Second, congressional assistance in the form of mutilating and finally ending all price controls enabled big business to pass on whatever wage increases were granted to the public and in general increased profits through the rise in prices.
Thus, Economic Outlook summarizes the profit situation saying:
“The estimated 1946 profits are 200 per cent higher than average profits in 1936–39 and about 25 per cent higher than the 1942–45 average of $9.5 billions.
“In all manufacturing corporations,1946 profits, after taxes, will be $7 billion, or $2 billion higher than the 1942–45 average, and $4.5 billion higher than the 1936–39 average.”
What else could John E. Steelman, Director of the Office of Economic Stabilization, say in knowledge of the above facts except that “business profits, after taxes, are at their highest point in history.”
The Workers’ Share
But at the same time that profits soar to new high levels, the workers share of the total national income has declined. In 1936–39 wage and low-salary earners received 63.5 per cent of the national income (wages, salaries, business incomes, rents, royalties, dividends and interest). 






As a result of a redistribution of national income in favor of profits, dividends, and interest, the actual share of the wage earners and low salaried employees rose during the war years to 67.7 per cent and since the war’s end declined to 62.6, below the average of the years 1936–39.
Put in another way: total income payments (Wages, salaries, profits, rents, royalties, dividends and interest) rose 12 per cent during 1942–45 and the first eight months of 1946, wages and salaries advanced only six per cent. “Business income (profits),” says Economic Outlook, “went up 10 per cent; and dividends and interest, 24 per cent.” While the CIO calls for a more equitable distribution of the national income, its approach to this question is purely reformist. Much of it is pure pleading to the tender mercies of the human octopi who make up America’s ruling class. But even in its own review, the CIO is compelled to take note of what is characteristic of the capitalist social order. Economic Outlook cites the experience of the “prosperity period” of the 20’s. Between 1924 and 1929, for example, manufacturing production rose by almost 27 per cent. Productivity per man hour rose 35 per cent. Yet, “while production and productivity were on the increase, wages were almost frozen.” The total increase in “average hourly earnings between 1924 and 1929 was only five per’ cent.” At the same time profits after taxes increased 72 per cent from $4.3 billion in 1924 to $7.4 billion in 1929. The present situation contains elements that resemble the “prosperity period.”
 
Cost of Living Rises
But even more important than the survey which relates, the growth of profits to the decline in wages is the real economic position of the overwhelming majority of the people in terms of the cost of living, i.e., the income of the mass of people in comparison to the cost of goods necessary to live.
In September of this year average earnings for workers in manufacturing industries were $45.10 a week. This is $2 a week less than peak earnings in 1945, but in terms of purchasing power it is $8 less than the 1945 peak. This figure, standing by itself, however, does not really portray what the average family in this country faces. The Heller Committee of the University of California, which makes annual studies of minimum budgets for wage earners, using as an average a family of four, reveals that the situation is indeed critical for many families. For the year 1945, the peak year, the Heller Committee estimated that a minimum budget to attain a standard of living providing “health and decency” was $3,075. This included $266 a year for taxes and $300 war savings bonds, leaving $2,509 yearly for regular living expenses.
But for this year, the committee points that the average family, to achieve the above standards requires a yearly income of $3,545.82, or $68.19 a week. The committee arrives at this figure by adding the 14 per cent rise in the cost of living since March, 1945, to its original figures, plus $30.00 social security payments and another $219.60 for income tax payments. It should be repeated that this estimated budget is for "minimum health and decency." But the average income of wage earners is more than $1,000 below the minimum requirements of the Heller budget!



As yet there has been no levelling out of this situation. Wages for the most part remain static, though the unions are now preparing a campaign for new increases. The cost of living, however, continues to rise. In general, the economy is still strong. There is almost total employment and a high level of production. The total national income is very high, but the share of the wage earners and low salaried employees grows smaller, while profits, interest and dividend payments continue to increase.
In this brief analysis, one sees the working out of Marx’s prediction about the increasing polarization of wealth in modern capitalist society: a smaller and smaller group of monopoly capitalists embrace a greater and greater proportionate share of the national wealth while a smaller and smaller share of the total wealth falls to the overwhelming majority of the people. One needs only to tear the veil from the propaganda of the capitalists to see how the system operates in the interests of the monopolists, to whom “free enterprise” means the freedom to exploit and rob the majority of the people.
 

vis: Ex-CPers Expose Stalinist Party Role as Strikebreaker (16 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Ex-CPers Expose Stalinist Party Role
as Strikebreaker
(16 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 50, 16 December 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In our article of last week, we tried to show how the group of former members of the Communist Party was completely confused on the character of Stalinism and the nature of the Communist Parties of the world. Advocating a radical policy in the struggle for socialism now, they at the same time demand the construction of a genuine “Stalinist Party” in the United States. They point to the French and Italian Communist Parties as examples for a party in this country to follow. The French and Italian parties, they say, are making progress and are not isolated from the masses; the American is an isolated party. This is proof that the American party is different from its sister parties in the above two countries.
But the NCP (New Committee for Publications) is profoundly mistaken. The Communist Party of the United States is a genuine Stalinist Party, in no principled way different from French or Italian. The advantages of the latter are to be sought in the deeper social crisis which exists in those countries which enable the perfidious, double-dealing policies of the Stalinists there to exploit the masses far better than in the United States. The parties in France and Italy are closer to Russia and therefore receive stronger support. The proximity of Stalin’s army to their countries enabled them to take advantage of and capitalize on its victories.
But those parties pursued the same general line that the Communist Party followed in this country which can be described as: class collaborationist, anti-working class, counter-revolutionary. Wherever and whenever the working classes of France and Italy endeavored to carry out a revolutionary struggle that threatened the very existence of capitalism in those countries, the Communist Parties, on the basis of their influence and strength, were able to head them off.
 
All Stalinist Parties Are Alike
In Italy as in France, the Communist Parties repeatedly said that they were not for a revolutionary struggle today, that they did not consider the fight for socialism to be the perspective in our times. One need only glance at the policies carried out there for proof of this.<(p>


Both parties were against the seizure of the factories by the workers and the establishment of soviets.
 
Both parties opposed the setting up of a government by the workers at a time when it was possible to develop the revolutionary struggle of the masses.
 
Both parties declared as their aims the establishment of governments in collaboration with the capitalist parties.
 
Both parties have cautioned the workers against engaging in nation wide strikes and militant struggles against their present unbearable living conditions.
 
Both parties have participated in rotten capitalist governments against the best interests of the people.
 
In France, the Communist Party collaborated with that would-be dictator de Gaulle. Thereafter it joined hands with the party of the Catholic Center under Bidault’s leadership.
 
In Italy, the Communist Party first supported Badoglio then the successive governments of capitalist futility.

This does not mean that the Stalinist parties of France and Italy are not willing to take power in common with other “left” parties, such as the socialists – in order to share their betrayal of the working class. But in seeking that kind of power, they are primarily concerned with serving the interests of Stalinist Russia at the expense of the French and Italian masses. Already, in both countries they have acted as strikebreakers.
 
An American Example
Bulletin No. 1 of the NCP, for example, in order to prove that the Communist Party in this country is reactionary and anti-socialist, cites a directive of the party to a San Francisco branch to act as strikebreakers in the strike of Local 68 of the International Association of Machinists. We cannot vouch for the precise character of the directive, but reprint the letter of a member NCP published. Its authenticity can be judged by the fact that the CP pursued a strikebreaking policy during the war and continues to do so against its opponents. The letter says:
“With the strike of Local 68, IAM, together with the CIO machinists In the East Bay area, the split began to widen in CPUSA forces. After issuing perfunctory approval of the strike demands as ‘just’ CP began to break the strike. It issued leaflets and had articles published in People’s World (CP paper on West Coast) openly advising the machinists that they couldn’t win the strike and urging them to go back to work.
“The best CP branch here, made up of machinists and having the best reputation in the whole country, was directed by CP to attack the strike leaders as Trotskyite (which was a damned lie, as usual) and to demand a rank-and-file committee to lead a back-to-work movement.
“The reasons for all this were that CP wanted the strike to fail. The CIO leaders in this area, closely associated and interpenetrated with CP did not want a victory in the strike. They feared a victory that would make the machinists more influential and expose the 18 per cent sell-out in which the warehousemen, a part of the ILWU (Bridges’ union), had ‘pioneered.’ To the state committee of CP, Dick Lyndon, president of the warehousemen, declared that a machinists’ victory in the strike would be a ‘tragedy of the first magnitude.’ In the newspapers he called on workers to break the picket lines.
“Naturally, the machinists’ branch would not go along with CP policy, and so the branch was liquidated in the usual smart way: at the end of a meeting called for another purpose, the liquidation of the branch was announced with a ruling: ‘There will be no discussion of this.’ Expulsions came thick and fast. Comrades who refused to hall the maritime settlement of June 16, ’46 as a victory were expelled. Walter Lambert, once state CP trade union secretary, and Homer Mulligan of ACA were also expelled for opposing these actions.”
If NCPers think this is something new in CP policy let them only remember the war years. Let them remember how Bridges scabbed on the strike of the Retail Clerks led by Wolchok. Let them remember how the CP trade union leaders spearheaded the struggle for incentive pay, for the no-strike pledge and labor-management committees. Let them remember how the CP trade union fractions acted like imperialist watch-dogs in the labor movement. If they recall these things they will, upon examination of the sister CP’s in Europe discover that that is exactly what they had done during the war and immediate post-war period.
 
Break with Stalinism
And, if NCPers want to understand why, let them examine Russian foreign policy. They will then discover that so long as Stalin’s alliance with Anglo-American imperialism was solid, his parties in all other countries were on good behavior and saw to it that the war economies of his allies were unhindered and the masses kept to the grindstone. Now, however, that the war is over and the enemy defeated, now that relations between the erstwhile allies have deteriorated in their own conflict for world power, the CPs have been given the word: you can go ahead for a while, exploit the militancy of the working class, pretend that you are revolutionary socialist parties, embarrass your ruling governments. I, Stalin, am showing my rivals that I have allies in their own countries and can make trouble for them at home if necessary. And this too, only to a degree, because Stalin is just as much opposed to the socialist revolution and the power of the workers as are the capitalist powers whom he opposes.
Once NCPers begin to understand this, they will begin to understand the antics of Foster-Dennis and Company. They will then discover the reason why there is not a great deal to chose between them and Browder whom they replaced. But for such an understanding they must break with Stalinism itself.
 

vis: Ex-CPers Indict Their Party as Anti-Socialist (9 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
On the Group Recently Expelled from the Communist Party
Ex-CPers Indict Their Party
as Anti-Socialist
(9 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 49, 9 December 1946, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Several weeks ago, we published reports of the expulsions of members of the Communist (Stalinist) Party because they would not accept the “new line” of the Foster-Dennis leadership which has replaced Browder. Among the expelled were such old-timers as William F. Dunne and Verne Smith; a group in the Bronx; and two intellectuals, Ruth McKenney and Bruce Minton. The expelled were charged with organizing a “factional struggle” against the “political line” of the party and advocating “ultra-leftist” views. As outlined in the statement of the National Committee of the CP, these views denied the possibilities of establishing peace under capitalism and asserted that imperialist war was inevitable so long as capitalism existed. The expelled had also asserted that the struggle for socialism must be the main aim of the party and denounced the deals which the CP made with the Democratic Party.
We have at hand several copies of a bulletin called NCP Report, issued by the New Committee for Publications. The people associated with this bulletin are evidently among those who were expelled during the “purge” of recent weeks. Whether they include Dunne, McKenney or Minton we do not know. The bulletin is an interesting exhibit of what happens to people who join the Stalinist Party in the belief that they are entering a revolutionary socialist organization devoted to the interests of the working class. For the bulletin not only reveals the anti-working class degeneration of Stalinism; it also discloses that those who have broken with the party have themselves been deeply scarred with Stalinist ideology to the point where their program and struggle is, in reality, as anti-socialist as it is ludicrous. The fundamental aim of NCP Report, for example, is “to do what we can to help bring about socialism, in the whole world, and hence, (a) to support socialism in that country where it is already established (Russia), and (b), to work to bring about socialism in the U. S. ...
They are against the CP in the United States because it is “anti-Marxist,” distorts the teachings of Stalin, and has become an anti-socialist organization. The NCP group wants to build a “Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalinist Party in the United States.” In answer to a question: “Will you not undermine confidence in the leadership of the Communist Party USA and shake the unity of CPUSA?” they answer:
“Yes – that is exactly what we want to do. We wish to undermine confidence in the leadership of CPUSA because this leadership is politically rotten. We wish to ‘shake’ the ‘unity’ of CPUSA, because facts have already fully demonstrated – for all who wish to see – that this ‘unity’ is based on support of capitalism and refusal to fight capitalism.” (Emphasis in the original)
 
Confusion Abounds
It should be clear to the naked eye, that this group is not a Browder group, protesting the fate of the erstwhile leader of the American Stalinists. On the contrary. Evidently they had hoped that the ousting of Browder and his replacement by Foster and Dennis would result in a complete reversal of the pro-imperialist, pro-war policies which the party pursued during the military alliance between the U.S. and Stalin’s Russia. Now, these terribly confused people find that Foster pursues fundamentally the identical line which Browder reputedly originated.
But it is obvious that these former members of the CP do not begin to understand what happened in their party and how the Communist Parties of the world are nothing else hut the agents of Russian foreign policy. Browder was dumped because he sold himself a bill of goods about the future peace and prospective relations between the United States and Russia. Browder misunderstood Russian strategy and took it for real coin. Thus he got far out on the limb, and when the post-war period demonstrated how untenable was the Browder line, he could no longer be retained as the head of the party. From now on, even though the American party might still pursue a class collaborationist policy, might still support the Democratic Party, and still, in the minds of gullible rank and filers, postpone the fight for. socialism, a struggle they never even intended to pursue, they carry out this “Browder (read: Stalin) line” only with a cover of “militancy,” exploiting the best sentiments of the worker. Other than that there is no real differences between the two leaderships: they are both composed of hand-picked leaders, chosen in the Kremlin, whose main purpose is to carry out such a policy at home as will redound to the benefit to the Russians in their struggle for world power. Browder now, complements, from the outside, Foster’s leadership inside the party.
A blind spot of the NCP is its sincere belief that the American Stalinist Party lives an independent existence, and that whatever policies it pursues are of its own making. Misguided people: every important step taken by the Stalinist in this country is decided abroad. If Browder, subverted the socialist program; Foster has done the same (according to their own charge). Browder is deposed, but unlike formerly deposed opponents of Stalinism, he is invited to Russia, feted there, made a representative of book publishers, and uses his position to carry on pro-Stalinist propaganda outside of the CP.
In a sense, therefore, Browder can be even more useful than Foster and Dennis. NCP has to explain why Browder, whom they consider the originator of the Foster line, was not pilloried by Stalin. And if they think about it at all they will discover that what is wrong with the Communist Party originates not on the 9th floor of East 12th Street in New York City, but in Moscow.
 
“Teachings of Stalin”
To bear out their contention that the American Stalinist Party is anti-socialist and pro-capitalist, the NCP group cites a series of unrelated facts which purport to prove the revisionist nature of the politics and practices of native Stalinism. While the recitation of the indictment coincides in a confused way and to a small degree with revolutionary socialist criticism of Stalinism, as a whole it reflects the utter confusion of the NCP. This group is obviously groping in the dark. And it will continue to grope hopelessly so long as it retains the illusion that Russia is a socialist state, Stalin is the leader of world socialism, the Communist Parties of the world are revolutionary socialist parties, but the American Stalinist Party is an aberration, totally different in principle and practice from the movement to which it is affiliated.
One example will suffice to show how completely disoriented this group is: Their most damning charge against the Foster-Dennis leadership of the Communist Party is that it has falsified the teachings of Stalin in order to give theoretical justification for their “pro-capitalist policies!” Thus, the group reflects a really curious specimen. It has broken from a Stalinist Party in order to fight for a “real Stalinist Party.”
In doing this it has brought to light several interesting aspects of CP policy and conduct which we will relate in another article next week. We shall also trace the evolution of such a group as this and what it signifies for the revolutionary socialist movement.
 

Gates: Why Workers Should Not Defend Stalin’s Russia (9 December 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Why Workers Should Not Defend
Stalin’s Russia
(9 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 49, 9 December 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Of all the organizations that adhere to the general program and ideas of the Fourth Internationalist movement, there is none so sterile, so impervious to events, so alien to the free-and scientific spirit of inquiry as the Socialist Workers Party in the United States. It clings conservatively to outlived theories and false slogans with a tenacity characteristic of theoretical ignorance. And nowhere does this manifest itself so clearly as on the famous “Russian question.”
As many of our readers will know, the SWP still adheres to the theory that Russia is a “degenerated workers’ state,” and therefore, whatever the differences with and opposition to Stalinism, the “defense of the Soviet Union” remains the key slogan of world socialist policy. Those who disagree with their theory of the Russian state and the slogan which flows logical from the theory, are described as being on the other side of the “class barricades.”
 
Fetish and Ritual
The founder of the theory of the “degenerated workers’ state,” and the “defense of the Soviet Union,” was Leon Trotsky, the greatest socialist leader of this era. But he never went to the absurd lengths of his epigone followers in the SWP. Where Trotsky was deeply concerned with Russian developments in the latter period of his life and concerned with the real possibility that he may have to revise his position on Stalin’s state, the SWP proceeds in this question with the blindness of cave animals who perambulate without sight. Their theory of Russia has become a fetish, the slogan of defense, a ritual. The war years came and went without having the slightest effect on the thinking of the Cannonite leaders of the SWP.
One of the best examples of an absolutely hard-headed approach to this great question is contained in the Militant of November 9, in an article by Joseph Hansen, called What Trotskyists Defend Today in the Soviet Union. The opening sentence of this article declares:
“Today in the Soviet Union nationalized property, the great conquest of the November 1917 revolution, still remains.”
Therefore? Therefore, despite the crimes of Stalin, the workers must not be blinded “to the necessity of defending this great historical conquest of the world working class.” How? By the “defense of the Soviet Union.”
Such a slogan had justification, if it did not have validity, years ago, before experience and greater knowledge of Stalin’s Russia was at hand. But today, this position is absurd, as Hansen himself proceeds to prove unthinkingly. Years of Stalinist rule have shown that mere nationalization of property does not advance the interests of the working class nor improve their historical position in society. What made the Russian Revolution the most progressive event in modern history is that it destroyed the power of the bourgeoisie and elevated the working class to political power. It established the first workers’ state in history which proceeded to govern the country in the interests of the masses, proletarians and peasants. This was true during the period when property was not nationalized as well as when it was. It was not nationalized property which made Russia a workers’ state, but the political power of the working class, the fact that it ruled the country through its state. The moment the workers lost political power, i.e., from the day that the Stalinist bureaucracy usurped power and proceeded to destroy the independence, initiative and power of intervention and control by the working class, the workers’ state no longer existed. The fact that the nationalization of property remains under the regime of Stalin only proves that such property forms can exist under the most reactionary, anti-working class, counter-revolutionary regime imaginable. Thus there’ is nothing to defend in a nation ruled by a reactionary brutal dictatorial regime, which rests precisely on this form of property. To call for the defense of this property form, as though it were something distinct and separate from the regime which rules the country, is an absurd abstraction totally unrelated to life itself.
 
Joseph Hansen Describes Russia
If you want to see to what absurdity Hansen is compelled, listen to what follows in his article immediately after the monumental statement quoted above:
“Virtually all the other conquests of the November 1917 revolution, however, have been liquidated ... Counter-revolutionary forces seized power ... Stalin crushed the Bolshevik Party that had been built by Lenin. Stalin exiled tens of thousands of Bolsheviks. ... He executed all Lenin’s general staff of revolution. He murdered Leon Trotsky ... Stalin stamped out all democracy in the soviet organs of government ... Stalin instituted dictatorial personal rule. His political party prohibits the organization of any opposition ... In elections the people are permitted to vote for only one slate of hand-picked candidates. The rule of the Stalin bureaucracy rests on the terror of a secret police ... The secret police has in its power between ten and twenty million workers ... doomed to slave labor ... Periodic purges terrorize the population ... The Stalinist regime has restored privileges in the Soviet Union ... So thick and powerful has this growth (the parasitic bureaucracy) become, that the tree of the workers’ state can scarcely be seen.”
The “tree of the workers’ state can scarcely be seen,” or better, cannot be seen at all, because no such tree exists in Russia. Hansen might well have added that there are no “soviets” in his “Soviet Union”; that there are no trade unions, except in name, for what are called trade unions are government bodies for the purpose of binding totalitarian chains around the masses and enslaving them to the regime. There is no party of the working class in Stalin’s Russia. In a word, the working class is a down-trodden, persecuted, enslaved proletariat in Russia, ruled over by a new class of bureaucratic collectivists which arose on the basis of nationalized property. And if ever a theory was proven false in life, it is the theory that Russia is a “degenerated workers’ state.” That would be bad enough if the adherence to such a theory had only an abstract significance. But it doesn’t. It has a real living significance. It is one of the most dangerous myths that has ever entered the working class movement, for the political consequences of the theory has already destroyed in large part the effectiveness of many organizations which, in all other respects, embrace revolutionary socialist principles.
 
What It Meant Politically
As a result of this rotten theory, the SWP hailed the victories of Stalin’s army in Europe as the harbinger of the socialist revolution on the Continent. The SWP counseled the European workers to welcome Stalin’s gang of marauders, secret police detachments, and oppressors as “liberators.” The usually silent leader of this party once declared that the Polish underground, which fought so valiantly in the battle of the Warsaw Ghetto, should subordinate itself to the Red army on the other side of the Vistula. [1]
As a further example of the disorienting effect of this false theory of Russia and the slogan which accompanies it, we have the response of the SWP to the termination of the most destructive war in the history of mankind. The end of the military conflict saw the SWP declaring that: The war is not over! If by that it meant that peace is only an armed interlude between wars under capitalism and that so long as imperialism prevails war is inevitable, that would be one thing. Even then, its declaration is confusing and disorienting. But in the minds of the SWP leadership this declaration had another meaning. The sharp conflict between U.S. and Russian imperialism, the new struggle for world power between these two imperialist camps, described as the preparation for an immediate attack on Russia. Stalin’s expansion into Europe, the spread of his murderous, totalitarian, anti-working class rule into other countries are minimized by an attack on only one of the imperialist camps. This one-sided, unrealistic analysis causes the SWP to raise again the slogan of defense as the most important immediate slogan for revolutionary socialists.
To say that the powers are preparing for a third world war is one thing; to speak in the terms of a daily threat of war is to live in another world. Thus, on the basis of a false analysis of the world situation, the Cannonite SWP have resurrected a slogan that can only doom the progress of the revolutionary socialist movement. The “degenerated workers’ state,” even by their own description, is in reality a modern slave state. Nationalized property in Russia under Stalin has been the means to enslave the Russian workers. It is now clear from life itself, the nationalized property can be subverted for reactionary social purposes or used for socialist purposes. To separate the nationalized property in Russia from the bureaucratic class of exploiters and usurpers is impermissible.
Given the real conditions that exist in Russia, there is nothing for the workers of Russia, or the rest of the world, to defend. On the basis of the Cannonite theory, they would be defending an abstraction. The reality is that the “degenerated workers’ state” theory and the slogan of defense, disorients the movement of socialism. The worker is asked to defend what Joe Hansen has described is virtually a prison for the Russian masses. If one did not know that they are serious one could easily believe that the SWP leaders write about Russia with tongue in cheek. For, what possible conclusion, can one reach upon reading Hansen’s description of Russian society than that it is not a workers’ state, degenerated or otherwise, but is rather another exploitive society, a “prison of the working class.”
The refusal to think, to re-examine policies in the light of reality, which is a distinctive feature of Marxism, results in a sterile adherence to outlived theory produces such self-defeating and illusory concepts as are contained in Hansen’s article.
*
Footnote by ETOL
1. The author is here confusing the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (19 April–1 May 1943) and the Warsaw Uprising (1 August–2 October 1944). By mid-September 1945 the Red Army had occupied the Eastern suburbs of Warsaw on the other side of the Vistula from the city centre but no attempt was made to help the insurgents. The Red Army finally took Warsaw on 17 January 1945, 3½ months after the defeat of the Uprising and the subsequent destruction of most of what was left of the city.
 

vis: Jan Christian Smuts – the Pious Bilbo of South Africa (25 November 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Jan Christian Smuts –
the Pious Bilbo of South Africa
(25 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 47, 25 November 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The hypocrisy of the imperialists is endless, and nowhere is this truth so firmly established as at the meetings of the UN. In a previous article detailing several incidents which bear out the above, we cited the case of South Africa. Under the leadership of Field Marshal Smuts, the South African government proposed that it be permitted to annex Southwest Africa, over which it held a League of Nations mandate. The demand of South Africa brought forth a torrent of criticism from the suspicious small nations, which properly understood the demand to be nothing else but the imperialist incorporation of one country by another: The uneasiness of the small nations can be easily understood: Their own independence is constantly endangered, directly by seizure and indirectly through economic and political pressure.
Native African leaders, joined by Indian delegates and others from Latin American countries were bitter in their denunciation of Smuts. The fact that South Africa is a “small power” did not deceive them because they understood that under Smuts and his ruling class supporters South Africa is a member of the British Empire and that the demand for annexation is part of the general aims of British imperialism.
Russia is the one big power to join the protest against South Africa. Is it the freedom of Southwest Africa which motivates Russian policy? Hardly. For an imperialist power which has already seized large areas inhabited by millions of people and subjected them to the rule of the NKVD, the interests of a small country with a tiny population cannot be of great moment. To tens of millions of people in Eastern and. Central Europe, Russia’s defense of the liberty of another country must be a grim joke indeed. But Russia’s role in this situation can be understood only in the light of her struggle for power against the Anglo-American bloc.
 
Why Does Smuts Insist?
Taking advantage of the formal provisions of the charter of the UN, Russia has demanded that a trusteeship be established over Southwest Africa. The White Russian delegate, Frol P. Shmigov, declared that a trusteeship for Southwest Africa was obligatory under the UN charter. This, of course, is denied by the British and the South Africans. Although the United States has not taken a definite position on this dispute, its inclination is to hold with Smuts on the ground that legally South Africa is free to decide for itself whether or not it wishes to have a trusteeship established.
Why does South Africa insist on annexation? It is certainly not out of love for African natives. It is not just because it holds a mandate over this former German colony. The answer is twofold: it lies in the possibilities of an extended exploitation of over 300,000 Negro workers and in a consolidation of British imperialism in Africa generally. There is no other explanation for it. If one were to judge on the basis of the political superstructure of South Africa, it would seem illogical for a nation which practices Jim Crow and race discrimination as a matter of government policy to desire the incorporation into its borders of several hundred thousand more blacks whom it despises with a race hatred possessed by Southern bigots in the United States against Negroes or Hitler against the Jews.
Thus, Field Marshal Smuts and his government, who deny to the natives any form of democratic rights, can only have the interest in Southwest Africa described above. In justification for his demand, the aged and sanctimonious Field Marshal states that it is only in response to the desires of the Southwest Africans themselves. A “poll” taken by his government has resulted in a majority of natives expressing a desire to become part of South Africa! One can well imagine what kind of a poll it was! No one knew anything about it. Obviously, this secret and sudden polling of natives, living in veritable concentration camps, was so constructed as to guarantee the result the Field Marshal desired.
 
South African Bilbo
In his rebuttal speech against the Indian delegates and Russia, Smuts said that thousands of Southwest Africans had flocked to his country in search of work and because of that his government was compelled to close the doors to further immigration from the mandated country. But all that Smuts revealed is that conditions in Southwest Africa under his rule are so unbearable that the Negroes were quite willing to go even to South Africa and live under the slavery of his regime as an alternative to outright starvation in their looted and decimated country.
Equally as important as the above factor is the aim of British imperialism. Fully cognizant of the fact that the Mediterranean Sea is no longer the isolated bastion it was before the advent of air power, the British have been developing a “second line of defense” for the Empire. This second line of defense is situated in Africa, across its belly and around the Cape. The British are determined to keep control of these areas and will resist to the end any system of trusteeship which will bring rival powers into Empire areas and its environs.
That is why Smuts stated, according to the New York Times, that “his country would continue to administer Southwest Africa as an integral part of the union (South Africa) even if the General Assembly of the United. Nations failed to approve the Union’s proposal to annex this mandated territory.” This is certainly clear enough. If the Assembly does not grant the demand, South Africa will keep the territory anyway!
But Smuts wasn’t through with his statement at that point. He contrasted the “peaceful, well-ordered country” of South Africa to turbulent India. And he asked: “Is there a country in the wide world where there is more social discrimination between the communities and classes than in India? Is social discrimination not the very basis and pattern of Indian society?” So the spokesman for race discrimination and Jim Crow can resort to nothing else in defense of his imperialist policy but an attack on another country’s abhorrent residue social relations which are the principal products of several hundred years of rule by British imperialism, relations which have been fostered and maintained by the British Colonial Office as a means of impeding the struggle for independence. Even the most recent riots between Hindus and Moslems which have dotted India are the direct product of British policy, which has cunningly supported Jinnah against the Congress in hope that independence would be stalled for another long period of time. The real point about India is that only complete independence and the expulsion of British imperialism can create the condition for eliminating the vestiges of religious and feudal conflicts. British imperialism only fosters them.
 
An Orderly Country!
Smuts is lying when he says there are not race or class conflicts in South Africa because of his “orderly government.” Such conflicts have occurred frequently in his “white man’s paradise.” But let us assume for the moment that what he says is true. How was it achieved? Listen to this South African Bilbo expound his defense of race segregation, discrimination and the ghetto. His country, he said, was trying “on fair, decent and wise lines to keep the different elements, as much as convenient and possible, apart and away from unnecessary intermixture and so to prevent clashes among them ...”
While clashes are not prevented (attacks on natives by white gangsters and hooligans and the vigorous and brutal suppression of strikes are frequent) the Field Marshal has openly espoused the cause of racism in these remarks. By “fair, wise and decent lines,” Smuts meant that South African natives live in ghettos, subject to curfew laws, and are not permitted beyond their special camps without a. pass given by police officials. By “convenient and possible” he meant insofar as the employment and exploitation of native workers compels them to have contact with whites. The interests of exploitation and profits prevents the Field Marshal from driving the black workers into the bush. But if these blacks were permitted to live in what was once their own country, it is only because they are a source of profit to the mine and plantation owners.
Southwest Africa is a tiny country with a small population. In relation to the big political and economic world problems it appears of small moment. But in the events surrounding tiny Southwest Africa is contained a big lesson in imperialist policy and an outstanding example of the imperialist character of the United Nations which is the arena in which the rivalries of the powers are expressed in diplomatic struggle. There will be no real freedom for the people of the world until imperialism is destroyed.
 

Gates: James M. Cain Plan for Authors a Totalitarian Inspired Scheme (11 November 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Can an Authority of “Tough Mugs” Bring Security
to America’s Writers?
James M. Cain Plan for Authors
a Totalitarian Inspired Scheme
(11 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 45, 11 November 1946, pp. 3 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Several weeks ago, James M. Cain, popular novelist and movie writer, proposed a plan to protect the writer, any writer, against unfair exploitation at the hands of book publishers, the movie and radio industries. Arguing correctly that the writers are annually cheated out of thousands of dollars by these enterprises, the Cain plan envisaged a new system of control over authors’ copyrights so that they might always retain control over their own creations. His plan, however, has produced a sharp struggle among writers and their various organizations. The cause for the dissension lies in the nature of the Cain plan, which is essentially bureaucratic and contains within it dangers that in some respects are as great as or greater than the present evils which confront the creative writer.
Cain proposed the establishment of an “American Authors’ Authority.” This Authority, according to the original plan, would be presided over by a committee of five “tough mugs.” The committee would have complete control over the copyrights of all writers. All writers would be forced by the job control of the Authority to join it and turn their copyrights over to the committee; the chief force of “compulsion” over writers would be the Screen Writers Guild in Hollywood. Once the Authority was organized and the Committee of Five established, the Authority itself would have no visible control over the activities of the “tough mugs.” The Committee of Five would operate with an “estimated one million dollars” to be raised by a tax on the licensing of copyrights and this fund would be completely at its disposal without the possibility of rank and file supervision.
 
What Is the Set-Up?
What will be the means of establishing the Authority and Committee? In exchange for “protection,” all writers would join the AAA and turn their copyrights over to the Committee. Each section of the Authors League of America (there are four of them) would select one member of the Authority Board and these four would choose the fifth member to act as chairman of the Committee. He would be the supreme boss. He would have the power to appoint representatives of the AAA, lawyers, publicity agents, and set salaries, determine expenses, etc.
In this way, claim the advocates of the AAA, the exploitation of writers by Hollywood, the radio industry and the book publishers would be ended; the writer would retain control of his writings through the Authority and remain in a position to earn money constantly from his or her creative work. Explaining the reason for his own interest in this problem, Cain cited the fact that Hollywood grossed $13,000,000 on three pictures based on his books which it bought for only $45,000. In this citation, Cain described a condition which is widespread and there is no question but that something must and can be done about protecting the writer from exploitation by the three main enterprises mentioned above.
Why, then, the severe objections from all quarters, the “right” and the “left”? And why are the staunchest supporters of the plan the Stalinist writers, the organizations under their control and their “action committees”? The answers to these questions lie in the essence of the plan itself which has already been altered several times since it became subject to criticism. Under the blows of many writers, the plan has been revised to eliminate both the element of force to be used against writers and the complete control of copyrights only by the Committee of Five. It now proposed to create a join trusteeship between the writers and the Committee of “tough mugs.” This “voluntary” change is an expression of at least two things: the Stalinist nature and backing of the proposal, and the thoughtlessness in the original conception of the plan.
 
The Plan’s Critics
The most trenchant criticism made of the plan comes from James T. Farrell, who is a writer most conscious of the inequities which exist in the writer-publisher relationship. Farrell has written extensively on the commercialization of writing in this country, the domination of the profit motive in book publishing and the exploitation of the writer. The basic criticism made by Farrell is that the plan proposed by Cain is anti-democratic, i.e., it is a bureaucratic plan which would deprive the writer of independence of action and thought in the defense of his rights. Behind this plan, he pointed out, stand the Stalinists, whose interests in it flow from their political aim of controlling the writers of this country. In the concrete circumstances, the Committee of Five would be controlled by the Stalinists, or at worst they would have a fifty-fifty relationship in it. Knowledge of what Stalinist control of thought and writing means indicates what great harm would be done to creative writing in this country.
Farrell, as well as other writers, points out that the Committee of “tough mugs” saturated with Stalinist ideology could manipulate writing in this country to the advantage of world and domestic Stalinism; it could initiate punitive measures against anti-Stalinists. The reverse would hold if reactionaries were in control. Worst of all, by control of the copyrights of authors, it would attempt to create a totalitarian mold for writers, thus sterilizing all creative talents. The attempt of Cain and his supporters to describe the struggle over the plans as a contest between progressives, i.e., the plan’s advocates, and reactionaries and fascists, the plan’s opponents, is an example of the mode of thinking of the sponsors of the plan.
But that is not all. The original plan was endorsed by the Screen Writers Guild, although it was “created” at the top or, more precisely, by Cain and the Guild lawyer, Morris Cohen, a former partner of Maury Maverick, Texas Democrat. Since then the plan has been changed in important respects. Were these changes endorsed by the Guild or discussed by it? Obviously not. The Radio Writers Guild of Chicago accepted the plan “in principle” although it did not see it or read it. It merely acted on a report of the plan. Its acceptance of the plan “in principle” also means that it accepts the changes made in it by Cain and his associates, also without seeing the plan.
The Stalinist writers in New York, through their “action committee,” have also adopted the unseen plan and its changes without participating in its drafting. At the New York meeting called by the “action committee” (a Stalinist body), Cain spoke in behalf of the plan in its revised form. He did not read the plan because he did not even have it with him. “They,” in Hollywood, were making changes in it. Yet he called upon the audience to accept a plan they did not have before them and to endorse all the changes made and those contemplated without their knowing anything about it!
In his letter to Elmer Rice, president of the Authors League, urging the rejection of the Cain plan, Farrell wrote:
“This plan has been sponsored by the screen writers and the radio writers. While they are the most highly rewarded writers in America, they are also the most unfree. While it is true that the screen writers and the radio writers have struggled to defend their economic interests, it is not also true that they have a good record in the defense of rights of free expression. They have very little free expression in their own work. The bureaucratic board of ‘tough guys’ which they want is to be one which, in the main, concern themselves with monetary questions. The most important money issues arising will be those involving the motion picture rights of books, and concerning the financial rewards from film and radio in general. These facts led me strongly to fear that Mr. Cain’s board of ‘mugs’ will be strongly influenced by attitudes and conditions prevailing in the motion picture and radio industries, and among the motion picture and radio writers. The conditions of their long servitude as hired writers causes me to feel alarmed lest this board would also be too much a Hollywood and radio board, and that it would absorb the ideas that prevail in these industries. Because of this possibility, I am strongly fearful that this board will not offer much hope and promise for poorer and more independent writers.
“In his article sponsoring this plan, Mr. Cain did not offer any valid reasons to show why this plan is the best possible one for defending the economic and artistic interests of the writer. He cited a list of economic grievances. One of these concerns the contracts which motion picture scenarists are required to sign. These contracts give to the studio the rights to all writings produced by a writer while he is under such a contract. Is the creation of a five-man board of ‘mugs’ the most effective way of changing the terms of such contracts? Would it not be better for the Screen Writers Guild to take up the question directly? ... Instead of going about their problems in this manner, however, the Screen Writers have concocted a plan which causes many writers to feel the most justifiable alarm.”
Why? Because the Screen Writers Guild is Stalinist-dominated and influenced.
It would be a mistake to approach the Cain plan from purely economic considerations. This is an important question but can be left for another time. Of primary importance today is the political problem involved. The fact that the plan is opposed by a Marxist like Farrell, a Democrat like Dorothy Thompson, who accurately described the Cain proposition as taken from one of Goebbels’ pages, and the extreme right among authors such as Rupert Hughes and Clarence B. Kelland, only illustrates the overall inacceptability of the plan.
There must be an end to the inequitable economic position of the writers, but certainly a far better plan than the one proposed by Cain can be developed. For example, in the case of the Hollywood writers, there is the Screen Writers Guild. It is difficult to understand what purpose there is in the Guild if it does not or cannot fight for improving the contractual and job conditions of the Hollywood writers. The same holds true for the Radio Writers Guild. It should be made clear that we are not so much concerned with the high paid writers, in which category most of the sponsors of the plan belong, but with the many underpaid writers in the movie and radio industries.
We are even more concerned with the creative writers who do not work for the industries. It is they who suffer most from economic inequities. Whatever plan is developed for defending their economic interests and of all writers, it must be one which in no way interferes with the free and unencumbered creative work of which they are capable. Any plan which contains within it bureaucratic totalitarian measures is a threat to the writer. The fact that it is sponsored by James M. Cain and not Joseph Goebbels, makes no difference. It would be just as bad under Stalinist domination as any other reactionary force. In this present circumstance, Cain serves as a perfect front man. The fact that he is “sore” because he feels gypped, and that he is not a Stalinist, makes him a perfect front man for the advocacy of a plan which could only redound to the benefit of Stalinism and against the best interests of the writer.
 

Gates: Imperialist Conflicts Sharpen in UN Arena (18 November 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Imperialist Conflicts Sharpen
in UN Arena
(18 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 46, 18 November 1946, pp. 1 & 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The meeting of the United Nations and its various subcommittees and sub-departments at Lake Success (!) in New York State is heavily overladen with hypocrisy. No one country has a monopoly over this dubious quality. For each power and its satellites is embroiled in an. involved and complicated game of imperialist politics. The true aim of the game is camouflaged by copious use of the words “democracy,” “freedom,” “self-determination” and the “rights of the people.” Yet, however ingenious the camouflage, the imperialist aims of the contestants sticks out at every stage of the struggles which dominate the sessions of the UN.
There is endless testimony to prove that the UN does not differ in principle from its predecessor, the League of Nations. The participating nations are almost the same (except for the two dominant powers, the United States and Russia); some of the architects of Geneva ply their trade at Lake Success; the new figures are cast in the same mold as the old. Each dispute which reflects the bitter clash of conflicting imperialist interests is covered with the camouflage cited above; the disputants hurl epithets at each other like actors rehearsing a play. But they are all deadly serious. In Common they deceive the people; among themselves they are fighting for high stakes.
So long as the UN meets there will be no end to the obscene exhibitionism of the big powers carving up a world in the name of freedom and democracy. We shall follow its sessions closely as a living exhibit of the hypocrisy of imperialism and the. decay of capitalism. At the moment we cite only three examples among many:
1. Trusteeships over Non-Self-Governing Territories, Including Areas Mandated by the League of Nations. The charter of the UN adopted a plan of trusteeships by “directly concerned” nations over such territories. The professed aim of the powers was that trusteeships would be the initial steps toward a future complete independence for the territories involved. The imperialists turned anti-imperialist! But in the context of the real aims of the powers, the fight over trusteeships reduces itself to a struggle between the two main imperialist blocs – the Anglo-American and the Russian.
Shortly after the war ended in Europe, the Russian imperialists demanded a share of the former Italian colonies in Africa. Their demand is still before the UN. Now the Russians claim to be “directly concerned” in the former Japanese Pacific territories held by the United States. The United States has demanded the right to be sole administrator over some 1,500 Pacific islands under a United Nations’ trusteeship. She has asked that the veto be set aside on this question. In the event, however, that objections are made against American trusteeship, President Truman has already described, these territories as “strategic areas” of the U.S. If the UN does not accede to the American demand, then the territories formerly held by Japan will be retained by the U.S., anyway. This is tantamount to a veto over other powers’ objections, despite pious objection on the part of the U.S. to the veto principle. The areas involved are the Marianna, Caroline and Marshall islands, German possessions mandated to Japan after the First World War, and other Japanese possessions, such as Okinawa and Iwo Jima.
Now the Russians have put in their claim for a “joint trusteeship” of these territories as a “directly concerned” state. To bolster up this demand the Russians cite their interest in Germany. Since the above mandated areas were former German colonies Russia cannot be excluded from participation in the trusteeship. In attacking the American proposal, Russia also denounced the British strategy of discussing the Palestinian situation with the U.S., Arab and Jewish representatives outside official channels of the UN.
This is indeed a spectacle! Russian imperialism protests the type of trusteeships proposed by Great Britain, the U.S., France, and Belgium because they would lead to the setting up of “colonial territories,” and would violate “the principles of the United Nations Charter, which establishes a trusteeship system over non-self-governing territories including former mandates.”
But while Russia is deeply concerned about trusteeships tor “non-self-governing territories including former mandates,” she has herself gobbled up states which were self-governing, thus violating every democratic principle of self-determination and national freedom. She incorporated the Baltic States, parts of Finland, Poland, and other Eastern European territory. And while Russia is right in her criticisms of her rivals, they are also right about her. Having acceded to Russia’s territorial seizures, the Western powers are a little taken aback that the Russians won’t grant their demands.
*
2. General Smuts and South-West Africa: As part of the general problem of trusteeships but standing apart because of its special character is the proposal of Africa’s leader, Field Marshal Smuts, that South-West Africa, over which it holds a mandate, shall be annexed to it and not placed under a UN trusteeship. In defending his proposal for annexation, Smuts declared that 200,160 (!) of the 303,850 natives had been consulted on their wishes in the matter (how, when, where and by whom has not been declared). We can easily imagine the manner in which they were consulted by Smuts’ Jim Crow government which is notorious for its racial practices. The sanctimonious Smuts was roundly attacked by Delegate Herard C. L. Rey of Haiti and José Mendose of Guatemala. Prior to this outburst, Indian delegates submitted Smuts and the, South African government to a proper dressing down for the policy of discrimination they practice in what they regard as a “white man’s” hunting ground.
The author of this annexationist proposal is undoubtedly the ancient Field Marshal, once an opponent of British rule in South Africa and now one of its outstanding imperialist spokesmen. Like all late converts he outdoes his sponsors. On holiday occasions Smuts makes learned speeches about the new era of “democracy and the right of freedom for all peoples.” But in practice, he is the heed of one of the most vicious “white supremacy” governments in the world. Some of its practices are even worse than these employed in the South in the U.S. As is to be expected, race discrimination, Jim Crow and white chauvinism in South Africa are accompanied by a brutal, vicious system of exploitation of the native population, who are herded into ghettos beggaring description. The natives have no right to organize and assemble; they have no right to free speech or free press; they are subject to curfew laws which make it impossible for them to do anything except to slave for their white exploiters. If this South African Bilbo won his proposal, it would merely place several hundred thousand more natives under the heel of the gang of unconscionable exploiters for whom he speaks.
(P.S. Smuts is not alone. The United States has its own Smutses at Lake Success who never fail to rise and deliver perorations about democracy and freedom. Why not? They make those speeches in the very South where democracy is only for the white population – and not all whites either. They make those speeches on election day when the poll tax rules the South, when Negroes are not permitted to vote, and when the tiny well-knit political machines of the Southern bourbons organize and “win” their elections. But if these hypocritical speeches are good enough for the South, they’re good enough for the UN. It is interesting to note also that no representatives of the “great nations” rose to say a word about Smuts’ proposition!)
*
3. Refugees and Democracy: Poor Mrs. Roosevelt! There is no doubt that she is an honest and earnest liberal. But like all liberals she has her head square up against an impenetrable barrier. She tries hard to achieve what she regards as real freedom and democracy in an imperialist-capitalist world which is the very antithesis of these. Her popularity in the United States with the people at large is due to her intervention on many democratic and trade union questions in favor of the workers, the Negroes and other discriminated minorities. She is a “do-gooder” (this is not meant to be entirely derogatory) in the decaying, rotting society in which she believes. And that is the basis of her contradictions and her inconsistencies.
Right now, Mrs. Roosevelt is a member of the Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee of the UN. At one of its sessions, she became embroiled in a dispute with that notorious democrat, Russian Vice-Foreign Minister Andrei Vishinsky, who was a leading participant in the judicial murder of hundreds of Old Bolsheviks during the Moscow Trials. Vishinsky and the Russians oppose the formation of an International Refugee Organization to assist the resettlement of hundreds of thousands of refugees throughout Europe, vast numbers of whom refuse to return to their former countries. The reason for this refusal is that in most cases it means returning to Russia (the Baltic States and annexed Poland) or territories under the control of the NKVD and the Russian army.
Mrs. Roosevelt defended the right to the refugees to refuse to return to their former homelands on the grounds that in many cases these homelands no longer existed as free and independent nations, and because these refugees feared reprisals against them. But Vishinsky, displaying that same fiendish zeal with which he called for the death of those who made the Russian Revolution which he opposed, entered into a dispute with Mrs. Roosevelt on the right of these people to refuse to return and on the meaning of democracy. At one point, in the debate, Mrs. Roosevelt declared :
“I gather that Mr. Vishinsky felt that any who did not wish to return to their homelands must of necessity be fascist. I talked to a great many of these people who do not strike me as being fascist.”
This is not news. Anyone acquainted with the Stalinist school of falsification knows that in its simplification of politics one is either a pro-Stalinist, or a pro-fascist, or, what is the same thing, a “Trotskyist mad dog.” Certainly Stalin’s secret police would like to get hold of the refugees who refuse to return to the hell of his rule. And the refugees who refuse to return know what fate awaits them if they do: the NKVD prisons, convict labor camps, forced labor and death.
 
What Parades as “Democracy” at Lake Success
To the new ruling class in Russia this is all democracy. More precisely, their type of democracy. What a travesty! The revolutionary socialist movement – bitter foes of Stalinism – are the outstanding champions of democracy: the right to free speech, free organization, free assembly. For revolutionary socialists, genuine democratic rights are an indispensable part of the struggle for socialism. Because genuine democracy is resisted and curtailed by capitalist society it is something always to be fought for and defended. But in the universal social decay of present times, Stalin’s Russia – that prison of the peoples where no one dares speak out the truth, write what he believes, or organize an independent meeting, let alone a political party or fraternal society – is represented as a genuine democratic land!
Because the Stalinists have perverted the idea of democracy as they have every principle of revolutionary socialism, Mrs. Roosevelt, the liberal defender and advocate of capitalism, is able to defend this system as “democratic.” The net result of all this is confusion of the people at large. Looking at Lake Success from a distance one sees:
“Democratic” imperialism: a world of class exploitation, colonial persecution, racial discrimination, military rule, poll tax elections, Jim Crow practices, outlawing of strikes, suppression of freedom – all of it mixed up with a bit of democratic rights depending on the richness of the countries involved and the state of class organization and struggle. This is represented as “pure” democracy!
Stalinist imperialism: a world of dictatorship and the rule of the secret police; no democratic rights whatever, a new exploitation of the peoples under the rule of counter-revolutionary parties, the prison or death for opponents. And this is represented as the “new” democracy!
 

Gates: Republican Congress Plans a Boost for Big Business (25 November 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Republican Congress Plans
a Boost for Big Business
(25 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 47, 25 November 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The whole country is now deeply interested in what the Republican Party will do on January 3 when the new congress convenes. This is understandable, especially in light of the type of election propaganda which characterizes political campaigns in this country. The Republicans were wisely silent about their program and their plans in the campaign itself. Lacking a finished and common program, they concentrated on the chaos of the past period and the incompetence of the new Democratic administration. Their campaign slogan was designed as a catch-all for votes: “Had Enough! Vote Republican!” And there was no question that millions in the country felt they had had enough of the Truman administration.
In the absence of a bona fide labor political party, a party that could speak for and represent the overwhelming majority of the people, the choice between Truman’s Democratic Party, whose strongest base is the reactionary Southern leaders, and the reactionary, big business Republican Party, could not have been one based on program and policies. That is why it is correct to say that the vote was largely against the Democrats rather than for the Republican Party. The bankruptcy of the Democratic Party was, epitomized by the fact that its campaign featured the playing of records of speeches by the deceased Roosevelt and by the silence of its “leader,” who was prevented from making a single speech in behalf of his Party by its political big-wigs. Thus the vote of a large section of the electorate was a protest vote, but it was a protest vote going in no particular direction.
 
Problems the Republicans Face
The immediate problems which the Republican Party will tackle are already clearly indicated: foreign affairs, the budget and taxes, labor and emergency war powers. With the election over, the party congressional leaders are already approaching these questions with considerable caution. The reason for this caution is to be sought in the precarious nature of the world and domestic situation, the former fraught with extreme danger, the latter relating to the problem of labor, the boom and the prospect of a crisis.
However reactionary is the interest of the Republican Party in the welfare of big business and in maintaining the high profits of American capitalism through domination of world trade and the curbing of labor at home, these must be achieved with a minimum of international and domestic disturbances.
The Democratic Party and the befuddled PAC talked a great deal about how the Republicans threatened to wipe out all the achievements of the New Deal and to return to the conditions which existed during the Hoover days. This is nonsense. Reform legislation was long overdue in this country. The economic crisis of the Thirties merely hastened the enactment of social legislation, much of which was supported by the Republican Party. But it is necessary to distinguish between social legislation of the New Deal and the general political course pursued by Roosevelt through the successive Administrations. The Roosevelt of 1941–44 was not the Roosevelt of 1932.
The New Deal Administration was liquidated by Roosevelt himself during the war years. What remains of the New Deal is the social legislation enacted during the crisis and its basic achievements will remain even under the Republican Administration. That the Republicans will amend some of this legislation goes without saying; but in this they will have considerable support from the Democrats, counting among them some ardent Rooseveltians. The lessons of the Thirties have not been without their effect on the Republicans.
 
Will Not Return to Isolationism
The same holds true in the field of foreign affairs. The Republicans cannot, and do not want to, return to the isolationism of the pre-war years. To believe that this is possible contradicts the characterization of the party as the instrument of an interventionist big business. The Hot Springs conference of Republican leaders and the heads of some of the mightiest monopolistic enterprises in the country which met to consider the problems of foreign trade, prices, wages, prosperity and depression, the role of the Stalinist Party in this country, can hardly be characterized as an isolationist group.
That the party has its own type of “extremists” is obvious. A man like Rep. Taber of New York, who still lives in the dead era of the Twenties may stump for the “fiscal policy of the ’20’s” because “you won’t get a ’29 depression from any of the policies of the Coolidge administration,” will not set the tone for Republican financial policy even though he will be fighting for the dead past.
No, the Republican leaders Taft, Vandenberg, White, Wherry, Martin, and others have already met and mapped out the general course they will pursue in the next session of congress. If it is permissible to have said that the Roosevelt Administration was “friendly” to labor, that is, gave some concessions to labor in exchange for its unstinted support, the new congressional power will be more avowedly big business and anti-labor. But it will not seek to destroy the labor movement, for it will not dare to rouse the wrath of the organized labor movement. But it will aim to destroy some of labor’s power by legislation—and here labor will have to be strongly organized.
 
A Summary of GOP Policies
At present the following appear to be GOP policies:

Emergency War Powers. The GOP will introduce a resolution declaring the end of the war. Government control and presidential extraordinary powers will terminate gradually. The statements about “returning power to the states” are propagandistic nonsense, as are those which declare that “business will now be free.”
 
Foreign Affairs. There will be no policy change in Republican control of the Senate and House committees on foreign affairs. The Republicans, no matter how many differences they may have on concrete policies with the Democrats, or how vigorously they may prosecute “American interests first” will continue the main line in foreign policy pursued by the Democratic Administration.

There will not and cannot be a repetition of the 1920’s when the United States, under Republican leadership, withdrew from participation in the League of Nations which Wilson helped to initiate. American policy in foreign affairs will bg decidedly interventionist whether it is led by Republicans or Democrats.
 
Budget and Taxes. The Republicans will cut the budget by several billions and eliminate some Democratic projects. But there will be no substantial change in the main expenditures outlined by the Democratic Administration. While the Republicans have talked a great deal about tax cutting, they now warn that they will be guided by caution. They are aiming at a $30–31 billion dollar budget against the present one of $41 billion. In relation to the federal pay roll, which will be reduced, Senator Bridges has already said that “they will do it scientifically, and not with a sledge-hammer.” Slated to become the chairman of the powerful Senate Appropriations Committee, the senator also indicated that he is not even certain that his party will carry through an “across the board” 20 per cent tax cut. Government needs growing out of the war and the struggle for world domination compel the Republicans to conduct themselves carefully.
 
Labor. On this question the Republicant Party is clearer than on any other. They will seek to enact curbs on the labor movement, trying to compel unions to register their funds and make public financial reports. They will very likely enact a new version of the Connally Act or seek the reintroduction of the Case anti-strike bill. Whatever form anti-labor legislation will take, either through the above, or by amendments to the Wagner Act, anti-union curbs will emerge from a Congress dominated by big business’ party – unless labor acts in such a way as to force them to retreat.
 

Proof of Labor Party Need
So far as other important questions relating to social problems are concerned, the Republican Party will bury most of them or prevent the enactment of positive legislation. These are bills on housing and medical aid. Since the Truman Administration has already taken the lead on raiding rents, which in effect means the end of rent control, the Republicans will find their job cut out for them. As for the rest, not even the Republicans are sure what they will do.
We are faced with a new Congress dominated by the reactionary party of big business. In a fundamental sense, as a capitalist party, it is in no principled sense, a different party from Roosevelt’s or Truman’s. But it is more OPENLY big business than the Democratic Party. The new Congress will therefore be a reactionary one, whether it will be more reactionary than the one just ended which was controlled by a bloc of Republicans and Southern Democrats will not alter things fundamentally.
In the light of what has happened in this election and the political prospects of the coming year, the criminal policy of the labor movement becomes abundantly clearer. Tying labor to the needs of the Democratic machine (the CIO-PAC) and the reactionary Republican Party (the AFL bureaucracy) has resulted in a defeat for the labor movement. The elections have supplied additional proof, if anymore was needed, that the political hopes for the working class lies through the establishment of its own political organization, an independent labor party.
 



The field of labor and socialist journalism is in capitalist society a unique form of expression. The very purpose of a workers’ press takes it out of the realm of customary journalism as we experience it every day of our lives.
All newspapers are vehicles of propaganda. The capitalist press, the most corrupt and biased press in the world, pretends to be impartial. It pretends to be impartial in a society of classes, of bosses and workers, of rich and poor, of the well-fed, well-housed and well-clothed and the hungry, ill-housed and ill-clad. It pretends to be impartial in attitude toward the great problems produced by capitalism: war, unemployment, starvation, the class struggle.
Yet, the capitalist press, a big business enterprise closely allied to finance and industry, is indeed the most partial press we know. It lives on insinuation, subtleties and outright lying. It is pro-big business and unmistakably anti-labor. It is capable of big lies, as well as small ones. It never ceases in its venomous outpourings against the interests of the working class.
 
A Bias Toward Labor
A workers’ paper stands as a living answer to the corruption and morality of the capitalist press. It openly takes the side of the wage earner and all exploited people against their exploiters and oppressors. It never pretends that in a strike one must see the bosses’ side of it, for a workers’ paper is always on the side of the workers. In a profit society, in which one class lives by exploiting another, a workers’ paper frankly and boldly takes the side of the workers.
Labor Action is that kind of a paper. It is a labor paper in that it represents the interests of the working class. But it is more than that: it is a socialist paper because it seeks not merely an improvement of the conditions of the workers under capitalism, but the abolition of this system of scarcity and insecurity and its replacement by a social order of security and plenty for all. Labor Action fights for socialism in order to end the exploitation of man by man for all time; to eliminate wars and unemployment and hunger.
Those who have read Labor Action during the war years came to know it as the hard-hitting champion of the working class. Labor Action’s handicap was lack of sufficient space to deal with all the great questions of the day. In the complex world in which we live there are far too many occurrences of importance to the working class to compress into four pages.
 
Labor Action Depends upon Labor
An eight-page Labor Action is a matter of life and death. Labor Action is not an advertisers’ paradise. It cannot count among its supporters men of wealth. It has no secret funds. It gets no assistance from any great power – Labor Action depends for its existence on the support and aid given it by its readers. I cannot add anything to what has already been written by my associates.
I merely want to add my appeal to all friends of Labor Action to get behind the $15,000 fund drive of the Workers Party to enable us to launch a bigger and better Labor Action, the finest labor and socialist weekly in the United States.
 

Gates (Albert Glotzer): Can U.S. Post-War Capitalism Provide Jobs for Everybody? (1 April 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Question in Everyone’s Mind
Can U.S. Post-War Capitalism
Provide Jobs for Everybody?
(1 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 12, 1 April 1946, pp. 1-M & 3-M.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The war economy organized by the Roosevelt Administration brought about a number of changes in the United States which cannot fail to have important bearing on the future economic and political life of the country. There is hardly a person who does not know what occurred in general. The government organized and directed the war economy. Unemployment, which remained at the high level of between nine and ten million during the highest peacetime year of production in 1940, was liquidated almost overnight. An economy unprepared to meet the requirements of modern total war supplied the whole Allied camp with all the materials of war within a short period of time. Production expanded at a rate far exceeding all previous experience. While these things are known in general, it is the concrete developments which are not known.
Yet, in the concrete expansion of the American economy are to be found all the grave problems which confront the working class. A few examples will suffice to illustrate the tremendous changes which took place during the war and to indicate the insoluble problems they have created for American capitalism and the new problems created for the working class.
 
Government Directs Big Business Program
The government organized the war economy. This is the first point to bear in mind. The government determined what was needed for the war. It supplied the plans, the capital, the material, the plants, the tools, set the rate of profit for the capitalists, froze the wages of the workers, controlled the labor supply and in general supervised production so that we had, in effect, a state-directed economy during the war. Private industry merely carried out the government programs for which it was repaid in the biggest profits in American economic history.
The war economy program was a big business program. The reason for this is obvious. War production could not be carried out by small plants and individual producers. It could only be done by the immense mass production plants, by the monopolistic enterprises. Thus, the multiple boards in Washington were in the hands of the representatives of big business who controlled the whole war economy and conducted it entirely in the interests of monopoly industry and banking. Because of government organization, direction and planning, the following immediate results were produced:

There was a rapid and continuing rise in production and a vast expansion of industrial plants.
 
Unemployment, which almost ten years of the New Deal could not solve, was liquidated practically overnight.
 
There followed an absolute growth of the labor force, i.e., the size of the working class.

Production rose from the record peacetime year of $100 billion in 1940 to $155 billion in 1943. While in 1940 only $2 billion was devoted to war production, by 1943, $85 billion represented the share of war production. By 1944 production had risen to $198 billions (allowing for price adjustments).
The volume of manufactured goods outpaced all other production. It had tripled within a period of five years, indicating the tremendous possibilities inherent in the American productive apparatus to supply the necessaries of life, when, as a matter of fact, it was concentrated on the production of machinery of destruction.
Manufacturing capacity prior to the war (including government arsenals and navy yards) was estimated to have cost $40 billion. Even with this manufacturing capacity, capitalism could not maintain full employment at a time when production was rising. In five years of war, $25 billion in new plants and equipment, and cost of converting to war, were added to the $40 billion. Of this new manufacturing capacity the government expended $17 billion or two-thirds of the above amount.
To meet the requirements of war production and to make use of the expended manufacturing capacity created by new plants, an absolute increase of the working force was needed. The working class grew from 54 to 64 million (including the armed services) in the five war years, or an increase of 20 per cent. This factor is of immense importance in assessing the prospects of unemployment in the coming peacetime years, again remembering that until the war broke out, capitalism was unable to liquidate unemployment.
When the war was drawing to a close, government economists began to concern themselves with the problems of production and employment in the post-war period. They knew that unless production was maintained at a rate comparable to the war years, the economy was destined to experience a sharp crisis through a decline in production and consequent rise in the mass army of unemployed. The “liberal” capitalists, the New Dealers and their economists and statisticians, demanded that private industry must maintain full production and full employment to prevent the chaos of a post-war crisis. If private industry would not adopt such a program, said these New Dealers, the government would have to guarantee high production and full employment. The Roosevelt Administration adopted the slogan of : 60,000,000 jobs! President Truman reindorsed this program.
 
Problems of Post-War Economy
The capitalists, however, rejected this program with full knowledge that the costs of such a program would indeed be heavy for them. The program of the New Dealers aimed at maintaining peace at home because they know that low production and mass unemployment creates the conditions of intensified class struggle and they want to save the disintegrating system of capitalism by making concessions to the people without changing the profit character of society. This program big business rejects. Big business feels powerful and rich. It is determined to solve its problems by heavy blows against the working class and by a general lowering of the standard of living. And their program will prevail over that of the New Dealers in the next period as it is prevailing now.
Capitalism is a profit system wherein production is carried on for market and for the enrichment of the capitalist class. This class will resist any efforts to encroach on its property and profit rights. The immediate post-war period has already provided ample proof of this fact in almost every action of Congress and the Administration. Tax rebates to guarantee the high wartime profits of business have been passed. Wages have declined sharply, while prices rise and the cost-of-living has continued to mount over the war years. No steps have been taken to alleviate the abominable housing conditions which are universal. Congress deliberates over vicious anti-labor measures and in general proves over and over again that the government in Washington is a government of the capitalist class.
The situation in the country is not yet severe. Actually, we are witnessing the beginning of a post-war boom based on many millions of workers still at work, a large demand of consumer goods following the war and vast accumulated reserves. But this boom cannot and will not last long. The capitalists know that in a short period of time this condition will cease to exist. They know that their chances for continued production and vast profits lie in foreign trade, in complete control and domination of the world market.
 
Capitalism Cannot Achieve Stability
The war solved not a single important problem for capitalism. It did not bring peace, freedom and security for the peoples of the world. It merely resulted in the defeat of one group of rivals of American imperialism and brought into existence new rivals. Because the future of American capitalism lies in its economic and political conquest of the world, we will witness an increasing imperialist policy developed by the native capitalist class and its government. It is for this imperialist policy that the ruling class and its political and military servants are pressing for permanent peacetime conscription. In addition, we are witnessing an increasing militarization of life and a tendency toward peacetime totalitarianism which is reflected in the dispute over the control of atomic energy and the continued rule of government by decree.
American imperialism, however, will not find it easy to achieve its world aims. To achieve them it requires peace, stability and order. But the outstanding feature of the world today is that there is no durable peace, no stability, no equilibrium. These factors only make American imperialism more determined and more ruthless in its expansion with the result that peace, stability and order will become increasingly impossible.
The disintegrating and decaying character of world capitalism will have a pronounced effect on the still powerful American capitalism which is completely intertwined with world economy. It cannot and will not escape the disintegrating influences of a world society in decline.
The American working class is not wholly unaware of these prospects for capitalism and what it means for the mass of people. This is already reflected in the great struggles now taking place. These struggles presage even greater ones to come. The working class is now struggling for security, to prevent the burdens of a peacetime economy with declining production, employment and standard of living from being placed on its shoulders. The working class realizes that all the promises made to it during the war, were never meant to be kept; that the wage freeze, the long hours of work, the high cost of living were its rewards for the tremendous sacrifices made during the war. It. increasingly realizes that the war benefited only one class: the capitalist profiteers.
The working class has seen what the government was capable of doing for war, for the purposes of worldwide destruction. It observed how the government planned economy, provided the capital, new plants, material and the means to maintain a high level of production for destruction. It will not easily understand how and why a government which is capable of doing that in the interests of war cannot and will not provide for full employment, a rising standard of living and the well-being of the people during peacetime.
 
A Period of Great Class Struggles
The present struggle for higher and guaranteed wages is a forerunner of new and greater struggles on the part of the working class. Already, the present strikes developed beyond ordinary bread and butter struggles. In the GM strike the UAW was compelled by the extreme urgency of the situation to raise the slogan of “Open the Books,” which was a slogan of tremendous political and social implications, for it challenged the very structure of capitalist property relations.
The working class of this country is a powerful and militant class. It has great confidence in itself. Its great weakness however, is that it has little political and class consciousness. But this is a development which is certain to come, a development which has been hastened by the war and which will be intensified in the coming struggle for security and existence in which the majority of the workers will participate.
The struggle of the working class will become increasingly political in this period. Idle plants and mass unemployment will strengthen the demand for nationalization of industry under the control of the workers. The working class will learn in these struggles that no reliance can be had in the Democratic and Republican Parties, both instruments and servants of big business. It will be compelled to travel the road of independent political action. For while the American workers know how to fight on the economic front, they have as yet no positive program by which to combat the capitalist class politically. Yet, upon the political development of the working class as an independent, anti-capitalist force depends its whole future.
The great task of the revolutionary socialist is to assist and hasten this political development of the American working class as the first stage in its class conscious development which will put it on the high road toward the socialist emancipation of humanity from capitalist unemployment, misery, wars and insecurity.
 



ON MAY 1, 1940, the first issue of Labor Action came off the press to begin its appearance as the outstanding labor and socialist weekly in the country.
It was indeed a perilous time to originate a new paper. The second world imperialist war had already begun in Europe and although the United States was not yet a belligerent nation, the nature of the war and the course of action pursued by the Roosevelt Administration made her military entrance inevitable.
Those were the days of swift war mobilization of the economy and the physical resources of the nation. The war economy, planned for many years in advance, began to operate swiftly. The great mass of men between the years of eighteen and forty-five began to be drafted in the millions for a slaughter whose purposes were in no way different from the imperialist slaughter of 1914–18. This war, too, was a war for markets, natural resources, territory  –  for profit.
The small band of people, members of the Workers Party, who bent all their energies to promote Labor Action and to secure its existence went about their business in response to the task imposed on them by their socialist program and ideal: to speak out the truth about the war, to tell why it was fought and what its bad results must be. To the everlasting credit of Labor Action, it was the only working class paper which met the declaration of war by the United States with a resounding, truthful manifesto against it. No other paper did it. The labor press joined their officialdom in support of the war. The other so-called radical and “socialist” papers were either silent, confused or engaging in support of imperialist barbarism.
The Manifesto of the Workers Party, The World in Flames, made a penetrating analysis of the causes of the war which lay in the rivalries of the capitalist powers for the riches of the world. It pointed out that an imperialist war could not be fought for democratic aims, for the people; that the war was against true democracy and against the interests of the people. The manifesto warned the workers of this country that the war economy meant saddling the workers with the burdens of war while industry and finance, the capitalist class, would, as they did in the first world war, enrich themselves at the expense of the people.
The manifesto warned that the end of the war would find the world faced with the same unsolved problems which capitalism created. That for the mass of people of the world, the war meant death, hunger, disease and destruction. For the American workers it meant a lower standard of living, rising costs in those commodities required in order to live, and a general insecurity of life.
 
Spoke for Labor During War
From the date of the publication of that famous manifesto, Labor Action remained true to its banner of working class solidarity and world socialism. It never hesitated, whatever the issue, to speak in the interests of labor here and abroad. It analyzed the real meaning of Roosevelt’s “equality of sacrifice” program. It described the conduct of the labor officialdom in giving up the strike weapon and accepting Roosevelt’s request for a “no-strike pledge” without the slightest guarantees to labor, as a murderous weapon in the hands of the bosses which could only result in an increase of their war profits at the expense of every worker and his family.
The government organized the war economy, planned its production, supplied raw materials, gave out contracts and guaranteed the bosses high profits. Roosevelt, who could not solve the problem of unemployment during peacetime, did solve it during war for the purposes of creating the means of mass destruction. There were plenty of jobs, but under conditions difficult for labor.
The worker, faced with a steadily rising cost of living, could not achieve a substantial measure of economic security, even temporarily, because his wages were frozen. The working class as a whole was bound hand and foot by the no-strike pledge. The capitalists, enriched by the war and a war economy which they directed through their immediate representatives, used every provocation imaginable to break down the union standards of work won after many years of struggle. Labor worked long hours under any ahd all conditions, while wages were pegged to an outlived “Little Steel” Formula.
 
Remember the War Labor Board
Behind this conspiracy was the War Labor Board, the inhuman graveyard of labor’s wage demands. Its role was to pile up case upon case, thereby making it impossible to redress labor’s wage demands. But while tire capitalist government operated efficiently in keeping the workers of this country chained to the war machine, it made a farce of rationing and price control. For all of this labor paid with its blood, sweat and tears.
It was no wonder that, despite the conservative and even reactionary role of the labor officialdom, thousands of workers went out on strike, and that the coal miners, engaged in the most dangerous of occupations, struck four times against that pack of wolves known as coal operators, who were backed by all the forces of capitalism, the government, the press, the radio, and the “minions of the law.” Occupation of struck plants by troops, often invited by labor leaders, proved fatal to the workers, for in each case production was resumed, profits for the bosses continued and the workers received either slight wage increases or nothing at all.
In this situation, Labor Action stood out almost alone, as the champion of the interests of labor. Very early in these struggles it campaigned for revision of the Little Steel Formula, for the abolition of the WLB and the resumption of collective bargaining and for rescinding the nostrike pledge.
Labor Action threw its support to every fight made by labor, big or small. It exposed a rationing system directed against the poor and revealed the conspiracy of big business to rob and cheat the people in yet another way, through gigantic, well-organized black markets.
 
Labor Action’s Internationalism
But that was not all. As a socialist paper devoted to the abolition of the capitalist system of profit and exploitation of the people, Labor Action defended the interests of oppressed people the world over, showing how these interests were common to all who labor. It called for support to those peoples fighting for their national sovereignty and independence. It struck out against the hypocrisy of the Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter, forecasting that they were merely propaganda vehicles of the Allies to entice support of the people for their brigand’s war. Labor Action declared that all the Allies, including Stalin’s Russia in its own way were imperialists and that the close of the war would demonstrate it fully.
Before the war came to an end, the world was shocked by the explosion of Hiroshima which disclosed the proud product of the “arsenal of democracy,” the atom bomb, before whose destructive powers the whole past history of slaughters pales. So enormous is the destructive potential of the atom bomb that the control of atomic energy in the hands of imperialism threatens the whole of mankind and its civilization. Labor Action, in individual articles and in series form subjected the development of atomic warfare to a searching analysis showing why socialism, a system free of classes, profits, exploitation and war was the only hope for humanity, for the peace, freedom and security of all the people.
The immediate post-war period – a period of preparation for a third world war, increasing misery of peoples in Europe and Asia, growing insecurity of all who toil – finds Labor Action carrying on in its militant traditions, as the champion of the working class and all oppressed peoples here and abroad.
 
Labor’s Post-War Struggles
The post-war period will be accompanied by great struggles of the workers in the United States for security. The General Motors’ strike already exhibited that these struggles, coming after a war in which the whole social order was mobilized for destruction, will be of a higher order and fought with greater consciousness by labor.
In Europe and Asia the fight of the peoples for life will also be on a high plane.
In this great clash between the forces of progress represented by the mass of people and in the first place, the workers, and the forces of capitalist and bureaucratic exploiters, Labor Action will continue its great aim: to help raise these struggles to a socialist level, to seek the abolition of the rotten system of capitalist exploitation, of wealth concentrated in the hands of a few and poverty for the tens of millions, of estates for a handful of rich and hovel for the people, of fine foods and delicacies for a handful and hunger for the mass of people, of security for the rich and insecurity for those who work in, order to live. It will fight for a socialist society of plenty for all.
Labor Action appeared regularly throughout the war as a four page weekly. This was made possible by the great sacrifices of its supporters, by the indefatigable devotion of its contributors and staff members.
 
Forward to a Regular 8-Pager!
But that is not enough. The postwar period is rife with problems of a decaying and complex society. Labor Action is far too small to deal adequately with the great and burning questions of the day. Expansion of Labor Action to eight pages weekly is indispensable for maintaining its past high level. There is only one way it can be done: Every reader, sympathizer and supporter of Labor Action should get behind the drive for the eight-pager and thus help to insure another six years of prosperous existence for the outstanding labor and socialist weekly in the country.
 



The same old imperialist policy! The same old imperialist explanations! That is the nature of the decision on Korea made by the Big Three in Moscow. The foreign ministers of the United States, Russia and Great Britain have agreed upon a trusteeship over the country to last for a period of not more than five years! The trusteeship shall remain in the hands of a joint Russian-American commission.
Why a trusteeship for Korea? Was it a member of Axis coalition? Did it oppose the Allies in the war? No, Korea was an independent nation with a long history of national independence. Korea lost her independence to a more powerful Japan, which overran the country and ruled it in the same way as its national provinces. The Koreans were promised independence by the Allies when the war began. The Allies assisted the powerful independence movement which existed inside and outside the country. A provisional independence committee with headquarters in the United States and China has functioned for many years trying to solicit support from the big powers to win freedom from Japanese imperialism.
The Koreans took seriously the declarations of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms. They believed with certainty that an Allied victory in the war and a defeat of Japan would mean the automatic freedom and independence of their country. On the morrow of the Japanese defeat a provisional government was erected and everywhere organs of government sprang up. They were of various political coloration. But all of them were symbolized by their adherence to a general program of independence, democratic rights for the population and the election of a permanent republican government.
 
“Making Them Ready”
The desires of the Koreans, however, clashed immediately with the plans of the United States and Russia. The two Pacific powers divided the country into two zones. The real rulers became the military directors of the American and Russian forces. In the American zone, for example, the representatives of defeated Japanese imperialism continued to patrol and rule the country as before. Only this time they were taking orders from the American, General Hodges.
The Koreans did not understand why the “liberators” refused to permit the liberation of the country. As in all cases of this kind, they were promised their independence as soon as their “house was put in order.” And now they find, months after the defeat of Japan, that foreign troops still occupy the country and that foreign powers are the real rulers of the country.
The decision of the latest Moscow conference that Korea shall be governed under a trusteeship for the next five years, a decision taken without the slightest regard for the opinions and desires of the Koreans, has resulted in a wave of anger, disappointment and active resistance inside the country. The leading city of Seoul has been plastered with posters and proclamations denouncing the Moscow decision. The Korean press called this decision a “lethal blow to the independence hopes of Korea.”
Posters have been put up calling for a general strike against the United States Military Government, the shutting down of schools and for nation-wide demonstrations. Secretary of State Byrnes’ announcement that the trusteeship may not have to be applied and the statement that the military commissions of the two powers would seek to end the division of the country into two zones has had little or no effect on the mounting resentment of the people.
 
Who Is Korea’s Friend?
Dr. Kim Koo, chairman of the provisional government, addressed a message to Russia, China, Great Britain and the United States, declaring that Korea “opposes the decision” because it “opposes the desires of the peoples of Korea and is against the assurances given repeatedly by your nations in the course of the war.”
Those who are puzzled by this decision must look outside of Korea for its explanation. The decision has nothing whatever to do with the readiness of the Korean peoples for independence. The decision grows out of the imperialist rivalry in the Far East between the United States and Russia as to who shall be the dominant power in Asia. It is related to the present struggle between them in China; it is related to Russian demands for a place in the occupation forces and policies for Japan.
When the newspaper Chosen Immin, a spokesman for the “left,” writes: “We hope that this trusteeship has not been initiated by our good friend the United States; to think that it was initiated by Russia is out of the question,” it merely reveals that it understands nothing about imperialist politics in general nor of Russia in particular.
American imperialist interests in the Far East and, therefore, its politics, differ in no important way from any other imperialism. The difficulty about understanding Russian policy arises from a total misconception that Russia is a socialist nation and therefore cannot possibly pursue an imperialist policy. Yet the truth is that Russia is not socialist and that it does pursue an imperialist policy of its own.
 
For Korean Independence
The Russia of twenty-five years ago, that is, workers’ Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, was the champion of the oppressed and colonial countries. That Russia fought valiantly on behalf of all the oppressed and granted independence to all the possessions of the imperial Czarist ruling classes. But the Russia of Stalin is carving out a new empire at the expense of the peoples of Eastern Europe and the colonial peoples of Asia. Once that is understood, it is easy to understand Russian policy in China and Korea.
American labor, whose real interests are identified with all peoples fighting for freedom and independence, should rally to the support of the Korean people. U.S. troops have no place in the country. They should be withdrawn and the boys brought back home. It goes without saying that Russian troops should also be withdrawn. We are not merely opposed to U.S. imperialism. We are opposed to all imperialism.
Support the Korean people in their struggle for freedom and independence!
 



The arrival of General George C. Marshall in China as the new ambassador from the United States is an event of symptomatic importance. He has been given the task of resolving the current “civil war.” between Chungking and Yenan. This fact alone emphasizes the interventionist role of Washington in Chinese affairs and the complete dependency upon the United States of the Chiang Kai-shek regime.
Marshall replaced General Patrick J. Hurley, who resigned following charges that members of his staff in China, assisted by Under-Secretary of State Acheson in Washington, were secretly undermining his policy of support to Chiang in favor of support to the Stalinist forces in Yenan.
Obviously United States imperialism has not abdicated its powers in China. Marshall’s role would then be inexplicable. China remains now just as much dependent upon U.S. economic and military strength as she was throughout her long war against Japan. The United States has kept Chiang in power because he represents the most important bulwark of American aims in the most populous country in the Orient.
It is no secret that American friendliness toward China arises from the far-sighted imperialist understanding of a section of the capitalist class which sees in China a tremendous potential market for goods of all kinds. What has hindered a thorough exploitation of this tremendous nation with the largest working class in the colonial world has been decades of internal warfare between “bandit” generals (mercenaries who fight for a price), the civil wars between the government forces and the workers’ and peasants’ movements, the Stalinist Communist armies and, finally, the Sino-Japanese war.
 
U.S.-Russian Rivalry
The Chiang regime represents for the United States the strongest force for order in the country, provided it is possible to organize the peace. That Chiang came to power as head of the counter-revolution in 1927; that he retained his power through a reign of terror during all these years; that a reactionary band of industrialists, financiers, landlords and politicians rule the country for their own benefit, and that there is no real freedom, peace or democracy for the tens of millions of workers and peasants – all of this is of no great importance to Washington.
What is of importance is that a sharp conflict has been going on for years between the Chiang regime and the formidable forces of Yenan, the Stalinist Communist armies, which have the backing of Russia in the fight against the Kuomintang government.
U.S. imperialism will never permit China to become another Poland, that is, a vassal state of Russia. But she still understands that it is necessary to come to some understanding with Stalin in order to win the peace in China and thus permit exploitation of the country.
Thus not China but two foreign powers and, in the first place, the United States, will decide that nation’s fate. This is what General Hurley did not understand. He considered every concession made to Yenan – that is, the Kremlin – a surrender of American interests and the sovereignty of Chiang. General Marshall now, has the job of reconciling the great conflict in China in order to achieve what General Hurley did not achieve – peace through a “bandits’ agreement.” The Chinese people will, of course, have nothing to say in the matter, for they are ruled by an authoritarian military regime which has destroyed all the democratic rights of the people.
 
Contending Forces
U.S.-Russian rivalry explains many things about what has happened in China. The Sino-Russian treaty, in which Stalin recognized the sovereignty of Chiang in exchange for concessions in Manchuria (an action which seemed to be directed against the Stalinist forces of Yenan); the Russian withdrawal of troops from Manchurian centers before Chiang’s could arrive but in time to permit Yenan forces to occupy these cities; Russia’s subsequent assistance to Nationalist Army troops to occupy other cities and the Russian announcement of its withdrawal of all troops from China and Yenan, represent the ebb and flow of the struggle which depends in the last analysis on relations between the United States and Russia within the Big Three.
Since the Moscow meeting of the foreign representatives of the Big Three has reached a new agreement, it is quite possible that the Chinese situation will be quickly settled. This brings us to the heart of the Chinese question from the point of view of the international as well as Chinese working class interests. It is too early to write about the agreement that will be reached, but already the proposals of the Chinese government and the counter-proposals of Yenan, which provide for the cessation of fighting and the basis for a wider selection of those parties and movements to make up the new government, seem to be certain. General Marshall occupies the unique role of an ambassador from a foreign nation which is acting as the mediator in a conflict between the government and Stalin’s Chinese battalions. This fact illustrates that China is not, either that part under Chiang or that under Yenan, a free and independent nation, but that freedom and independence have yet to be won.
The question is asked: Does not Yenan represent the forces of the social revolution in China? Does it not represent the movement of the new society and should not all revolutionary socialists support Yenan in this “civil war”?
 
A Social Revolution?
The struggle between Chungking and Yenan is not a “civil war” in the sense of the Russian Revolution, or the Spanish Civil War of 1936. Yenan does not represent the independent movement of the Chinese workers and peasants fighting against an internal reactionary regime. Yenan is a Stalinist government, patterned after its Russian model and, like all Stalinist movements, represents first and foremost Russian interests in China. Like all Stalinist movements, it draws its strength from the masses, rests upon the workers and peasants and, depending upon the given situation, issues revolutionary, reformist or reactionary demands. Thus the Stalinist movements exploit the feelings and desires of the people for the purpose of betraying them in the end.
If Chiang is a reactionary enemy of the Chinese people, then an implacable struggle against him must be waged. But, it may be asked, do not the Chinese Stalinist-Communists carry on just that struggle? The answer to this question is: only when it appears that Russian relations with the United States and Chiang appear to be deteriorating, do the Chinese Stalinists employ their blackmail “civil war” to force a settlement in favor of Stalinist imperialist aims. Otherwise, it is impossible to explain the following statement of General Chou En-lai, aide to General Mao, head of the Yenan government:
“Mr. Chiang is not only the leader of China today. It is our hope that he will be the leader of China during the period of peace and national reconstruction.”
It is important to understand this about China: none of the important revolutionary demands of 1925.27 have been won under the reactionary Chiang regime. The workers do not have the right to organization, press and assembly. The trade union movement has been driven underground. The working class undergoes severe exploitation at the hands of brutal native and foreign bosses.
The peasants of China have still to achieve the agrarian revolution. They have still before them the job of destroying landlordism and breaking up the remnants of feudalism in land. To do this means to struggle against Chiang and his regime, whether he stands alone or whether he rules in alliance with the Chinese Stalinists from Yenan and the Democratic League (which acts as a bridge between Chiang and the Stalinists).
 
Against Imperialism
Yenan does not and cannot represent the revolution in China. It is, like all other Stalinist governmental formations in Eastern Europe, the spearhead of counter-revolution. Some point to the collectivization of land in Yenan, plus other reforms, as examples of the revolutionary nature of the Yenan government. But its collectivization, like that of Russia, is thoroughly bureaucratic and, from the point of view of the mass of peasants who are ruled in the same bureaucratic manner as the Kremlin rules the Russian peasants, the Yenan regime is reactionary. The question is not whether Yenan collectivizes the land, but what kind of collectivization it carries through. And it is abundantly clear from the accumulated experiences with Stalinism on a world scale, that its collectivization, while progressive as against the old feudal land relations in China, nevertheless represents totalitarianism and in the final analysis redounds against the best interests of the people.
To grant critical support to Yenan on the ground that it represents the “social revolution” in China is to deceive the Chinese people and the workers of the world. For to give critical support to Yenan means to give support to Stalinism in its struggle for power. No revolutionary socialist can do this without imperiling his principles in the same way that Stalinism imperils the progress of humanity.
What is needed in China is an independent revolutionary movement of the workers and peasants devoted to a liberation of the country from foreign imperialism and to the struggle for a workers’ China, a China of the masses which will carry out the revolutionary progressive program of 1925.
That means not merely getting rid of Chiang, but of imperialism and, in the first place, U.S. imperialism.
 



Dear Comrades:
It is impossible for me to take up the argument made by Comrade Judd on whether or not nationalization or collectivization has actually taken place in the Yenan province. The reference to it in my articles was based entirely on the claims made in the Stalinist press in this country and on observations of some fellow travelers. My present circumstances make it impossible to check this material. Assuming these claims, the point of my article was to show that it could only follow the pattern of Stalinist nationalization and collectivization which would not make it ipso facto a basis for the support of Stalin’s Chinese representatives in what some people mistakenly refer to as another Chinese “civil war.”
But Judd is wrong when he says that the Chinese Stalinists have “fully capitulated to Chiang Kai-shek” in any of the fundamental senses in which he indicates. Nor has the question of a “possible ‘civil war’ ... vanished.” On the contrary, all of these things are inherent in the situation. Circumstances also prevented me from following up my original article so that I might show that the agreement reached between Chiang and the Stalinists was only provisional. This could have been ascertained from a careful reading of the Stalinist press in general and the articles of their new “international expert,” Joseph Starobin, who warned against any jubilation over the announced agreement. The attitude of the Stalinists was: we will wait and see. There is nothing in their conduct which is in conflict with Stalinist international politics.
Albert Gates
 

Gates: Stalin’s New Purges and Ukraine Independence (9 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Stalin’s New Purges and Ukraine Independence
(9 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 36, 9 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In the midst of the great diplomatic struggles which aptly characterize the Paris Peace Conference as the meeting ground of imperialist brigands, the news of another nationwide purge in Stalin’s Russia has been reported in more or less subdued terms. This purge extends everywhere: in Great Russia, the Urals, Siberia, White Russia, The Ukraine; it embraces functionaries of the “Republics,” factory managers, and the highest summits of the Stalinist parties. And nowhere is the purge as severe as it is in the Ukraine. Two highlights of the situation occur to one immediately: the general purge itself and its relation to Russian society, and the severity of the purge in the Ukraine. While the two problems are related, they have, nevertheless, distinctive qualities and touch, as it were, two separate questions.
In general, the purges are a preparation for the commencement of a new five-year plan to be completed by 1950 with goals approximating prewar levels. Like all previous “victories of the five-year plans” this one, too, if successful, will be achieved by the sweat, blood and tears of the workers, peasants and convict laborers of the “federated Republics.”
 
Purges Explode Myth of “Socialist” State
The regime of the Kremlin, which has just emerged from the war a somewhat battered victor with immense new prestige and power as an imperialist giant, prepared for the expected post-war dissatisfaction of the masses and their demands for “a new and better and more fruitful life” by a campaign against scores of small bureaucrats. Several things are thus achieved by the purge:

It strikes fear into the hearts of millions of lower functionaries, technicians, specialist and industrial engineers creating the condition for abject submission to the regime;
It creates a frenzy of industrial planning and operation and produces superhuman efforts by the workers and peasants to achieve the norms of the plan at the expense of their physical well-being;
It postpones again, on the grounds of the destruction caused by the war, the question of increasing the production of consumer goods and raising the living standards of the people (Russia is surrounded by enemies; now is not the time for luxuries!);
It prepares in advance all the alibis for bureaucratic failures which are inherent in the backwardness of the nation and the totalitarian regime which, acts as a brake upon progress;
It prepares for new repressions against the masses.

One need not listen to the professional apologists for Stalin, who raise their feeble and often indistinct voices against capitalist exploitation and more loudly condemn its imperialism, while they are totally silent about Stalinist imperialism and the exploitation of the masses who compromise the new Russian empire. (Did I say silent? Pardon me. They are the loudest and most vulgar supporters of the new exploitative society!) One has only to recall the history of the successive purges to see through the camouflages created by the regime.
The purges often take on a ludicrous form amidst the terrible tragedy that is Russian society. We have been told that Stalin’s Russia is a socialist nation. That it has not only entered the stage of socialism, but as long as fifteen years ago completed nine-tenths of socialism. Obviously, the other tenth has long ago been reached. Russian society, however, has nothing in common with socialism; it is a new form of exploitation; a new class society emerging from a defeated revolution. It contains manyvices which are characteristic of all class societies and therefore has many similarities to capitalism. Its exploitation is, however, even more primitive than that of the advanced capitalist world; savage under the most complete totalitarian police regime in the world.
Socialism presupposes a classless society, a social organization without exploitation and where the state diminishes in importance as the economy rises and finally enters its decline on the road of disappearance, to be replaced by administrative bodies of the people. It is not complete socialism, i.e., communism. This signifies the actual disappearance of a state power of coercion. But this distinction is not really as great as would appear at first glance. A dividing line between the disappearance of the first stage and the appearance of the second is difficult to fix. The achievement of the socialist stage of development implies a new advance of culture, a complete and irrevocable defeat of capitalism and capitalist ideology. Mankind living in a socialist state would have lost completely the strivings, interests and desires which spring out of the insecurity of capitalist property relations.
If Russia had achieved only five-tenths of socialism, there would be no need to be concerned with the recrudescence of capitalist ideology unless it was forcibly introduced over a period of years from the outside. In addition, Stalin’s Russia is a hermetically sealed land. Few ideas from the outside world penetrate its borders (unless there has been some disaffection brought back by the returning soldiers). Despite the claim of having achieved socialism, the regime has constantly to mobilize its police apparatus to combat “alien” ideology. This type, of struggle is employed as a method of combatting opponents of the regime; at the same time it is a reflection of the new exploitative character of the Russian social order.
 
Reflects a Wide Dissatisfaction
The masses who observe through their own experiences the character of Russian exploitation, the miserable factory conditions, the speed-up systems, piece-work payments, the immense poverty and deprivation on the one hand and the well-being of the bureaucracy on the other, are themselves influenced in part by the anti-socialist nature of the economic, political and social system that prevails. Older workers who lived under Tsarism, recall the similarities of exploitation between the two systems. The social system in Russia having a logic of its own, creates conditions under which socialist ideology cannot flourish; it can only be the property of revolutionists, who seek the overthrow of the regime and the social system which it has imposed. The regime itself, as an anti-socialist force, is a reactionary influence in the land.
Thus, almost thirty years after the revolution, the Kremlin continues to “combat survivals of private ownership among farmers, especially ip areas occupied by the Germans during the war, where hostile propaganda against the Soviet state structure and collective farming was carried out by the enemy.” The conscious, thinking, socialist worker must say to himself: How is it possible that after a decade and a half of socialism Russian workers and peasants could be influenced by such a reactionary movement as German fascism? It makes no sense ... that is, if you accept the premise that Russia is a socialist society. It does make sense if you accept that some elements of the population could have been influenced by the Germans because of the oppressive, class character of Russian society.
We consider this, however, to be the least important factor in the situation. The attack upon the farmers “in whose consciousness survivals of private ownership are still strong” is a reflection of a deep dissatisfaction with the rule of the bureaucracy which fattens off the labor of the workers and peasants. And what better instrument can the Kremlin employ against dissatisfaction among the people than to accuse dissident elements of representing capitalist ideology and capitalist restoration. The fact that these “survivals” are most noteworthy among peasants illustrates not only the strong urge for ownership among this class, but indicts the whole regime for its anti-socialist measures arid conduct. What is very likely true about some peasants, is certainly not a nationwide phenomenon. The workers and peasants of all Russia are not desirous of a return to capitalism.
The attack on the “backward elements” is related to Stalinist policy toward the Ukraine. The purge has been most inclusive there. A mass replacement of personnel in the state and party apparatus has taken place. One-half of the party leadership has been replaced in addition to 64 per cent of the presidents of executive committees of regional soviets; 38 per cent of all secretaries of regional committees of the party; two-thirds of all directors of machine and tractor stations. In the Sumi district of Northern Ukraine. 91 per cent of all presidents of executive committees of regional soviets have been changed. Eighty-three per cent in the Nicolaiev district and 83 per cent in the Rovno district were similarly removed.
 
Charges Have Familiar Ring
The charges have that familiar monotonous ring: “falsifying production figures”; “plans unfulfilled.” “fraud,” “machinery very poorly employed,” “careless attitude toward machinery,” work “badly organized,” “rotten liberalism and petty-bourgeois looseness.”
The report of Nikita S. Khruschev, principal secretary of the Communist Party of the Ukraine, criticized the training of party officials and called for the organization of six-month training courses for “soviet workers of district and village organizations.” He criticized the Central Committee of the party for not giving sufficient attention to “ideological-political training” which brought about a situation where “there are ideological mistakes and distortions and attempts to give rebirth to bourgeois-nationalist conceptions.” According to the New York Times, “some of these writers were accused of ‘idealizing the past.’”
It is obvious from the nature of the situation that Khruschev is not really deploring the lack of proper training of officials – it is inconceivable that the regime would appoint “untried and untrained” officials. What Kruschev is actually saying is that the Great Russian rule over the Ukrainians is meeting with difficulties. The Ukrainians are restless under the oppression of the Moscow regime and carry on, under the totalitarian regime, various forms of resistance to Stalin’s endless campaign to Russify the Ukraine. The officials have been found wanting in this campaign.
The charge that there are “attempts to give rebirth to bourgeois nationalist conceptions” is not really very funny coming from a tyrant who has introduced the worst kind of chauvinism into the nation. The difficulty of the regime is readily apparent: the Kremlin, which has resurrected Peter the Great, the old Tsarist generals, Gen. Chelmnitsky, the pogromist, and has decorated its own generals with diadems, medals and platinum stars in the manner of ancient potentates, is not opposed to great Russian nationalism; it is fighting the new growth of Ukrainian nationalism which cannot possibly develop except in a struggle against the Kremlin.
 
Revolutionary Policy in the Ukraine
The Ukrainian question is not new; the Bolsheviks had long ago adopted in its program the right of self-determination for the Ukraine even to the point of separation from the “Soviet Federation.” There was a struggle over this question in the Central Committee of the Bolshevik party in which Lenin vigorously opposed the Great Russian nationalism espoused by Stalin. In an important article written in 1939, Trotsky again issued the slogan of the independence of the Ukraine, precisely because under the Stalinist regime it became a necessity for the Ukrainian masses. He wrote:
“The Bolshevik Party, not without difficulty and only gradually under the constant pressure of Lenin, was able to acquire a correct approach to the Ukrainian question. The right of self-determination, that is, of separation, was extended by Lenin equally to the Poles and to the Ukrainians. He did not recognize aristocratic nations. Every inclination to evade or postpone the problem of an oppressed nationality he regarded as a manifestation of Great Russian chauvinism.”
Lenin constantly urged the government to “accede as far as possible to these nationalities that have been oppressed in the past. In the proposals and declarations of Stalin, on the contrary, the tendency to bureaucratic centralism was invariably pronounced. In order to guarantee ‘administrative needs,’ i.e., the interests of the bureaucracy, the most legitimate claims of the oppressed nationality were declared a manifestation of petty-bourgeois nationalism.”
The Stalinist regime, which has resurrected the Tsarist dream of “panslavism,” also demanded the unification of all Ukrainians during the war – after Hitler broke his pact with Stalin and invaded Russia. But prior to this demand for the unification of all Ukrainians in Eastern Europe who were oppressed by Poles, Rumanians and Hungarians, Stalin was ready to make various diplomatic deals against the best interest of these people, deals which violated their right of self-determination.
In the Ukraine, more than any other place, bureaucratic hooliganism has been employed against the longing of the masses for their freedom and independence. The regime combats the healthy and progressive character of Ukrainian nationalism with reactionary oppressive Great Russian nationalism. No wonder, then, that the Germans were able to make headway in the Ukraine by giving lip-service to the desire of large masses for national freedom. It is Stalin’s Great Russian nationalism in the Ukraine which gives rise to reactionary chauvinist sentiments among the people. But even this, on the scale of progress, is less offensive than the oppression “big power” policy of the Kremlin.
 
For Ukrainian Independence!
Thus, purges, changes in personnel, new policies, new practices, all take place by order from above without consultation with or the participation of the Ukrainians, except through Stalin’s hirelings. The masses of workers and peasants constantly feel the whip-lash of the bureaucracy and the dissatisfaction therefore is undoubtedly widespread. This is revealed in the very character of the present purge.
If it was correct to raise the slogan of the “independence of the Ukraine” almost ten years ago, it is even more important to do so now. In a dishonest way, and for reactionary diplomatic purposes, Stalin has unwittingly granted the validity of this slogan, as well as verified the position of Lenin and Trotsky by insisting that the Ukraine be accepted as an independent nation at the Paris Peace Conference and in the United Nations. This “formal” recognition, however, is counteracted by the real state of affairs, i.e., by the iron rule of the Kremlin over the country.
Thus, if the purges in the Ukraine are any symptom, they are a symptom of the immense dissatisfaction of the masses and their desire for genuine national freedom. The slogan, “For an Independent Ukraine,” is a progressive, revolutionary, socialist slogan which coincides completely with the interests of the socialist revolution. It becomes an indispensable measure in the struggle against Stalinist totalitarianism and counter-revolution.
 

Gates: Six Who Survived – What Happened at Hiroshima (23 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Six Who Survived: What Happened at Hiroshima
(23 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 38, 23 September 1946, pp. 3 & 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In its issue of August 31, The New Yorker magazine published a story of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima by John Hersey, described by the press as “sensational reporting.” All of its pages were devoted to it. This alone is unusual enough for a magazine whose stock-in-trade is humor and wit that caters to the “cultural needs” of the upper middle class? That it did so is due entirely to the earth-shaking (in a literal sense!) significance inherent in the discovery of the control of atomic energy, the danger to the future existence of mankind.
The story Hersey tells is a simple one. It is anything but “sensational.” He begins his narrative on the morning the bomb exploded, centering the whole sequence of events around six persons. These six survived the disintegration of the target area. He tells who they were, their occupations and additional duties created by the war, and what they were doing at the time of the explosion, following their movements, activities and reactions until the “healing of Hiroshima” began.
 
An Answer to Complacency and Pretense
No excess words are used in telling the world what actually happened to the city and its inhabitants. The power of the story, therefore, is found in its simplicity; fact piles up upon fact; one horrifying detail follows another. The disintegration of the city, the bewilderment of the people, the terrifying, unknown characteristics of a cataclysm – all of this is vividly portrayed by the simple words of the story, by its under-telling. In this way, Hersey will succeed in overcoming a great deal of the complacency which has grown up about the bomb in recent months as a result of “sensational” writing, the deliberate propaganda of the professional militarists of the War and Navy Departments and their brethren of other countries.
The exaggerations of sensationalism always tend to minimize the effectiveness of the reality. In the case of the atom bomb, the speculations of the scientists were so used to attach many unfounded attributes to the new discovery that a reaction of disbelief in its destructiveness inevitably followed.
Professional military men, congressmen and government functionaries, under the influence of the military caste, have carried on a public discussion of the atom bomb that was calculated to produce the above results. Where the scientists emphasize the inability to devise a defense for the atom bomb, we are given specious arguments about how many are needed to destroy a city; how the monopolization of the bomb by the United States grants it security and immunity; how an atomic bomb offensive will save this nation in the coming war. Or, we are treated to the spectacle of capitalist politicians espousing legislation which would create a totalitarian strait-jacket upon science for the purpose of keeping secret a scientific discovery which cannot be kept secret.
Thus, the real problem of the atom bomb, its unmatched, destructiveness and the peril it creates for the people, is diverted in a discussion on how large an army is now needed, whether the land forces required for war are greater dr less, whether naval warfare is obsolete, etc. All of these tend to divert attention away from the cruel fate which awaits mankind in a new war.
The Story of Six People Who Survived
The Hersey story pulls everything back into its proper perspective. The calculations of military “science,” the speculations of the brass hats and the politicians are lost in the reality of an atomic explosion on the people. Mr. Hersey takes us back to the morning of August 6, 1945. We are introduced to six people: Miss Toshiko Sasaki, a clerk in the East Asia Tin Works; Dr. Masakazi Fujii, reading the Osaka Asahi on the porch of his private hospital; Mrs. Hatsuyo Nakamura, a tailor’s widow, watching a neighbor tear down “his house because it lay in the path of an air-raid-defense fire lane”; Father Wilhelm Kleinsorge, a German priest of the Society of Jesus; Dr. Terufumi Sasaki, a young doctor on the surgical staff of the Red Cross Hospital, and the Rev. Kiyoshi Tanimoto, pastor of the Hiroshima Methodist Church.
These six were about their business on this morning. But there was no calm in their lives. They all knew that, of the important cities, only Kyoto and Hiroshima had not yet been visited by the destructive Mr. B, as the Japanese referred to the B-298. The tales of the destructiveness of mass raids on other cities were known by all. Hiroshima had already received many warnings. Its area seemed to be a guide-point in the air raids over the country. This had “made the citizens jittery; a rumor was going around that the Americans were saving something special for the city.”
The rumor was not ill-founded. Something special did come. “There was no sound of planes. The morning was still; the place was cool and pleasant. Then a tremendous flash of light out across the sky. Mr. Tanimoto has a distinct recollection that it traveled from east to west, from the city toward the hills. It seemed like a sheet of sun.”' (This was two miles from the center of the explosion.)
At a three-quarter mile point, “as Mrs. Nakamura stood watching her neighbor, everything flashed whiter than any white she had ever seen.” Dr. Fujii’s hospital on the Kyo River disintegrated. Father Kleinsorge said that the explosion “reminded him of something he had read as a boy about a large meteor colliding with the earth ... (he) never knew how he got out of the house. The next things he was conscious of were that he was wandering around in the mission’s vegetable garden in his underwear, bleeding slightly from cuts along his left flank; that all the buildings round about had fallen down except the Jesuit’s mission house which had been braced and double braced ...”
 
Nightmare Sweeps The City
Dr. Sasaki was at work at the hospital.
“He was one step beyond an open window when the light of the bomb was reflected, like a gigantic photographic flash, in the corridor, he ducked down on one knee ... then the blast ripped through the hospital (over two miles distant). The glasses he was wearing flew off his face; the bottle of blood (under examination) crashed against one wall; his Japanese slippers zipped out from under his feet ... The hospital was in horrible confusion; heavy partitions and ceilings had fallen on patients, beds had overturned, windows had blown in and cut people, blood was spattered on walls and floors, instruments were everywhere, many of the patients were running about screaming, many more lay dead.”
Nor was that all. The doctor thought only his building was hit by a bomb. But, “outside, all over Hiroshima, maimed and dying citizens turned their unsteady steps toward the Red Cross Hospital to begin an invasion that was to make Dr. Sasaki forget his private nightmare for a long, long time.”
The explosion was followed by fire. The physical collapse of a large part of the city and the fire made many streets unpassable. Streets and alleyways were clogged by debris and people. The flames from the wooden houses sought everything and everyone in its pathway. Attempts at firefighting were quickly turned back. The masses of dead, the tens of thousands of fleeing men, women and children, the falling houses and the absence of water made it impossible to even stem the spreading inferno. Only those still capable of fleeing escaped. Hundreds perished by running into the flames to save entrapped loved ones.
The six Hiroshimans all suffered the effects of the bomb. Cut from glass, radiation and fire burns, injuries from debris and falling objects – they all bore the marks of the “humane” atomic bomb. Like their fellow inhabitants, they searched for friends, gave first aid treatment, directed people to safer areas. The mass of humanity rushed for the extremities of the city; rich estates, the river banks, Asano Park. But wherever one went, the wounded crowds were already there; they brought with them their open wounds, their extreme pain and suffering. And they had to live through it Without water, or medical aid.
Miss Sasaki, with a badly broken leg which was later amputated, was brought to rest next to “a woman with a whole breast sheared off and a man whose face was all raw from a burn.” The rain which fell only made their existence more difficult since they had no shelter, no water and no food. The river rose and drowned hundreds of helplessly wounded people lying on its banks. The water grew hot from the flames to drown other hundreds trying to swim their way to safety.
And all of this, while no one, not a single person, city official, military man, or plain citizen, knew what had happened. They could not understand the absence of fleets of planes, for such destruction without a vast air armada was unthinkable. Some thought that a special kind of “Molotov flower basket” might have caused it. Others that the Americans had sprayed the city with gasoline and set it on fire. But none could guess that the weapon which had instantaneously wrought this undreamed of destruction was the atom bomb, newly discovered and created by world science, and produced by American capitalism.
 
The Living Did Not Escape
Soon people began to show the effects of radiation and atomic burns. Clothes and ornaments were burned into the bodies of people. Thirsty people drank from the dirty river which only intensified their illness. Others, apparently untouched in any way by the explosion, suddenly died. “Others were also nauseated; they thought (probably because of the strong odor of ionization, an ‘electric smell’ given off by the bombs’ fission) that they were sick from a gas the Americans had dropped.” Everywhere there were the dead and the dying. It seemed to the inhabitants as though the world had come to an end.
Ten thousand victims of the bomb had “invaded the Red Cross Hospital” seeking aid that could not be given to them. The handful of doctors that remained could do nothing for the people. Being ignorant of what had caused this explosion, unfamiliar with the nature of these strange wounds and without medical facilities, they painted mercurochrome on wounds and burns, or applied compresses of saline solution.
Mr. Hersey continues his story of the six Hiroshimans through the terrible days and nights which followed the explosion. He describes the deaths to many who appeared well; the falling hair, the nausea, the retching which beset hundreds and thousands. And finally the passing pf the blind bewilderment, the knowledge that they had lived through a veritable hell. Their city was destroyed; a hundred thousand of their relatives, neighbors and friends had perished by one bomb. Many who had survived would never again attain their former physical conditions. Thus, Hersey writes:
“A year after the bomb was dropped, Miss Sasaki was a cripple; Mrs. Nakamura was destitute; Father Kleinsorge was back in the hospital; Dr. Sasaki was not capable of the work he once could do; Dr. Fujii had lost the thirty-room hospital it took him many years to acquire and he had no prospects of rebuilding it; Mr. Tanimoto’s church had been ruined and he no longer had his exceptional vitality. The lives of these six people, who were among the luckiest in Hiroshima, would never be the same.”
 
Society Is Closer to the Crossroads
One cannot leave off reading Hiroshima without feeling the terrifying impact of the story. Its narrative power is not merely a striking example of genuinely honest reporting; its importance is established by the way in which Mr. Hersey describes what the atom bomb means to the people whom it strikes. The terror of these people, the loss of life, the destruction of homes and wealth, the wounded, the maimed, the torture, the utter barbarism that is created by imperialism and war – all of these are mirrored before your eyes to contrast with the ebullient declarations of professional militarists who talk about “keeping the secret,” give statistics on the size of armies, argue the need for more cannon-fodder, bigger navies, more fire-power, rockets, bacterial warfare, and prepare for new and bloodier wars.
One could wish that these protectors of profits, markets and raw materials, these dealers in human flesh, would taste the effects of an atom bomb, were it not that the destructiveness of atomic warfare would strike first at the millions of blameless people, the oppressed, exploited, and poor, producers of the wealth of the world. But one thing the atom bomb has done: it has put society a little closer to the crossroads: socialism or capitalist barbarism and death. This is the choice before mankind. Hersey’s story only enforces the necessity for making this choice.
 

Gates: The Heroic Period of the Comintern (September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Heroic Period of the Comintern
Trotsky and Revolutionary Strategy
(September 1946)

From The New International, Vol. XII No. 7, September 1946, pp.205-210.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The rich and noble history of the Communist International, formed in a period of tremendous class struggles, has yet to be written. Trotsky has contributed a considerable amount of material toward that history and a portion of it is now available in The First Five Years of the Communist International. [1] Since the formation of the Comintern in 1919, a new generation of revolutionaries has grown up. It knows little about the travail which attended its birth, the heroic period of its early growth, the tremendous figures – martyrs all – of the world revolutionary movement who directed its destinies, the body of Marxian theory which it developed, and the enormous contribution to strategy and tactics of revolutionary struggle which it gave as a legacy to the movement of today.
The Stalinist era is better known, being still with us. The crippling blows of its revisionism and then outright counterrevolutionary practices are felt with particular severity today in a period of the deepest depression the world revolutionary movement has ever known.
Since the failure of the German revolution of 1923, the proletariat has experienced little else but uninterrupted defeats, the rise of fascism and, finally, the chaos, destruction and mass misery of the Second World War. Some have learned to associate crafty politics, opportunism, bureaucracy, ruthless-ness, deception, assassination and counter-revolution with the whole history of the Communist International, unaware that the pre-Stalinist era of the Comintern contains within it the lessons for the future emancipation of the proletariat.
The material in Trotsky’s book has an extraordinary value for us in the present historical period. We have just lived through a second imperialist war and are in the midst of a post-war period of capitalist decay on a world scale. The re-emergence of imperialist rivalries occur even before the dead of this war have all been buried. Disequilibrium remains the basic characteristic of present-day economic, social and political life. Thus, all the objective conditions for the revolutionary overthrow of world capitalism are overripe.
 
Two Post-War Periods
The war, as could have been foreseen, was unable to solve any of the problems of imperialism. In this respect, then, the post-war conditions of 1945-46 are approximately identical to the post-war conditions of 1918-19. This similarity in the objective condition of world capitalism between the two postwar periods is, however, of no fundamental importance. It is the dissimilarity in the subjective conditions, between the two periods, namely, the state of the world revolutionary movement, which is of quintessential importance. And on these grounds it is necessary to say the proletariat of the present period, in contrast to 1918-19, finds itself in an unfavorable position. In 1918-19 there was a revolutionary movement on the Continent. The Russian proletariat had taken power. Shortlived Soviet republics existed in Bavaria and Hungary. The first German revolution had begun and the Italian workers were preparing to seize the factories. In all other countries the revolutionary movement was growing swiftly. The formation of the Communist International, as the guide and spirit of the world-wide upsurge of the revolutionary movement was itself a factor of inestimable value for giving the elemental movement organization and direction. But even then, as we shall see, the weaknesses of the revolutionary party, i. e., of revolutionary leadership, or the absence of such leadership, resulted in the defeat of the proletariat of Europe and the isolation of the Russian Revolution!
To begin with the subjective factor first because in “the epoch of wars and revolutions” it is the decisive factor, one must acknowledge that it does not exist today in any formidable shape or form. Certainly it does not exist in any comparable degree to the movement of 25 years ago. Except for the tiny organizations of the Fourth Internationalist movement, there is nothing on the Continent which resembles the mass revolutionary parties of the first post-war period. Moreover, there is no continuity of leadership or organization. Add to this, the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and the reactionary influence of Stalinism and you have the explanation for the absence of great class battles in Europe, where the decay of capitalism is far deeper than it has ever been before. We shall seek the explanation for this a little further on. But first, to return to the formation of the Communist International.
 
War and the International
The Communist International was not an insidious product of the Russian Bolsheviks, as the bourgeois and social democratic critics of the International maintained. The victory of the Russian Revolution coming on the heels of the collapse of the Second International in the war, made it inevitable that the re-emergence of a new world organization of the proletariat would take place in revolutionary Moscow. How else could it have happened? The Second International was rent by social chauvinism. The leading parties which dominated the International and controlled its policies were at war with each other, having joined their respective ruling classes in the imperialist conflict. The official organizations of the working class, parties, trade unions, fraternal societies and cooperatives, under the leadership of traitors, merged with the state apparati of the warring powers and were drenched in the flood-waters of imperialist nationalism. What an inglorious chapter in the history of proletarian struggle! The “socialists” at war with each other! Over what? The imperialist interests of their respective ruling classes! No wonder the bourgeoisie snickered and marveled at its own imagined power.
The collapse of the International made inevitable the formation of a new world body. After the fateful day of August 4, 1914, new organizations, groups, and factions of revolutionary internationalists made themselves heard all over Europe. Under the leadership of the Russian Bolsheviks and the brave revolutionists of the other Continental countries, a new voice was heard in the din of the war: the voice of revolutionary socialist internationalism. Zimmerwald and Kienthal were the first organized expression of the revival of internationalism in the workers movement in the midst of the war. The Russian Revolution then occurred as the mightiest force for the reconstitution of the new, Third International. The victory of the Russian working class was like a fresh breeze on a Europe befouled by imperialism and the treacherous social democratic leadership.
Given these conditions it was logical that the International be reconstituted on the soil of revolutionary Russia which heralded the new society, the new fraternity of the exploited. With the convening of the founding congress in Moscow on March 2, 1919, the continuity and integrity of the revolutionary socialist thought and practice was saved. Its formation marked a new stage and task for the modern proletariat.
 
Role of the Internationals
The First International “laid the foundation of the international struggle of the proletariat for Socialism.” It disseminated the scientific principles of socialism developed by Marx and Engels and destroyed for all time the power and influence of utopianism, “true” socialism and anarcho-communism, and gave the coming movement of the proletariat its scientific basis. The First International of Marx and Engels disappeared with the defeat of the Paris Commune and the beginning of a new epoch in the expansion of world capitalism. But it had sown the seed of the future.
In assessing the role of the Second International, one must not lose sight of the fact that it too had a grand history. There was the International of Engels, the elder Liebknecht and of Bebel, just as there was the International of MacDonald, Bernstein, Scheidemann, and Hillquit. Before its collapse in the Great War, the Second International had been a preparatory school of working class organization. And Lenin, in an historical appraisal of this body, once wrote:
When it is stated that the Second International is dead and has suffered shameful bankruptcy, it needs to be properly understood. It signifies death and bankruptcy of opportunism, reformism, petty bourgeois socialism. For the Second International has to its credit a service ELS A’EI (for all time) which no intelligent working man will ever repudiate, and that is – the building up of mass labor organizations, co-operative, trade union and political; the utilization of bourgeois parliamentarism, and generally all bourgeois democratic institutions, etc.”
The Communist International took over all that was good in the previous history of the Second International, but it gave the new movement a rekindled spirit of internationalism, the lack of which caused the old organization to founder. The historic place of the Communist International is thus secured by the fact that it became the International of proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat, the “International of the deed.”
Trotsky’s book is a summation of this heroic period of the Communist International. It presents one of the most stirring stories of an era of intense class struggle and presents a panorama of revolutionary strategy, purposeful in design, by the most complete revolutionary internationalists the world has ever known. Trotsky contributed an enormous amount of this history himself. The vibrant call of the manifesto of the first congress was his. He wrote the manifesto of the second congress. The main report at the third congress and the theses of that gathering, perhaps the most important in the history of the Comintern, were also his. Between these great documents, there are speeches and articles outlining the strategy of the Comintern which remain living documents to this very day and are invaluable source material to revolutionary Marxist thought.
 
II.
This volume of Trotsky’s book can be readily divided into two distinct periods: the First and Second Congresses, and the Third Congress. The first two gatherings occur in the post-war revolutionary period; the third in the period following the defeat of the European proletariat in its initial struggles for power. Unavoidably, then, the material which composed the deliberation of these congresses dealt with the problems which arose in the transition from the stage of proletarian offensive to defensive; from the stage of capitalist decomposition to one of relative stabilization.
The First Congress of the Communist International was held in Moscow on March 2, 1919. It was attended by 51 delegates from 17 countries. The Allied blockade of Russia prevented wider representation. Delegates sent by their respective organizations never arrived in Moscow, but representatives of the most important areas of Europe were present.
As the organizing congress of the Communist International, the first meeting had a provisional character. Yet it was to clear away the ideological debris of social democracy and its traditions and set the theoretical sights of the new world party. Convening in the midst of the social decay of capitalism and proletarian struggle for state power, the congress naturally reflected the intense revolutionary situation in Europe. If one bears in mind the confusion created by the betrayals of the Second International, it will be easier to understand why the Congress dealt with the following subjects: Bourgeois Democracy and Proletarian Dictatorship; the Berne Conference and our Attitude Toward Socialist Tendencies; the World Situation and the Policy of the Entente, and the Manifesto.
 
Manifesto of the First Congress
The manifesto which Trotsky wrote and presented to the congress clearly delineates the purposes of the new international and the period in which it emerged: Capitalist chaos and disintegration! Mass unrest and a will to struggle on the part of the working masses. Toward the revolutionary seizure of Power! No wonder the manifesto is a stirring call to action:
“Our task is to generalize the revolutionary experience of the working class, to purge the movement of the corroding admixture of opportunism and social patriotism, to unify the efforts of all genuinely revolutionary parties of the world proletariat and thereby facilitate and hasten the victory of the Communist revolution throughout the world.”
And it concludes with this ringing challenge:
“Bourgeois world order has been sufficiently lashed by Socialist criticism. The task of the International Communist Party consists in overthrowing this order and erecting in its place the edifice of the socialist order. We summon the working men and women of all countries to unite under the Communist banner which is already the banner of the first great victories.
“WORKERS OF THE WORLD – in the struggle against imperialist barbarism, against monarchy, against the privileged estates, against the bourgeois state and bourgeois properly, against all kinds and forms of class or national oppression – UNITE!
“Under the banner of Workers’ Soviets, under the banner of revolutionary struggle for power and the dictatorship of the proletariat, under the banner of the Third International – WORKERS OF THE WORLD UNITE!”
The manifesto of 1919 became a rallying force for the new world organization of the revolutionary proletariat. Eighteen months later the Second Congress convened. This intervening period was the most revolutionary in the history of Europe. Throughout the continent the Communist International established new sections. Its growth was phenomenal and reflected the turbulent character of the class war that girdled the globe. Thus, the Second Congress concerned itself chiefly with the struggle for power as an immediate prospect.
 
Theoretical Clarity and Political Struggle
Clarification of principle became indispensable for the future development of the new movement; a world party engaged in the struggle for power in the name of the only progressive class in society.
As in all periods of revolutionary upswing, the movement attracted dubious elements of every description, organized in their own parties, factions or groups, or unattached. These hybrid elements brought with them an assortment of theoretical and political ideas which ran the gamut from sectarianism to opportunism. The excursion train was a long one and tended to slow the progress of the revolutionary engine at its head. The congress therefore had to return to basic principles: the role of a revolutionary party, shall revolutionaries participate in parliamentary activity?; shall Communists work in reactionary trade unions? On all these questions, the congress rejected the sterile doctrines of sectarianism which could only lead to isolation from the masses. It then adopted conditions for admission into the Communist International, the basic premise of which was the acceptance of the revolutionary doctrines of Marxism.
The continuation of the intensive revolutionary offensive was also reflected in the manifesto of the Second Congress which Trotsky wrote, too. So sure of the future were the leaders of the International, that the manifesto, issued again as a call to action, proclaimed:
“Civil war is on the order of the day throughout the world. Its banner is the Soviet Power ... In different countries the struggle is passing through different stages. But it is the final struggle.”
How nearly true these stirring words were, we can only appreciate in retrospect. The failure of the victory, however, was revealed as a failure of leadership! Only a few years afterward, Trotsky was able to write:
“War did not lead directly to the victory of the proletariat in Western Europe. It is all too obvious today just what was lacking for victory in 1919 and 1920: a revolutionary party was lacking.”
This statement by Trotsky is in apparent contradiction to the reality, the existence of the Communist International. Yet, actually, its formation was belated. Had the Communist International been formed during the war, it is likely that the parties which adhered to it would have passed through their formative, preparatory stages in time. Instead, the First and Second Congresses met in the course of the revolutionary wave and had to carry through the task of clarification and education during the battles itself. Thus, the struggle for power was pursued in the midst of a process of clarification and education in which the advance guard of the proletariat had to discard the ideological trash of social democracy and to learn, for the first time, the theory and practice of revolutionary Marxism, of revolutionary strategy and tactics. Before this process of rearming was nearly completed, the revolutionary wave had passed.
In his Third International After Lenin, Trotsky wrote of this period between the second and third congresses, relating specifically to the lack of maturity of the communist parties:
“When we looked forward at that time to an immediate seizure of power by the proletariat, we reckoned that a revolutionary party would mature rapidly in the fire of the civil war. But the two terms did not coincide. The revolutionary wave of the post-war period ebbed before the communist parties grew up and reached maturity in the struggle with the social democracy so as to assume the leadership of the insurrection.”
(Henceforth, in at least four other significantly revolutionary situations, especially in Germany in 1923, the defeats of the proletariat were attributable to a new failure in leadership resulting this time from the degeneration of the Communist International under the aegis of Stalinist revisionism.)
 
Foundation of Internationalism
But before the Third Congress had convened, the leaders of the Comintern had sufficiently clarified theoretical questions and, above all, established the international character of the movement as its primary manifestation. Reflecting the international character of capitalism (the interdependence of nations, the primacy of the world market, the world division of labor and exchange of goods), the Comintern was not a “sum” of national parties each devoted to their national tasks. “It is,” as Trotsky wrote, “the Communist Party of the international proletariat.” As such it “represents a unified, independent, international organization, pursuing definite and precisely formulated aims through definitive revolutionary means.”
Corresponding to the imperialist epoch, the proletarian struggle was essentially “international in substance but national in form.” No party can estimate the objective situation in its country, or develop strategy and tactics for its working class, without giving first consideration to the international situation and the condition of the world movement of the proletariat. For a party to do otherwise would result in its degeneration after the manner of the Second International.
These ideas hammered home, the CI arrived at its very important Third Congress. The revolutionary wave, as we have already indicated, had subsided. The proletariat, worn out from years of war and revolutionary struggle, exhibited marked tendencies of fatigue and disillusionment at the failure of their revolutionary parties. The failure of the revolution gave capitalism a new breathing spell and the opportunity to reestablish a measure of economic equilibrium.
 
A Turn in Strategy
The Third Congress which met mid-year of 1921, was attended by more than 500 delegates from 48 countries. The most important subject before the congress was the report made by Trotsky (in complete agreement with Lenin) on the World Economic Crisis and the New Tasks of the Communist International. The main content of this report and the resolution which formed its basis is already indicated. In summary, Trotsky’s report showed the delegates the dialectical relationship between an objectively revolutionary situation and the problem of leadership, the subjective element. He illustrated, by example, how the failure of the revolution gave world capitalism the opportunity for reorganizing the chaotic economy and reestablishing a measure of stabilization. Given the failure of the revolutionary parties, the exhaustion of the proletariat, Trotsky was able to pose for the first time since the end of the war this type of question:
“Does development actually proceed even now in the direction of revolution! Or is it necessary to recognize that capitalism has succeeded in coping with the difficulties arising from the war? And if it has not already restored, is it either restoring or close to restoring capitalist equilibrium upon new post-war foundations?”
The report already indicated the answer in its opening remarks in which Trotsky said:
“Capitalist equilibrium is an extremely complex phenomenon. Capitalism produces this equilibrium, disrupts it, restores it anew in order to disrupt it anew, concurrently extending the limits of its domination ... Capitalism thus possesses a dynamic equilibrium, one which is always in the process of either disruption or restoration. But at the same time this equilibrium has a great power of resistance, the best proof of which is the fact that the capitalist world has not toppled to this day.”
There follows a mass of evidence indicating how capitalism was gaining strength and confidence, repairing its tottering economy, plugging gaps here and there and reaching the road toward a stabilization of the system. “The bourgeoisie gains appeasement” said Trotsky. But with this difference: whereas in the period of capitalist growth and expansion, crises were of brief duration and “prosperity” longer lasting, in this period of capitalist decay and decline, the “crises are of a prolonged character while the booms are fleeting, superficial and speculative.” Thus the prospects of economic crises and sharp dislocations are ever present. Then Trotsky made clear that even boom and stabilization did not automatically preclude the prospects of great class struggle. On the contrary, a favorable economic conjuncture can “reassemble the demoralized and devitalized workers who had lost their courage.” And then he added, “Such a change (stabilization) could prove harmful only in the event of a long epoch of prosperity.” Denying this prospect, Trotsky contends that the future will offer favorable opportunities for victory. And it did.
 
The “Uninterrupted Revolution”
The emphasis given to this problem by Trotsky was made necessary by the presence at the congress of an ultra-leftist faction led by Bucharin whose major premise was his own version of the “permanent revolution”:
“Since capitalism had exhausted itself, therefore the victory must be gained through an uninterrupted revolutionary offensive.”
It was against this pernicious theory of the “uninterrupted revolutionary offensive” that the big guns of the conference were turned. The report declared that the great task, in view of the changing world situation, was to win the support of the majority of the working class everywhere. “To the Masses,” became the slogan of the Congress. But not simply that. “To power through a previous conquest of the masses!” The emphasis laid on this point was to defeat all ultra-leftist and sectarian ideas which arose in the congress. The ultra-leftists proceeded on a single note: this is the period of the decay of capitalism. All the objective conditions for the overthrow of capitalism are ripe. Therefore we must adopt the policy of “continuous revolution.” And in this way they overlooked the dynamics of the revolutionary struggle and the fact that “the revolution has its own fluctuations, its own crises and its own favorable conjunctures.”
The Third Congress, however, met at the end of one wave of revolution. It was necessary to reorient the International to a new stage of the struggle. This stage Trotsky summarized in the Third International After Lenin as follows:
“The Third Congress of the Comintern was a milestone demarcating the first and second periods. It set down the fact that the resources of the communist parties, politically as well as organizationally, were not sufficient for the conquest of power. It advanced the slogan: ‘To the Masses,’ that is, to the conquest of power through a previous conquest of the masses, achieved on the basis of the daily life and struggles. For the mass also continues to live its daily life in a revolutionary epoch, even if in a somewhat different manner.”
And out of this congress came the tactic of the united front to serve as a means of developing the class struggle and achieving leadership of the masses. How? Through the united front tactic, to fuse the masses “on the basis of transitional demands!”
“It is economics that decides,” wrote Trotsky, “but only in the last analysis.” In other words, it is not merely the decay of capitalism, the “objectively revolutionary situation” which is decisive, but the state of the revolutionary movement, the maturity of the parties, their leadership over the masses, the will to struggle on the part of the proletariat and their confidence in the revolutionary party. And the absence of these conditions, given the defeat of the post-war revolutionary movements, brought about a new political stage in Europe and the decisions of the Third Congress.
 
III.
Capitalism saved itself, but it was a wounded giant. The healing process left it alive but it was not the youthful, strong, expanding capitalism. The fact was, as Trotsky reported at the Third Congress, that “Europe has been hurled back ... The Balkan countries are completely ruined and have been thrown back into the economic and cultural conditions of barbarism.” He speaks of a “regression in economic life.” However, all is not lost for the bourgeoisie so long as the proletariat does not take power.
In 1921, still living under the influence of the post-war revolutionary situation, Trotsky did not believe that capitalism could survive another decade or two. But he did postulate the future, saying:
“If we grant – and let us grant it for the moment – that the working class fails to rise in revolutionary struggle, but allows the bourgeoisie the opportunity to rule the world’s destiny for a long number of years, say, two or three decades, then assuredly some sort of new equilibrium will be reestablished. Europe will be thrown violently into reverse gear. Millions of European workers will die from unemployment and malnutrition. The United States will be compelled to reorient itself on the world market, reconvert its industry, and suffer curtailment for a considerable period. Afterwards, after a new world division of labor is thus established in agony for 15 or 20 or 25 years, a new epoch of capitalist upswing might perhaps ensue.” (Emphasis in original – A.G.)
How prophetic Trotsky was! A new upswing has not occurred and will likely never occur. But a new period of stabilization did arrive. The United States did orient itself on the world market and did “suffer curtailment for a considerable period.” This whole course of development continued approximately until the outbreak of the Second World War. For a second time within living memory the imperialist powers went to war to seek a new redivision of the earth.
But whereas in 1914 it was possible to depict the great revolutionary upheavals during and after the war, one could not justifiably make such predictions for the recent war and post-war period. And this was due, not to the absence of favorable objective conditions. This period of capitalism remains a period of “wars and revolutions,” of capitalist decline and disintegration. This past war was far more destructive than the first, far more dislocating in its effects. If Trotsky declared that Europe was “hurled back” after the First World War, what would he have said today! If the Balkan countries lived under “economic and cultural conditions of barbarism” in the ’20’s, what can one say of Europe today, Europe of the concentration camps, labor camps, forced migrations of peoples; Europe, the economic wasteland. These, then, are the fruits of modern capitalism.
 
The Meaning of the Struggle for Power
Why did not the proletariat revolt and take power after World War II? Why no class battles, no revolutionary offensive comparable to 1919 and 1920? The answer is simple: no revolutionary organization of the working class; no revolutionary parties.
Revolutionary Marxists cannot approach this question sentimentally or emotionally. One must apply the power of Marxist analysis to the world situation in order to understand precisely the conditions under which we live, what the prospects of the class struggle are, and how the revolutionary socialists must orient themselves.
Delusion is the greatest danger to the movement today! The delusion lies in the failure to recognize that all talk of an immediate successful overthrow of capitalism in this period is criminally disorienting given the absence of the revolutionary organization of the proletariat, the absence of mass revolutionary parties, the absence of experienced cadres, i.e., leadership, and the absence of a revolutionary international with authority over and the following of the majority of the working class of Europe.
Yet it is upon such leadership and proletarian organization that the whole future depends. If one does not recognize this task, then the reconstruction of the movement is an impossibility!
Can a small party (not of hundreds, but of thousands) achieve the strategic goal? Perhaps. Says Trotsky:
“And therefore if it is true – and it is true – that under certain conditions even a small party can become the leading organization not only of the labor movement but also of the workers’ revolution, this can happen only with the proviso that this small party discerns in its smallness not an advantage but the greatest misfortune of which it must be rid as speedily as possible.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
This was said against those who developed putschist concepts and the idea that the revolution is the task of a small minority party whose will is decisive, no matter what the objective conditions and the state of proletarian organization.
“A purely mechanical conception, of the proletarian revolution,” said Trotsky, “which proceeds solely from the fact that capitalist economy continues to decay – has led certain groups of comrades to construe theories which are false to the core: the false theory of an initiating minority which by its heroism shatters ‘the wall of universal passivity’ among the proletariat. The false theory of uninterrupted offensives conducted by the proletarian vanguard, as a ‘new method’ of struggle; the false theory of partial battles which are waged by-applying the methods of armed insurrection.... It is absolutely self-evident that tactical theories of this sort have nothing in common with Marxism ... The economic preconditions for the victory of the working class are at hand. Failing this victory, and moreover unless this victory comes in the more or less near future, all civilization is menaced with decline and degeneration. But this victory can be gained only by the skilled conduct of battles and, above all, by first conquering the majority of the working class. This is the main lesson of the Third Congress.”
 
The Effect of Prolonged Defeats
We continue to live in the epoch of “wars and revolutions.” But that docs not wholly describe our epoch. It is also the epoch of Stalinist counter-revolution which has burst forth from the failure of the European revolution and the persistent decay of imperialist capitalism. The past twenty years have been years in which the proletariat of Europe and the colonial peoples of Asia have suffered uninterrupted defeats. These defeats have taken a heavy toll, but heaviest has been the destruction of the revolutionary world organization of the proletariat. Nor is there an end of “favorable prospects,” of “revolutionary objective situations.” There is much evidence of the deep dissatisfaction of the masses throughout Europe and the colonial world. There have been many struggles already in Italy, France, Belgium, etc., many more will follow. These struggles have the potentiality of great class battles for power. But all of them pass by so long as the instrument to take advantage of these “favorable objective conditions,” i.e., the revolutionary party, synthesized in the revolutionary international, does not exist. It is true, compared to the great movement of the Second International, the revolutionaries during the last war were small in number. But the recuperative powers of the then undefeated working class were yet great. There was in existence a Bolshevik Party. The Russian proletariat had taken power and the working class thereby had a fortress embracing “one-sixth of the earth.” Parties were formed in the heat of the battle. The hope of the Russian Revolution was an international unifying force.
How does the present post-war situation, from this point of view, compare to that period? Unfavorably. The only revolutionary socialist force in the world is represented by the Fourth Internationalist movement, small in number and isolated from the masses. It is necessary to recognize this fact, for it is impossible to change this situation, to grow, to become a mass movement by sell-deception. If you already believe that you are a mass movement, that you are a force to contend with, and that power is... well, almost yours, then it is impossible for you to do what is indispensably necessary to insure the future: rebuild the world revolutionary socialist movement, rebuild the revolutionary parties in all countries. Without this, the immediate future lies in the hands of capitalist reaction and Stalinism.
The world revolutionary socialist movement suffers from a crisis in leadership and organization. That is the outstanding feature of this post-war period. It is necessary to repeat this over and over again since the special and fundamental reason for the primacy of this factor lies precisely in the character of our epoch. Again, in the Third International After Lenin, Trotsky summarized the problem from the following viewpoint:
“The role of the subjective factor in a period of slow, organic development (of capitalism) can remain quite a subordinate one. Then diverse proverbs of gradualism arise as: ‘slow but sure,’ and ‘one must not kick against the bricks,’ and so forth, which epitomize all the tactical wisdom of an organic epoch that abhorred ‘leaping over stages.’ But as soon as the objective prerequisites have matured, the key to the whole historical process passes into the hands of the subjective factor, that is the party. Opportunism which consciously or unconsciously thrives upon the inspiration of the past epoch, always lends to underestimate the role of the subjective factor, that is, the importance of the party and of revolutionary leadership.”
However, can the present situation be changed? Can it change quickly? Yes. This social order has known many swift transformations. But that depends on how the Fourth Internationalists recognize the problem and judge the tasks ahead. Trotsky’s book is a guide to this epoch, a textbook in strategy and tactics. To absorb its teachings is the first guarantee of success. Unfortunately, the official Fourth Internationalist movement has not yet understood the monumental ideas which Trotsky, in common with the other deceased giants of the Comintern, had developed, It talks of power without a party, of the revolutionary offensive without a movement. It pretends to be what it is not: the leader of the European and American proletariat. It takes for granted what is yet to be accomplished. And all of this is done in the name of Trotsky!
It is impossible to close this review of one of the greatest books in Marxian literature without a comment on its editors. That the publication of the book is an invaluable contribution to the movement, goes without saying. The explanatory notes, however, arc sloppily done and unscholarly. They give all the evidence of slip-shod work and petty factional bias, lacking in objectivity.
But even worse than this is the introduction to the book. Nature and God were unkind to Joseph Hansen. They enabled him to write and what flows from his pen is indeed a commentary on the intellectual sterility of the theoreticians of the SWP. The introduction has no relation to the ideas in the book. Banalities and assertions replace reality. Sectarian braggadoccio substitute for the living movement. Thus, the introduction reaches its high point (or low, depending on your point of view) when Hansen asserts:
“... the organizations of the Fourth International ... find the world working class far more receptive to the program of Bolshevism than was the case in 1917-19.”
Were this only true! But one blinks his eyes upon reading such undiluted bureaucratic smugness which proclaims achieved that which is yet to be achieved, which counts as completed that which has to be done. Is it any wonder that the forces of the Fourth International make such slow progress? That despite the heroic activities of the European sections, they have failed to grow more rapidly. One of the reasons for this failure is that the concepts and practices of the SWP have exercised too great an influence upon these European sections. These sections have not absorbed the great teachings of Trotsky, the theoretician of revolutionary strategy and tactics of our era. They too are saturated with a sectarianism which casts a shadow over what is the main strategic task of our period: the building of the revolutionary socialist party.
 
Footnote
1. The First Five Years of the Communist International, by Leon Trotsky. Pioneer Publishers. 320 pp.
 

National Unrest in Ukraine Behind Stalin’s 3 UN Votes (16 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
National Unrest in Ukraine Behind Stalin’s 3 UN Votes
(16 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 37, 16 September 1946, S. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In last week’s issue of Labor Action we discussed the latest purges in Russia and the issue of Ukrainian independence. We pointed out that the question of national rights and freedom for the Ukraine were granted the country by Lenin’s Bolshevik regime as a matter of principle, even to the point of granting the Ukraine the right to separation.
For many years now the Ukraine and its people have been subjected to oppression at the hands of a Great Russian nationalism under Stalin as severe as any they suffered under Czarist absolutism. The war and the Nazi occupation of the Ukraine merely lifted the veil which covered that country and showed that the deep nationalist aspirations of its people, which reached their highest fruition under the socialist policy of the Bolshevik regime, had burst open again during the early military defeat of the Russian armies.
That the promises of independence made by the German fascists was used solely as a propaganda measure to win support of the Ukraine in the war, goes without saying. But the fact that the Germans could successfully utilize elements of Stalin’s Ukrainian army and large sections of the population, is an indictment of Stalin’s regime and policies of national oppression which it employs.
 
What Stalin Demanded
Many readers will recall that when the United Nations was organized at San Francisco it had before it a proposal to grant Russia three votes on the ground that White Russia and the Ukraine would be represented as independent nations. At that time the only explanation given for this demand accepted at Yalta by Roosevelt and Churchill, was that it gave Stalin a larger vote in a body in which voting blocs were stacked against him.
But last week, James Reston, New York Times correspondent at the UN meeting at Lake Success, discloses that Stalin gave another reason for his demand. As he related the story, Reston writes that when Stalin first raised this question, Roosevelt said that if this demand was made, he (Roosevelt) would demand forty-eight votes for the American States. Stalin is reported to have walked around the table and confronted Roosevelt again and said, “‘for internal reasons’ he had to have two extra votes for the Ukraine and White Russia.”
Had this been reported at the time, there would have been reason for the average person not to take this seriously. But in the light of what is happening in Russia today, particularly in the Ukraine, it is obvious that in addition to the undoubted advantage it would give Russia in the Councils of the UN, Stalin needed this concession in order to strengthen his position in the Ukraine. Undoubtedly the country seethed with resentment against the Moscow regime.
All the reports on the new vast purge reveal that it is most severe in the Ukraine, not for reasons given by the regime in other parts of Stalin’s domain, but for particular reasons which have been of long standing in that country.
 
For Independence
The October Revolution had promised the long-suffering Ukrainians a new life in a new social milieu – complete national freedom in a federation of soviet states. Special concessions were given to a country which gave birth to many national movements and many forms of the national struggle for independence. These rights, which the regime of Lenin and Trotsky gave freely, include the right to use the Ukrainian language and to develop their folk lore, theater and history. With the advent of Stalinism, the Kremlin carried on a reign of national, cultural and intellectual terror against the Ukraine. The present campaign against “bourgeois nationalism” in the Ukraine is merely a cover for imposing on it “Great Russian” nationalism.
Stalin’s demand on Roosevelt and Churchill revealed that the struggle in the Ukraine was as continuous as it was widespread. The demand for a Ukrainian vote in the UN was an attempt to show the Ukrainian masses that they were an independent nation recognized even by the powers of the world. But this formal “concession” to Ukrainian nationalism is unavailing, for the people of the Ukraine understand as well as anyone else that the votes cast in their name by Stalin’s handpicked “leaders of the nation” have nothing in common with their independence.
For the many reasons given in our article of last week the slogan: For the Independence of Ukraine remains a living and vital slogan in the interests of its people. It is a crucial issue in the struggle against Stalinism and one of the most formidable slogans in the fight for socialism.
 

Gates: National Budget Reveals Growth of Militarism (16 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
“How Much Is $41 Billion?”
National Budget Reveals Growth of Militarism
(16 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 37, 16 September 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“How much is $41 billion?,” asks the Bulletin of the National City Bank of New York, one of the largest financial institutions in the world. The $41 billion in the question, represents the new government budget for the year ending June, 1947. Its significance may be made clearer when it is realized that the little noticed budget report made by President Truman for the “single peacetime year ending June 30, 1947” contemplates “expenditures ... more than in the THREE YEARS of World War I, more than in the entire DECADE of the twenties, and more than in the FIVE YEARS of liberal spending just before the outbreak of World War II. It is twenty-six per cent of the estimated total national income, and imposes a tax burden of around $1,000 on the average American family.” (Emphasis in the Bulletin)
Of course, the $1,000 average does not mean that every American family pays such a tax, although taxes for the average American are vastly higher than they have ever been, higher than even the highest paid worker can afford to pay. But it does mean that the taxes on big business, the monopolies, corporations and all enterprises, as well as upon individual capitalists and those with high incomes, are not reduced to levels which they desire.
 
New Role of American Capitalism
The present boom in economy, featured by a high level of employment, high production, high inventories and the maintenance of the national income at near war-peak levels, has caused the proposed expenditures in the budget to be overlooked. Yet the division of the budget reveals concretely the new role of American capitalism in the world of today and how it is reflected in domestic policy.
One can extract from its figures the drift of American foreign policy from isolation to intervention in world events and the dependence of its economy on that of the world. The cause for the changes in the budget is due to that more than anything else. For the budget, the largest in the peacetime history of the United States, is concentrated on military expenditures in preparation for new economic, political and military struggles on a world scale.
For example, the budget for the year 1939 was $8,707 billion. For 1947, it is $41,539 billion, or an increase of $83,832 billion. The Bulletin aptly says: “With the wartime experience so close behind us – when public funds were poured out in profusion ... our sensibilities have been dulled.” They certainly have. The tremendous expenditures which are called for are not for the purpose of vast public works, unemployment relief, i.e., for plugging the breaks in a collapsing economy. This is a budget based upon an existing economic boom, irrespective of its artificial and temporary character.
 
Eighteen Billion for “National Defense”
Of the $41,539 billion, a little less than half, or $18,505 billion is for “national defense.” Over $4 billion is for international finance, indicating the involvement of American imperialism in the world economy. Here is a summarized table of comparison in the national defense budget of 1939 and 1947, the year of peace.



 


Fiscal Years
ending June 30




1939


1947




(in billions of dollars)




War Department


$  490


$  8,060




Navy Department


    673


    5,150




Terminal leave personnel


        0


    2,418




U.S. Maritime Commission


      44


       290




War Shipping Administration


        0


       412




Other (including UNRRA)


        0


    2,178




National Defense subtotal


$1,206


$18,508



Other elements in the budget show that veterans pensions and benefits have increased from $557 million to $6,205 billion. This is an item which properly belongs to “national defense” and war expenditures to which it is entirely related. The same can be said of $4,168 billion for international finance (nothing was spent in this field in 1939) which is a reflection of the new world position of the United States. It is an item which not only emerges from the political and diplomatic problems of the war, but is intimately related to the drive of the imperialists toward a new War.
Add these respective figures together and you will find that the new budget calls for an expenditure of $28,881 billion for “national defense” and war out of a total budget of $41,539.
Why should it be necessary for the government to expend almost three-quarters of the largest peacetime budget in American history for “national defense” after the war has been fought and won? For the simple reason which Labor Action has repeatedly suggested; this was no war for democracy or peace; it was a war between imperialist's struggling for a new re-division of the world. The military phase of the war between the powers has ended. But just as World War I did not and could not solve the problems of imperialist. capitalism, so this war did not solve them. No sooner had World War II ended when the erstwhile Allies, organized in the so-called United Nations, began the terrible new struggle for world domination. And because war has not been eliminated as “a way of life” of capitalism, the powers have begun preparations for the next war.
This does not mean that the war will break out tomorrow. But it does mean that preparations for the next war are not being postponed; each power waits in readiness for it.
 
And Two Billion for Peacetime Uses
In contrast to the especially high expenditures for national defense and war is the declining expenditures for peacetime purposes. Here are some of the figures:



 


Fiscal Years ending June 30,




1939


1947




(in billions of dollars)




Social security, relief and retirement funds


$2,984


$1,252




Housing (civilian)


         0


     202




General public works program


  1,000


     887




 


$3,984


$2,341



In anticipation of a lasting boom and prosperity, the budget pared off expenditures on public works, social security, relief and retirement funds. Housing, which remains the most acute problem for all the people, especially the veterans, is to be allocated the miserable sum of $202 million. Compare this with the sum of $18,508 billion to be spent directly for national defense and you can readily see what is wrong with the government housing program.
But suppose the boom and prosperity does not last beyond a year or two (something which is already indicated in the present economy). Obviously, then, the government will be forced to do what Roosevelt did in the Thirties: to make enormous expenditures for relief and public works. Will this mean a sharp decline in military expenditures to compensate for the increase in public relief funds? Only in part.
After the first year’s budget has enabled the War and Navy Departments to organize their new post-war war programs, there will be some decline in expenditures until a new war occurs. The national budget as a whole will decline somewhat after 1947, but even with its decline, it will remain abnormally high in comparison to previous peacetime history. This is due principally to the part that the war danger remains a permanent disturbing factor under imperialist capitalism. It will mean that the general burden of the masses who work in order to live will be heavier – not only for the present generation but of those to come.
 
Intervention in World Economy
The war merely accentuated a tendency that was already inherent in American capitalism: intervention in the world economy. In contrast to the Twenties, American economy has become completely interlinked to the world economy. Its hope for long lasting economic prosperity, given its present expansion and great productivity in a historically shrinking national market, lies in the economic domination of the world economy, the world market and sources of raw material.
Isolationism, a political phenomenon which reflected the little dependence American economy had upon the world market, is dead today. This is finally recognized by all sections of the capitalist class. And it is precisely for this reason – world economic domination – that the United States has become deeply involved in all the political, diplomatic and economic struggles of powers. To withdraw from these struggles, to hide behind the borders and coast-lines which surround the United States, is to deny the inherent tendency of the economy toward world expansion.
But international expansion in a world drawn closely together by modern invention, in a world whose market is itself shrinking, means the intensification of the conflicts with rival capitalist powers who need and seek the same things as American capitalism. These economic rivalries produce sharp political and diplomatic struggles which represent a prologue to war. In recognizing what the other powers have known for a long time, American capitalism has adopted the internal political policies similar to those existing in the older capitalist nations.
Conscription of servicemen after a war takes place for the first time. Tremendous military expenditures indicate a preparation for war. The military elements, of the country and the bureaucracy have a stronger weight in government and in the social life of the country. Thus, what was theoretically foreseen by Marxian socialists as the inevitable outcome of this war if capitalism survived, is now a reality. And this change is revealed unobtrusively, as though it were a natural phenomenon, in the new budget of the Truman administration.
 

Gates: Internal Crisis Forces Stalin to Begin New Series of Purges (30 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Internal Crisis Forces Stalin to Begin New Series of Purges
(30 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 39, 30 September 1946, p.  3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Under Stalin’s signature, a new series of purges have begun in Russia. This time the purges are directed against officials appointed by the Kremlin and the peasant population of the collective farms. The charges against them are similar to those in all previous purges: false interpretation and application of policies laid down by the state, mismanagement, personal enrichment of officials, withholding of grain by peasants, the development of private property ideology among them and failure to meet plan quotas. The present purge follows the purges just carried out in industry, in the. field of literature, art and culture, and against the “nationalist elements” in the Ukraine.
It is obvious from a reading of the press dispatches which occasionally break through the thick wall surrounding Stalin’s prison called Russia, that the present wave of purges is not an ordinary event. The world has come to look upon Stalin’s purges as something normal to Russia. In a measure this is true, for periodic purges are one of the normal attributes of Stalin’s dictatorship. But the extent of this purge reveals that the situation is a little more than normal.
Purges are a natural and normal part of totalitarian regimes because they are the only way in which a police regime maintains the solidity and power of its rule and enforces its plans and decrees. The regime punishes dissatisfaction, differences, normal and natural failures, and failures, produced by the policies of the regime itself in a brutal, police manner. Those who are swept up by the purges are punished in several ways: they are shot, imprisoned, deprived of jobs and privileges which are controlled by the regime, or they are sent into forced labor camps to swell the ranks of the many millions of slave laborers.
Purges are an indictment of a regime because they record its failures – the failures in economic and political policy. Sometimes the purges come after the event, sometimes they occur as a preventative measure against mass dissatisfaction. In Russia, purges have presaged a change of line on the part of the regime, usually after discarding a policy that was wrong, or they have been started to force the population to some inhuman effort to meet new goals set by the rulers:
Each successive period of Russian development – especially the contradictory policies adopted by the totalitarian regime, super-industrialization and complete collectivization which produced chaotic conditions in industry and a famine on the land, the victory of Hitler contributed to by Stalin’s policies, collective security as the antithesis of the long established revolutionary foreign policy of Lenin and Trotsky, the pact with Hitler, the alliance with the “democratic imperialists” – each of these were accompanied by nationwide purges and frame-up trials and the murderous extermination of all friends of the regime as well as opponents and critics.
 
Five Reasons for the Purges
The new purges have their origin and explanation in the present conditions which pervade Stalin’s Russia:

The economic devastation brought about by the war and the policies of the regime which rested its hopes (remaining out of the war) on an alliance with Hitler, has brought about a great deterioration in the living conditions of the masses without any hope that they will be easily or quickly ameliorated.

The new Five-Year Plan sets goals far below those of pre-war plans and in the field of consumer goods, less than those called for in the very first Five-Year Plan. This means that the actual living conditions of the masses will remain dismally low for a long time to come. The purges, therefore, are an instrument in forestalling mass outbreaks against the existing conditions by creating mass fear.
 
The devastation of war is not confined to industry, but is equally as severe in agricultural areas. But in addition to the destruction caused by the war, the state-appointed officials in the collective farms, as the industrial managers, have conducted its affairs in the manner of land bosses or plantation owners. The class division between the managers of collectives and the peasants is as wide and sharp as it is in industry. The managers and directors live in good houses, have automobiles, servants, special privileges, money bonuses to the point where the economic disproportion between; them and the masses is greater than that existing in capitalist countries.
 
There is widespread dissatisfaction throughout the land. This is attested to by the regime itself. The struggle against the reappearance, of so-called “bourgeois nationalism” is merely a cover for forcing on the variegated peoples who inhabit Russia, the practices of Great Russian nationalism. The tyrants of the Kremlin, who have resurrected ancient heroes of feudalism and modern Czarism, who have committed, in the name of Lenin’s enlightened and revolutionary policy on the national question, the worst crimes against the national minorities of land, inaugurate a purge to destroy those who question or oppose its policies.
 
In addition to these economic factors, the country lives under the severest police and spy system the world has ever known. Thus, economic and political insecurity is accompanied by ordinary personal insecurity in a world where the practice of “scapegoatism” is indispensably bound up with economic and political policy. The country lives under permanent terrorization.
 
The purges are also a preparatory measure, an organization measure, to meet the conditions of increasing struggle on a world scale. Aggressive, imperialist policies of the Kremlin are covered up by the old chestnut about the “imperialist encirclement of the Soviet Union” and lays the groundwork for excusing future failures and for continuing the police terror regime which keeps the masses in a permanent state of alarm. The regime calls into existence the “war danger” as the permanent obstacle to an improvement of the life of the masses, while the bureaucracy increases its own take of the total production.
 

Shift Responsibility
Thus, to prepare for a new postponement of an improvement in the life of the masses, to prepare in advance the excuses for future failures of the bureaucracy, to condone the corrupt practices of the regime and justify its exploitation of the country and its enrichment, to fortify its rule, the purges have been instituted. Blame for difficulties is put on the shoulders of second-rate and lower-grade functionaries or on the many-times liquidated kulaks and on the resurgence of “capitalist ideology” in a land where socialism was represented as having been completely realized.
It does not take great profundity to realize that the system of purges is incompatible with socialism and the mere existence of this system is proof that Russian society has nothing in common with the great ideal of masses. Russian society is a class society, an exploiting system. The bureaucracy which rules over the masses pursues policies which meet its needs as a new ruling class.
 

vis: Russia Squeezes Slave Labor out of Hungary (30 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Russia Squeezes Slave Labor out of Hungary
(30 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 39, 30 September 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In an Associated Press report hidden away in the newspapers, we read that Russia has proposed to take 30,000 Hungarian workers as part payment for reparations claimed by those two countries. These 30,000 workers would be employed in Russia and Yugoslavia until the reparations claimed by them are paid off. The Stalinist Communist Party of Hungary supported this proposal as did the Stalinist-controlled Socialist Party.
The proposal for “reparations labor” is merely a dressed up word for slave labor, for that is the essence of the Russian proposal. The whole incident calls attention to the worldwide growth of a new phenomenon which rises from the decaying social order of capitalism, and the brutal bureaucratic collectivist dictatorship in Russia.
Marxian socialism has described the worker in capitalist society as a “free” worker. In its scientific, social sense, this means that the worker is “free” from the ownership of property in the “means of production”: factories, machinery, land; that he owns only his labor power, his ability to work, which he sells to the boss in return for wages. In other words, the worker is only nominally free. He is, in reality, a wage slave because the social organization of capitalism makes it necessary for the worker to sell himself to the boss or else to starve.
 
Decline of “Free” Labor
Nevertheless, as compared to previous society, slavery and feudal— the worker is “free.” His body is not owned as a chattel; he can return home after his work, move to another city, or quit his job for another. In recent years, however, the worker has become less and less free as capitalism finds it less and less possible to function normally and progressively. The decay of capitalism and the difficulty of extorting profits has increased a world-wide tendency toward slave labor in which all forms of freedom are obliterated.
Imperialism has enslaved the colonial world and in many parts of the world actual slave labor exists. But nowhere in the world does slave labor exist so extensively as in Stalin’s Russia.
Russia has become the biggest slave state in the world. Although it is impossible to obtain accurate figures of the number of slaves in the convict labor camps, it has been estimated at between ten and seventeen millions. State officials, party members, workers and peasants make up the population in the slave camps. Initiated, as a political weapon against opponents, the slave camps in Russia have become an indispensable adjunct of the Russian economy.
What kind of labor do these camps engage in? Every kind. They build factories, work in them, clear swamps, forests and build roads; they work on railroads and in mines, and they work in the fields. The slave camps are under the constant surveillance of the secret police fully armed with a variety of weapons. The slave laborers receive a minimum of food, within echo-call of starvation, and a minimum of clothes. They live in barracks whose conditions beggar description. And the slave laborers work until they die. It is as simple as all that. There is no medical relief for their sickness; their is no rest from labor.
Some fortunate ones return from these camps as marked persons. Almost all die there after a few years. But the supply is inexhaustible. The periodic purges contribute new slave laborers. The occupied countries, especially Poland, are another source of replenishing the camps. Russia’s victory in the war and the conquest of new territories was still another supply source for the bureaucracy which rules over the Russian people.
 
The New Slave Laborers
Thus, the camps are filled with opponents of the regime, recalcitrant workers and peasants, officials who have erred in judgment or expressed doubts about some policy or other of the regime and “potential” enemies of the state. In the latter category fall most of slave laborers of the occupied countries, Baltics, Poles, Rumanians and Germans.
Fascist Germany under Hitler also developed slave labor camps to a high degree following the pattern molded by Stalin. But even in Nazi Germany, many of the foreign laborers were hired and paid wages. Tens of thousands came willingly, other tens of thousands were forced to work there, while still other tens of thousands were actually slave workers.
The war only accentuated this tendency inherent in the social decay of modern society. The French enslave German prisoners of war long after the war has ended. Every power uses slave labor in one form or another. It therefore comes as no surprise at all that Stalin demands Hungarian workers as slaves to pay off reparations assessed against that country. And this fact alone testifies that reparations are a system of economic enrichment against defeated countries, enrichment which comes out of the blood, sweat and tears of the masses of workers and peasants who had nothing to do with the war. It also bears out the imperialist, slave character of the war itself.
It may be argued that 30,000 Hungarians are not a great number. But this is only a beginning, and overlooks Russia, Germany and Eastern Europe. It overlooks the social pattern. How many Germans have been transported to Russia? How many men, women and children have been torn from their homes and families to become slaves to Stalin’s regime? Nobody knows, except the Kremlin rulers.
 

vis: Stalinists Embrace Argentina’s Dictator (16 September 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Any Line Will Do – If It Helps Russian Reaction
Stalinists Embrace Argentina’s Dictator
(16 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 37, 16 September 1946, p. 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In the manner of quick-change artists, which accurately portrays their adaptability to rapidly changing political lines, the Argentine Stalinists have announced their support of Peron’s dictatorship. Behind this sharp reversal of political position is the new diplomatic and trade pact between Stalin’s Russia and Peron which the Kremlin propagandists described as between “two freedom-loving and democratic peoples – Argentina and the Soviet Union.”
As soon as Russia changed its policy toward Peron, the Communist (Stalinist) parties in this hemisphere adopted the new line automatically without allowing their membership and following a moment’s breathe to adjust themselves to this change. At its recently held Congress the Argentine Communist Party declared:
“The Congress voiced its determination to fight against such attempts (American imperialist maneuvers against Peron) and to go into the streets with the Peronist masses should any reactionary (!) movement endanger constitutional order and stability ...
“Relations between Communist and Peronist workers are excellent at this time.”
Thus, within the twinkling of an eye, Peron, the “military dictator,” the “semi-fascist,” the “Nazi collaborator,” who seized power through a coup and a rigged up, strong-armed election, becomes the representative of “constitutional order and stability.” If this appears to be an aberration on the part of the Argentine Stalinists, remember that it reflects, the line given them by Moscow which dishonestly links the dictatorial regime and the masses who oppose it by speaking of “two freedom-loving and democratic” is true, That the Argentine people are “freedom-loving and democratic” is true, but what has this to do with the Peron regime which oppresses them? The sentiments of the people of Argentina no more describe the regime of “colonels” than do the aims and aspirations of the oppressed Russian masses describe the brutal police regime which rules over them.
 
Background to Change of Kremlin’s Line
The whole incident is an excellent example of the perfidy of Stalinism. During the war, the Stalinist Party of Argentina, its sister organizations in South America, and the most vocal of all, the Communist Party of the United States, kept up a steady chorus of denunciation of Peron, and the American State Department because it did not immediately break off relations with him. Peron was charged with being an ally of Germany; Argentina was declared to be a haven for fascists.
Even Argentina’s formal severance of relations with Germany did not strengthen its position in the Pan-American Union or the United Nations. Peron’s regime was being paid off by the Allies for its wartime neutrality, that is, for taking advantage of the war to play off one side against another in the interests of Argentine nationalism – for profits which would accrue to its financial, industrial and landlord class.
Reflecting the war alliance between Russia and the United States, the Stalinists and their fellow travelers demanded a rupture of relations with Argentina and the adoption of a policy of intervention which could only mean the destruction of the independence of the country. The demand for this rupture, however, overlooked the conflict between the United States and Great Britain over who shall establish economic preponderance in Argentina. It was this conflict which prevented a rupture with Peron. Had the U.S. severed its relations with Peron, Great Britain would have had a clear field in the one South American country in which she still had considerable interests. And at the San Francisco Conference it was the U.S. that proposed Argentina’s admission, and Russia that opposed it with a loud clamor from Stalinists everywhere.
In the meantime, neither the British nor American rulers, gave much thought to Russia. They did not think that with the end of the war Russia would join this rivalry. But Russia did. It recognized the regime which only yesterday it denounced in the fiercest terms. And just as quickly as the Kremlin changed its policy, its hirelings and agents throughout the world echoed the change.
The whole situation is indeed a little embarrassing to many Stalinist organizations which up until almost yesterday demanded a break with Peron and measures to overthrow this “reactionary” and, “fascist” who in no way represented the people, of the country. And now? Now the regime has become “democratic,” “freedom-loving,” and representative of the “masses.”
 
Stalinist Parties Are Agents of Russia
This switch of line on the part of the Stalinists not only confirms the charge that the Communist Parties of the world are Russian agents whose main purpose is the advocacy and defense of Stalinist dictatorship and foreign policy, but it also reveals that for them the terms “reactionary” and “fascist” have a changing meaning. Thus, “reactionary and fascist,” in the Stalinist dictionary, does not mean individuals, groups and movements in capitalist society which oppose the interests of the people, democracy, social progress or socialism. No, in the Stalinist language, “reactionary and fascist” have come to mean those who oppose Stalinism. “Democratic and freedom-loving” people, and “socialists,” are those who agree with or support Stalinist policy, no matter how truly reactionary it may be.
Throughout eastern Europe, the Russian puppet regimes are composed not only of Stalinist henchmen and the secret police, but of native fascists, reactionaries, anti-Semites and characterless, unprincipled people. On this side of the ocean, the reactionary, dictatorship of Peron is now “freedom-loving,” and his organized and subsidized totalitarian mobs and military aides have been transformed into the “masses.”
A reactionary, imperialist regime in Russia produces a reactionary policy both domestic and foreign. As in other parts of the world, the Stalinists in this hemisphere carry out the imperialist policy of their bosses in the Kremlin. Bearing this in mind, it should be clear why the justifiable opposition of the masses of Latin and South America against U.S., and in part, British imperialism. must not be allowed to become a support for Russian imperialism and the native dictatorships?
 

vis: Rigged Vote Returns Monarchy in Greece (9 September 1942)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Rigged Vote Returns Monarchy in Greece
(9 September 1942)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 36, 9 September 1946, pp. 1 & 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In a plebiscitary election held on Sunday, September 1, an overwhelming vote was cast to recall King George II to the throne of Greece. Like all plebiscites organized by dictatorial regimes, this vote is suspect, especially when it is remembered that the imported King was once before driven from the country by a popular revolt.
The regime which organized the plebiscite was a pro-monarchist government kept in power by British bayonets against the wishes of the people. The man who organized the plebiscite is John Theotokis, the same person who organized a similar vote in 1945 which returned a 97.5 per cent vote in favor of “His Majesty.” But it wasn’t long after this vote that “His Majesty” was driven from the country by the popular resentment against his regime.
This time, too, the reactionary regime composed of semi-fascists, monarchists and collaborators organized the “Ja” vote. Voters were given two ballots, one marked “George” and the other, “Democracy.” They were told to drop their favored ballot into the box and to crumple the rejected one and throw it upon the floor. Although the final tabulations have not yet been reported, indications are that the King’s majority is very large.
How is this to be explained against a background of mass opposition to the King, not only of long ago, but of recent months?
 
Several Reasons
There are several explanations, all of them contributing to a greater or lesser degree to the final result.

Greece is now a pawn in the big power struggle taking place in Paris. She is the object of aggression by the Russian satellite states, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, each of which want to carve off Greek territory and people. At the same time, the British have installed themselves as Greece’s protector because the country is strategically situated in the Mediterranean, which is Great Britain’s life-line to empire. The policy of the reactionary Greek ruling class is indistinguishable from British imperialist aims. In this way is reflected the U.S.-British-Russian conflict, inside of Greece.
 
The reactionary regime, kept in power by British arms, organized a reign of terror against all opposition to it and to the return of the monarchy. The regime is composed of the same elements which opposed a vote on the monarchy in the days following the liberation of the country from German occupation. Like Stalinist Russia in Poland, the reactionaries withheld an election long enough to consolidate their power in the country and to wage a campaign of extermination against the working class and all other opposition elements. Once having consolidated power and ruling with police brutality, they agreed to hold a plebiscite, which was boycotted by the influential Stalinist party of Greece. This reign of terror enhanced the power of the monarchists.
 
But these two factors do not explain everything about the vote, for it must be acknowledged, even with the above facts in mind, that the King received a tremendous vote. One of the reasons for this is to be traced to policies pursued by the EAM, under Stalinist domination. At one period, the EAM embraced all the important elements of the Greek resistance movement. It played a heroic part in the struggle to drive the Germans from the nation. It was at one time the real ruler of Greece. But Stalinist policy paralyzed the mass movement.

As a result of the agreement reached between Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill that Greece must remain a British sphere of influence, the EAM was halted in its tracks.
The British moved troops into the country and placed the reactionaries in power. The Stalinists at the head of the EAM adopted a policy of surrender to the Teheran decisions and proceeded to war against the genuine democrats, the revolutionary elements which made up an important part of the movement. While the Stalinists proceeded to decimate the EAM of its best forces, they also helped to fortify the regime they were to quarrel with later.
 
Last Word Unsaid
The reactionary policy of the Stalinists contributed to disorganization and disorientation of the movement of the Greek masses, many of whom undoubtedly turned to the existing regime out of desperation; the feeling of hopelessness engendered by the fact that the mass movement fell completely under control of the Stalinist totalitarians calling themselves Communist Party.
Thus, after the heroic struggle of the EAM, after the prospects of a new regime, a new workers’ democracy, the movement of the masses has been turned back. The elections were a setback for the people of Greece; a defeat for the working class. The reaction, under the monarchy, has triumphed for the moment on a parliamentary plane. But this only signifies that the real struggle will commence anew. The last word in this conflict has certainly not been said. It will be said when the Greek masses drive the unwarranted and imported monarchy from the shores of their country and begin again the work of reconstituting a democratic workers’ Greece. But to be able to do that effectively, they will have to defeat Stalinism along with the monarchy.
 

Gates: Another Example of Reactionary Stalinism – This Time in Italy (2 September 1946)<






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
World Politics
Another Example of Reactionary Stalinism –
This Time in Italy
(2 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 35, 2 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Stalinism represents a degeneration from socialism. Its forms are infinite and deep-going; it is thoroughly reactionary in principle and counter-revolutionary in practice. Because it has emerged from the Russian Revolution and the historical movement of the working class, its actions are sometimes written about as “betrayals” of the principles of socialism. Yet the betrayals occurred long ago – in the destruction of the world socialist goal and the revolutionary achievements of the Revolution, and the physical annihilation of all the great leaders of the Russian Revolution. To speak today of the actions of the Stalinists as “betrayals” of the interests of the workers loses all sense. For, whatever Stalinism does, it is natural and normal to its system of ideas and practices as a nationalist counter-revolutionary force representing a new type societal development between capitalism and socialism.
Thus, the cry, “betrayal,” which is periodically hurled at Stalinism by people who believe that Russia is “a degenerated workers’ state,” or that the Kremlin dictator and his organizations are part of the socialist and workers’ movement, becomes utterly ludicrous. The very concept creates the idea that Stalinism is able to act progressively in the interests of socialist policy. It is a disarming concept capable of doing great harm to the working class and the movement for socialism.
The reactionary nature of Stalinism is manifested in large questions of principle and mass struggle, as it is in small questions. And not only in Russia, but in world events, in the economic, political and social struggles that take place in the various nations. For in those countries there are the international representatives of Stalinism, the Communist Parties, whose degeneration has paralleled their tutor’s. These foreign detachments of Stalinism have one controlling arm: the Kremlin. By and large, and in general, their policies are born of the needs of Stalin’s Russia; they have been faithful servants to this day.
 
An Italian Example
Here is one of the latest wrinkles in this pattern: Since the overthrow of Mussolini in Italy and the collapse of the fascist regime, new parties and new movements have arisen under the impulse of the democratic urge of the masses. This takes immense social, economic and political form in the seizure of factories, the demand for genuine national independence, a Constituent Assembly, and for a series of “socialist” measures for the reorganization of the country in the interests of the people. The democratic desires in a country oppressed for twenty-five years by fascism inevitably extend beyond pure economic and political measures to their relatively less important by-products, but important nevertheless.
A case in point is the issue of the right of divorce. As a predominantly Catholic country and for a number of historical reasons, the right of divorce does not exist in Italy. Through the Lateran Treaty of 1929, the fascist state “followed the law of the church.” This “law” may have allowed an annulment of marriage from time to time, but never a divorce. Thus, the reactionary position of the church and the fascist state served as an additional force to maintain the domestic enslavement of women.
In recent months, one Augusto Francale, a Neapolitan lawyer, organized a league to write a divorce law for the new Italy. His proposal was met with powerful resistance by the church through sermons, editorials, posters and street demonstrations. The “Christian Family Defense Front” warned the people to “Beware of saboteurs of home and family – Down with divorce.”
 
The Stalinist Madam Speaks
This issue of divorce is clearly a democratic one, and it would appear that as against the church all other forces of Italy Would be allied. But not so. Time magazine reports that the church has found a new ally in the form of the Communist Party of Italy. It appears that Rita Montagnana, wife of the Stalinist boss, Palmiro Togliatti, joined the campaign of the Catholic hierarchy, which Time called “an effort to live down its (Communist Party) principles.” (This should read: principles attributed to the Communist Party but which they have long ago surrendered). Time goes on to quote Stalinist Montagnana:
“The majority of women, particularly women of the people, are against divorce ... Why should we Communists (read: Stalinists) – who are for democracy (!) – endorse this aspiration of a minority?” (As if that would make the aspiration wrong.)
It would be an error to discuss this question from the narrow plane of divorce. What is involved is the “slave” status of women in capitalist society. The drudgery and meanness of poverty and exploitation fall with heavy force upon women. When the German fascists hurled the slogan for women: church, children, kitchen, they merely organized efficiently what is normally the place of women in society at large. The fight for socialist freedom is, therefore, in large part a fight for freeing women from the social enslavement of capitalism. It is not an accident that Lenin acclaimed as one of the main achievements of the Russian Revolution that it gave freedom to women, freedom from domestic slavery, the right to divorce, the right to equality with men.
 
The View of Socialism
In his discussions on the national question and the struggle for democracy and freedom as a struggle for socialism, Lenin once wrote against some of his own party comrades:
“We would remind the reader that this problem was first raised by Rosa Luxemburg (founder of the Polish Socialist Party and murdered by Prussian officers in collusion with counter-revolutionary. German Social-Democratic government officials in 1919) in the discussion on the national question. Rosa Luxemburg rightly expressed the view that while advocating autonomy within a state ... we Social-Democrats (Bolsheviks), as centralists, must insist that the most important questions of state, among which she included DIVORCE legislation, be decided by the central state authority, the central parliament. This question of divorce is a striking illustration of the fact that one cannot be a democrat and a socialist without immediately demanding full freedom of divorce, for the absence of such freedom is an additional burden on the oppressed sex, women – although it is not at all difficult to understand that the recognition of the RIGHT of women to leave their husbands is not an INVITATION to all wives to do so!
“Under capitalism it is usually the case, and not the exception, that the oppressed classes cannot ‘exercise’ their democratic rights. In most cases the right to divorce is not exercised under capitalism, because the oppressed sex is crushed economically; because, no matter how democratic the state may be, the woman remains a ‘domestic slave’ under capitalism, a slave of the bedroom, nursery and kitchen ... The right to divorce, like ALL democratic rights under capitalism without exception, is difficult to exercise, is conventional, restricted, formal and narrow. Nevertheless, no respectable Social-Democrat would consider anyone who repudiated this right a democrat, let alone a socialist. This is the whole point. ‘Democracy’ is nothing but the proclaiming and exercising of ‘rights’ that are very little and very conventionally exercised under capitalism. But unless these rights are proclaimed, unless a struggle for immediate rights is waged, unless the masses are educated in the spirit of such a struggle, socialism is IMPOSSIBLE.” (Emphasis in original – A.G.)
These quotations are cited for two reasons: 1. to show what the genuine socialist position is on this question; 2. to point out that those who still think in the terms of Stalinism being a degenerated socialist movement, are entirely mistaken; that there is nothing in common between socialism and Stalinism. If the struggle for the right of divorce in Italy is not one of those “big” political questions, it is sufficiently big to reveal the reactionary character of Stalinism. For Stalinism is not merely an aberration, but a system of thought and practice, expedient though it may be, that flows from the interests of Russia’s new ruling class of bureaucrats. It reflects itself in this small affair in Italy as a tactic to increase the reactionary influence of the native Stalinists for the purpose of making Russian, Stalinism dominant in the country.
The crowning touch to Madame Togliatti’s sentiments is provided by an editorial note in Time magazine which points out that the countries without any divorce law whatever are: Spain, Portugal, Eire, most Latin American countries and ... South Carolina!
 

Gates: Reparations – New Blow at the European People (12 August 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Analyzing an Imperialist Device
Reparations: New Blow
at the European People
(12 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 32, 12 August 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

A peace conference is now being held in Paris. Gathered in the Luxemburg Palace are the diplomatic representatives of the victorious nations. Presumably all the nations are to help “win” the peace of the world. However, the small nations, that is, the militarily weak nations, have only a consultative role to play. The Big Four has already determined, in all important respects, the decisions of the “peace conference.”
To call the meeting in Paris a “peace conference” is in keeping with the universal hypocrisies of capitalist society. It is more than a year since hostilities have ended in Europe and Asia. Since the war resulted in a crushing defeat of the Axis powers, the danger of a new war from that quarter is obviously completely eliminated. On the other hand, from a realistic point pf view, the prospect of an immediate war resulting from the sharp antagonisms among the victor nations is also rather far-fetched.
The nations of Europe and Asia will be several years seeking to attain some degree of normal economic, political and social life. The devastation of the greatest war in the history of mankind has been far too vast to render possible such a new war among the new imperialist rivals.
Why, then, the meeting in Paris? The big powers have gathered together the members of the UN to ratify a conquerors’ peace, to establish a formal legality, by agreement, to an imperialist redivision of the spoils of war. The problems are many, the conflicting interests fundamentally unbridgeable.
The Paris Conference is merely the stage where the open diplomatic struggle between the two first-rate powers in the world today, the United States and Russia, takes place. As a natural result of this rivalry, the UN is divided into two camps, the Western and Russian blocs. While this struggle is fundamentally irreconcilable, the two blocs are in agreement on one thing: making the defeated nations pay for the war through occupation, seizure and removal of industrial equipment and raw materials, indemnities, reparation payments and territorial redivisions and annexations.
The only disputes involved here are over the kind of penalties; and here the differences have a political significance since they relate to the impending conflicts among the powers and their respective desires to improve their political-military positions against each other. Since the Big Four is in principle agreement on their right to impose a conquerors’ peace on the defeated countries, their quarrels assume a totally hypocritical tone.
 
Chaos and Peace
The conferences at Yalta and Potsdam established this “right” for the Big Four to settle the fate of Europe. Thus, all the defeated Axis powers
and the smaller nations which Germany occupied and forced into the war on its side are treated as vanquished nations in common. These countries are occupied or divided territorially. Their economies, like the rest of Europe, are completely disrupted. Hunger stalks the Continent. But the only contribution the victor nations can make is to increase the devastation and disintegration of Europe.
The worst malefactor among the bandit nations is Russia. On the heels of the advancing Russian army came the specialists and technicians who dismantled whole industries and together with raw materials, livestock, farm products and forced laborers transported them to Russia. The forced migrations of peoples assumes an even more desperate and cruel form than they did under Hitler. At least Hitler never said that he was carrying out his barbarous crimes in the name of “democracy and peace,” in the name of the Four Freedoms. Russia has forcibly incorporated nonRussian territories into its borders. Mutilating the economies of the countries which she occupies, the Stalinist bureaucracy has made a revival of those countries impossible.
On their part the Western powers have contributed their share to the chaos on the Continent. The United States, Great Britain and France join Russia in the occupation and division of Germany, the central problem of Europe. The Big Four, while drafting treaties for most of the Axis powers, has, for lack pf agreement, left unsettled the German and Austrian problems. But they transferred territory from Italy and gave it to France. Italy’s colonial empire has been taken and its disposition left for a later date. Draft treaties for Italy, Bulgaria, Finland, Roumania and Hungaria were completed. And in each case, the Big Four agreed to indemnities and reparations.
Revolutionary socialists oppose annexations, indemnities and reparations because, in the final analysis, they are paid for by the sweat and toil of the working people. Those who have no responsibility for war, are forced to pay its penalties. The Bolsheviks under Lenin always opposed annexations, indemnities and reparations as an extension of imperialist policy from war to peace, as measures leading to a more intense exploitation of the masses.
From an economic standpoint, how can a defeated state pay tribute? If, after a war, it loses its colonies, its share of the world market, much of its industry, raw materials, and territories containing coal and iron as well as industries, then there remains only one way in which the monopoly capitalists of defeated nations can partially pay their debts to their fellow capitalists. This is by increased exploitation of their people through longer hours of work, lower wages, worsened conditions of life and a general destruction of the living conditions of the masses.
 
Then and Now
After the last war, Europe suffered greatly because the war was fought on its soil. Material destruction and loss of life were immense. Industry and agriculture were at a standstill and economic decline manifested itself in all countries, including those of the Allies. The great progress that capitalist society had made theretofore was halted. The world market, the world division of labor and the world exchange of goods was destroyed for a time. Yet on top of all this, the Allies demanded from defeated Germany, Austria and Turkey, the payment of astronomical sums in goods and money.
The imperialist Versailles Treaty not only meant a long period of great poverty for the masses (the capitalist rulers of the defeated countries never did pay fully for their defeat) but held up whatever chance there was for an economic improvement on the Continent. It provided the impulse for the rise of reactionary nationalism and chauvinism which helped pave the way for fascism. Students of history will remember that the only way Germany was able to meet even a part of its debt was by dumping goods cheaply on the world market. This not only increased its rivalry with the United States and Great Britain, but was done at the cost of the German people who suffered low wages and mass unemployment. Even then Germany could not fully revive its economy since the dumping of goods was at the expense of future production.
The same thing is being repeated now, even though the post-war conditions of 1945–46 are far worse than they were in 1918. Modern instruments of warfare have wrought a greater destruction of natural and man-made wealth. The loss of life has been many times larger than in. the first war. The destruction of the economy of Europe is more severe – Europe is, as a matter of fact, an economic wasteland particularly in those areas which were once the centers of capitalist economy and culture. A divided and occupied Germany, an occupied Austria, an Italy still treated as an ally of Hitler, Balkan countries, once overrun by the Wehrmacht, now overrun by Stalin’s troops, and in Eastern Europe, on a line from Stettin in Germany to Trieste, on the Adriatic, the heel of Stalinism starks astride the necks of the people – this is Europe in 1946.
Leaving aside all other aspects of the treaties now before the Paris Conference, let us consider just one contained in common in all of them.
As we indicated above, in all the treaties there is a provision for the payment of tribute to the United Nations in one form or another. The only power, however, which has demanded money reparations of the impoverished countries is Russia. The money payments total almost a billion dollars and are divided as follows: $100,000,000; Romania, $300,000,000; Hungary, $200,000,000, and $50,000,000 each to Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia; and Finland, $300,000,000. German and Austrian reparations will be considered when the Big Four can reach a prior agreement. In the meantime, Stalin is stripping the zones over which he has control.
In making these demands, Russia has given added evidence that she has nothing in common with socialism, but practices an imperialism of her own. Stalin’s theoreticians, who were once Marxists, do not have to be told that by their demands they have accepted imperialist policy which identifies the people with the crimes of. their rulers; that they have saddled defeated nations whose economies are destroyed, with war debts and such conditions as make it impossible for them to establish normal economic conditions. Those who will have to pay these debts are the toiling masses of these countries. If the countries do not meet these payments, Russia, like all imperialists, thereby has an ace in the hole: She has a legal right to intervene in these countries or to tie their economies to the Russian.
To say that Russia pursues an imperialist policy of its own does not wholly describe Stalinist policy in Europe. Precisely because she is poorer than the other imperialists, Russian imperialism is less subtle, more ruthless.
The peace conference in Paris is, like the Versailles conference and the League of Nations, the meeting ground of imperialist robbers. To oppose their robbers’ peace is to defend the people of Europe. To fight against this latest imperialist attack on the peoples of Europe is to carry on the struggle for a free and Socialist Europe.
 

Gates: The Recent Strike Struggles and the Political Tasks of American Labor (5 August 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Recent Strike Struggles and
the Political Tasks of American Labor
(5 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 31, 5 August 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE first post-war wave of labor struggles has already taken place. A second is now in its first stages. These struggles surpass the ordinary “bread and butter’’ strikes of earlier years. The cause for these socially heightened labor struggles is found in the present character of United States capitalism.
Of the two real victors in the War, the United States and Russia, the former is by far the strongest economically and militarily. Its international political strength, while dependent upon its economic power, is difficult to ascertain, for the world political struggle within the “United Nations” is still in its early stages. The aim of American capitalism, however, is frankly clear. It seeks nothing less than the economic, political, and therefore, military domination of the world.
 
Capitalism’s Great Difficulty
The vast expansion of American industry and production makes mandatory the realization of these aims for the future existence of U.S. imperialism. American capitalism cannot produce profitably, nor continue expansion which is inherent in capitalist production, on the basis of its domestic market, or even by merely retaining its pre-war world markets. The new and vast expansion of industry and production which took place during the war to meet the military needs of the “United Nations,” makes it impossible to carry on the economy on pre-war levels, even those of the “prosperity period” of the ’20’s. This would mean a decline of profits for the capitalist class as a whole, chaos for many segments of that class, mass unemployment and the reduction of the standard of living of all the people. Herein lie the great inescapable difficulties for American capitalism.
But the great power of U.S. imperialism rests upon shaky foundations. Europe is a devastated continent whose peoples are restless, hungry and poverty-stricken. South America, more clearly under the domination of U.S. capitalism, is slowly reviving its old anti-imperialist struggle against the “Yankee dollar.” Asia and the Far East have emerged from the war with a new will to struggle for national independence. The collapse of world economy makes the prospects of recovery upon a capitalist profit basis quite dim.
The long range plan of American imperialism rests on two hopes: that it can achieve its world aim based upon the chaos and weakness of Europe and Asia; and that it can win the support of the working class at home through “bribing” it with the drippings from super-profits of imperialist exploitation. But the political factors of European and colonial discontent plus the increasing maturity of the American working class challenges this grandiose perspective of U.S. Imperialism.
 
Burden of Reconversion
During this post-war period the monopoly capitalists with the aid of their government put the burden of reconversion upon the shoulders of the working class. Since the relatively high war wages of the workers were primarily due to long hours of work, overtime and double-time, the end of war production meant an immediate cut in wages and a sharp decline in the standard of living. Coupled with the steadily rising cost of living it means that the entire burden of re-conversion fell on the people at large.
Capitalism could have weathered the post-war period on this basis alone, but it had other sources of strength. These other sources were political. Through its control of government, monopoly capitalism passed legislation guaranteeing profits at a high wartime level, rebates on paid taxes, elimination of price control, limitation of housing construction, etc. These advantages give American capitalism strength to pursue its world aims.
In what sense have recent labor struggles differed from previous ones? This time, the labor movement, spearheaded by the United Automobile Workers Union (CIO), was compelled to strike for something more than wages and hours. The UAW touched the very foundations of capitalist property relations when it demanded the right to examine the books of the company, to achieve a wage increase out of the profits of the company, without a rise in prices. If the conservative labor leaders (Green, Murray, Lewis) did not understand the real significance of the GM Program the most important section of the monopoly capitalist class did.
 
Capitalists Showed Alarm
The big capitalists responded to the UAW demands in the GM strike with alarm, denouncing the auto workers as enemies of free enterprise, property rights, production and progress. In contrast to most labor leaders, the capitalists exhibit an acute class consciousness.
This has been demonstrated anew in the present struggle on the price front in which the auto workers have proposed to the labor movement a program of action, which, if coupled with the GM Program, can win a significant victory over the profiteers.
But here again the top leadership of the CIO has watered down the UAW program in favor of reliance on the Truman administration and a host of so-called “friends of labor” in Congress. In the field of political action, which is the real hope of the working class, the leadership of the union movement reveals a lack of consciousness which results in a reactionary policy.
 
A Militant Working Class
On the economic front, the American working class is well organized and fiercely militant. The union movement in this country has become the most powerful in the world. Strike struggles in the United States are always vigorously prosecuted. American workers do not hesitate to take to the streets to defend themselves. If this wonderful militancy in economic struggle were joined to politically independent action, the future of the American working class would be more secure.
The amazing contradiction in the class struggle is the enormous gulf which separates the high level of economic struggles from the backward political character of the labor movement. In recent years there has been a stirring in the rank and file whose understanding is superior to an officialdom which has a vested interest in “business unionism.” The formation of the PAC was not merely an effort by the CIO to organize labor support for the Democratic Party; it was also a measure to forestall some form of independent political action.
But it is becoming clear to many workers that unless their economic struggles are joined to progressive political struggles, they are always severely handicapped and often defeated by reactionary legislation.
The political conservatism of the American labor movement is breaking down. Whereas early American capitalism gave the workers a rising standard of living because of its expansion of industrial productivity, this is no longer possible for a declining capitalism. In the immediate future, the monopolists Will attempt to “bribe” the working class by super-profits from international expansion and exploitation. Already it seeks support from labor for its imperialist aims with the excuse that success in its world program will guarantee jobs at home. Thus the American workers are asked to secure a doubtful livelihood at home by agreeing to the exploitation of the peoples of Europe, Asia and South America.
The experiences of the past period show that the workers are not at all inclined to accept this prospect. But the struggle of labor cannot be confined to the factory alone. That is a losing fight. The economic struggles of the workers will have to be joined to political struggles. The fight for “bread and butter” which is the ever-present instigator of the class struggle, catapults the working class into a struggle to control production, wages, prices and conditions of labor, and to fight for legislation to aid the fight on the economic front. The political struggle is inescapable. What is wrong with the politics of the labor movement is its subservience to capitalist politics.
The great task of American labor is to break with capitalism politically: TO HAVE NOTHING WHATEVER TO DO WITH the Democratic and republican parties of big CAPITAL. This conclusion flows logically and necessarily from the whole position of the working class. At present the main impediment to this progressive development of the rank and file of the labor movement is the hard shelled, conservative, capitalist-minded labor officialdom. The first progressive political step by American labor toward independent political action and a labor party will require the breakdown of the conservative influence of this officialdom.
 

vis: Navy Seeks to Dull Atom Bomb Fears (12 August 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Behind the “Experiment” at Bikini
Navy Seeks to Dull Atom Bomb Fears
(12 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 32, 12 August 1946, p. 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Exactly one year ago a frightened world learned of the latest invention for destroying property and lives – the atomic bomb. The reverberations of the blast at Hiroshima traveled around the world with a speed approximating the leveling of one of the largest cities in Japan. Such terrifying destructive power had only been visualized in adventure and semi-scientific pulp magazines. But the real atom bomb brought the war with Japan to an abrupt end. It raised the question of the ability of mankind to withstand concentrated blasts of the greatest explosive instrument ever devised and to which no defense is possible.
The horror of the people was followed by conferences, forums and resolutions to seek some way to avoid war. But the skillful propaganda of the ‘’statesmen” and professional military men has resulted in a growing complaisance toward the atom bomb.
The army and navy men in this country began a new type of propaganda. “This was not the last of new inventions and discoveries for war. There were other even more terrifying weapons!”
As if this would diminish the power of the atom bomb! After all, this was only one of the new weapons. There were still others: rocket bombs, rocket flown atom bombs, bacterial bombs, death-dealing rays, etc. Thus, by a system of comparisons the deadly power of the atom bomb was minimized.
 
Method in Madness
There was purpose in this campaign of madness. The professional army men sought to defeat the propaganda of the scientists, liberals and pacifists that the discovery of the atom bomb meant the elimination of the mass army. The navy men did everything in their power to deny that the atom bomb made a huge navy obsolete.
A struggle broke out in Congress over setting up controls and management of production of the atomic bombs as well as the peaceful and industrial aspects of atomic energy. Those elements who wanted exclusive civilian control of atomic energy and those who, acting as the spokesmen of the military men, sought to give control to the War and Navy Departments, battled it out. The Senate already decided against military supervision of the Atomic Control Board. The head of the House Military Committee, Andrew May, that notorious swindler of the people, led the fight to weaken civilian control of the Board.
The Navy finally organized the expensive expedition to Bikini to “test” the effect of an atom bomb upon a modern navy. The experiment was a phony from the start, since, as some of the liberal press already pointed out, the purpose of the Navy Department was to prove that the atom bomb in no way made a navy obsolete and that all that was required was a “change in design” and a new strategy in the disposition of ships. In this experiment, the Navy determined the power of the bomb dropped upon Bikini lagoon. It placed the ships in special order. It was a controlled experiment.
Of course, it will be no news to our readers when we say that in atomic warfare not one bomb but hundreds will be dropped. And they will be of infinitely greater power than the one the Navy used in Bikini. Professor Robert Oppenheimer, the outstanding atomic physicist in this country, has declared that already an atomic bomb capable of destroying a hundred square miles can be built; that with new productive methods it will be possible to produce atomic bombs at a cost of only a million dollars each!
Yet with all that is known of the power of the atom bomb, the Bikini experiment was so treated in the press as to make the weapon seem like any other explosive weapon. The whole fleet was not sunk! The lagoon was not dried out or turned into a boiling inferno! No hundred foot tidal waves were caused that traveled thousands of miles! Therefore ... the atom bomb was really not such great shakes.
 
Fear from Bikini
Yet the secret report to the President which has not yet been made public reveals that the worst fears about the effects of the bomb have been confirmed again by the Bikini show. William L. Laurence, correspondent for the New York Times, who just returned from Bikini, writes alarmingly about the complaisance at large which characterizes the reactions to the experiment. The thing that Laurence does not seem to understand is that this reason was manufactured by the kind of propaganda which issued from the Navy Department and the press itself. Laurence writes:
“Scientists and others closely connected with the development of the bomb, who know its potentialities for wholesale destruction and who devoted their energies during the last year to arouse public awareness of the danger confronting civilization, consider it of vastly, greater importance to gauge the effect of the Bikini tests on the change of attitude of the public toward the greatest problem facing mankind today.
“Considered from this point of view the Bikini tests add up to a tragedy of errors for which the world may pay a heavy price unless measures are taken in time to counteract them.”
But it is easy to determine the responsibility for this reaction, since it was manufactured in Washington, D.C. Laurence may look to his own New York Times in Hanson Baldwin’s column for such additional responsibility. Baldwin, an Annapolis man with a strong Navy bias, wrote only a few days ago that the atom bomb was proved to be only another of the new weapons of warfare. Laurence goes on to say:
“Watching the cloud of death that spread over the Bikini fleet, this observer considered it obvious that amphibious invasions ... would become impossible against an enemy possessing atomic bombs.
“A few atomic bombs exploded in the air and under water would not only sink all the invasion craft but also kill every man aboard them. Those who by miracle might escape the blast and heat would surely die by the invisible, all-penetrating radiation.”
All else that Laurence writes about so alarmingly is already known. The Bikini experiment was a reflection of the war spirit, the preparation for new wars; it was a warning to other nations. It was a Navy spectacle to prove the untenable thesis that the atom bomb did not make a navy as it is now obsolete. All of this could have been and was foretold in advance. In that sense, nothing new was learned at Bikini.
The issue remains. Given the continued existence of capitalism, the world faces new wars and the danger of the extinction of civilization. The issue is: either capitalist barbarism, the death of civilization, or socialism! For that is the danger the world faces: Socialism or death!
 

Gates (Albert Glotzer): The Heritage of Leon Trotsky (19 August 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Heritage of Leon Trotsky
And the Role of the Workers Party
(19 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 33, 19 August 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

“Is the Workers Party a Trotskyist organization and is Labor Action a Trotskyist paper?” The question is one that is often asked us, and the answer to it is: Yes! The question, however, deserves a fuller answer than that, and it is the intention of this article as well as others that appear in this issue of Labor Action to supply that answer.
It is, for example, well known that there were serious differences of opinion, notably on the “Russian Question,” between comrade Trotsky and the members of the Workers Party. We were sharply criticized by comrade Trotsky, and criticized him in return. Yet we consider ourselves Trotskyists. Only two groups find this a strange phenomenon. Oddly enough they consist of opposites. One group is so staunchly Trotskyist, it would distort Trotsky’s ideas into an uncritical cult, and excommunicate all dissenters. The other group, considerably more amorphous, is so preoccupied with preening its “democratic” feathers as against the “bureaucratism” of Leninism-Trotskyism, that it finds itself unable to tolerate a difference of opinion between revolutionists. Thus, one group contradicts the very essence of Trotskyism through canonization of the great revolutionist. The other distorts his work and teachings through ignorance or deliberate falsification, as the case may be, and so justifies its own escape from revolutionary politics into the miscellaneous swamps of utopianism, liberal mumbo-jumbo and worse.
Many men and women have contributed to the great body of socialist theory. Among these certain names stand out for their exceptional contributions – for example, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels who built the massive foundations of scientific socialism, or the beloved leader of the Russian Revolution, Lenin. There are others as well, giants who in knowledge, practice, and organization advanced the revolutionary movement immeasurably: for example, Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht. Leon Trotsky is one of these. Each of these was a creative contributor to the edifice of socialist theory and organization, and from them we have learned, as well by their disagreements as by their agreements, the method and meaning of Marxian principles and investigation.
 
Trotsky’s Great Struggle Against Stalin
In the struggle that Trotsky waged against the gravedigger of the revolution, Stalin, until a Stalinist assassin struck him down at his work table, the revolutionary program was pitted against a counter-revolutionary distortion of that program. Issues of tremendous historic importance, both inside and outside of Russia were at stake, and from the pen of Trotsky came documents fired with a brilliance of Marxian Leninist theory, emphasizing and elaborating the basic revolutionary principles of the communist movement. This is not the place to enter into a discussion of each of these historic issues: the problems of Russian economy, the nature of party democracy, the Lessons of October as they were related to the struggle of the working class outside of Russia, the problem’s of the Chinese Revolution, the struggle against fascism, and many others. Nor is this the place to discuss Trotsky’s elaboration of Marx’s theory of the Permanent Revolution which had the most intimate bearing on the development of the revolutionary movement, especially in the “backward” countries such as China. It is enough to say that the Trotskyist tendency was characterized by the firmness of its internationalist convictions, its struggle for a democratic regime in the party, and its application of independent Marxian analysis to the multiple problems of our day.
We were allied with Trotsky, as members of the same movement, in his struggle against Stalin. Many of us who are now members of the Workers Party helped to build the first Trotskyist organization in the United States, the Communist League of America. Today, in the Workers Party, the revolutionary principles as enunciated by Trotsky form the framework of our program, and serve us as a guide in the interpretation of new problems. Those of you who are most familiar with our history know that the Workers Party grew out of a split in the Socialist Workers Party in 1939–1940. We are not concerned here with the nature of the regime (Cannon’s) that provoked the split. The principal issue in dispute was the defense of Russia: should revolutionists defend or not defend Russia under any conditions. We said no. Trotsky, and with him the majority of the SWP, said yes.
 
Our Differences With Him
Trotsky based his position on the argument that Russia was a degenerated workers state. Our party, after an intense discussion, arrived at the conclusion that Russia was not a workers state, and at our second national convention in 1941 adopted the position that Russia was a bureaucratic collectivist state, the unique phenomenon of a bureaucracy that had succeeded in destroying the revolution and taking over the state power in a country where the working class had vanquished capitalism and nationalized property.
Trotsky defended his position on the premise that the distinguishing feature of a workers state was nationalized property; but, since the party and other instruments of working class control had been destroyed by the Stalinist bureaucracy, he called this a DEGENERATED workers state. We argued that nationalization without workers’ control was not socialist in quality, that working class democracy was essential to a workers’ state for it operated according to different historical principles from a capitalist state. Though in his last major works, The Revolution Betrayed and others, Trotsky conceded that a new type of state, neither capitalist nor working class, was theoretically conceivable, he maintained to the end that Russia was a degenerated workers state. (For a fuller exposition of this point, see Max Shachtman’s essay in The New Course.)
It is idle speculation to question what would have been the development of Trotsky’s views, whether the new crimes of Stalin would have led him to a new policy as the Stalinist crimes in the Germany of 1930 to 1934 led him to a new policy then: to call for the formation of a new revolutionary international, the Fourth.
The fact remains that up to the time of the assassin’s blow, Trotsky had not changed his position, and that in the course of presenting his position he polemized very sharply against us. But the fact also remains that the bases of our analyses of Russia and Stalinism, which we have developed far beyond any point stated by Trotsky himself, derive from the direction he gave us in his series of brilliant interpretations. In no sense is this meant by way of minimizing our differences; quite the contrary, the difference was a grave one for it involved what is, after all, one of the fundamental questions of our epoch: the nature of Russia and Stalinism.
 
The Spirit of Trotskyism
Now, it is possible to reduce the man to a saint, and cheapen his works into oracular texts. The Socialist Workers Party does precisely that. The sum of their understanding goes no further than the specific lines written by Trotsky; thus, if Trotsky wrote one thing based on the events of 1936 it is impossible to amend that view, or revise it, in the light of the events of 1946. To us, that is the very opposite of Trotskyism, and defeats its ends. It is, in short, a revolting spectacle that defies the very spirit of the man’s life and work. No man in our generation was more proud than Trotsky in his devotion to Lenin’s teachings. Yet, in the great days that followed the Russian Revolution, Trotsky did not hesitate to take issue with Lenin. Did that make him less of a Leninist? Hardly. How Trotsky flayed those who stifled the meaning of Leninism by converting Lenin into a sacrosanct figure! In this connection, it is worth our while to reread Trotsky’s earliest major polemic against the depredations of the bureaucracy in Russia, The New Course (recently republished by the Workers Party). What is The New Course, if it is not a plea for critical, creative thinking in a democratic party atmosphere? Without that there is stultification – and the party is destroyed in the grip of bureaucratic ignorance. The great revolutionists themselves, Marx, Lenin and Trotsky, invariably turned away with horror and distaste from those misguided followers who considered it sufficient to repeat their “lessons” by rote, as though Marxism were some bodyless catechism.
Consult The New Course again, and you will find that it is an unanswerable argument against monolithism in the party, that is against the self-destructive idea (for a revolutionary party) that all must share the same view, that differences of opinion on matters of policy are impermissible. In that respect too, those who stand on the virtue of their “official” Trotskyism, while creating a monolithic regime in the party, contradict what is to us of the Workers Party a salient characteristic of Trotskyism. By way of illustration, we gladly acknowledge the existence in our party of comrades who hold different points of view on Russia, including Trotsky’s point of view.
It is precisely because we take a creative analytical approach to the problems of our day, and the interpretation of historical events, that we call ourselves Marxian revolutionists and Trotskyists. We study the writings of these great teachers; and we study their method. How did they tackle this problem? How did they judge this situation? The method of applying to the class struggle, internationalist principles is of the Utmost importance. So applying this method, we worked out our policy on the “national question” in Europe – the necessity for raising once more to the foreground, in the particular situation of Nazi occupation and allied occupation that followed it, democratic slogans, slogans for national liberation. Trotsky may have agreed with us; he may have disagreed with us; it is conjecture in any case. What we do know is that we approached the new problem created in Europe during and after the war, armed with revolutionary principles which served us as instruments of analysis and decision.
 
The Transitional Program
Among Trotsky’s greatest contributions as leader of the Fourth Internationalist movement, was his development of the “transitional program.” This program is incorporated into our Party program. Not word for word, nor line by line. As Trotsky intended it should be, we have applied it according as the situation demanded, amplified it; interpreted it in the context of our problems. This transitional program, which Trotsky put forward in a document of monumental insight, The Death Agony of Capitalism, was intended to bridge the gap between the politically conscious level of the masses of the world today and their historical future in a socialist society; its purpose was to advance slogans of a qualitatively higher social level than immediate demands that pose the necessity for fuller revolutionary socialist action. The Death Agony is magnificent in its revolutionary vision; but to bow before each of its formulations as holy writ is to make of it a shabby caricature out of keeping with its author and its intent. The Workers Party understands the transitional program as a weapon for the socialist reconstruction of society, and we utilize it against the bankrupt system of capitalism as the situation dictates. Thus we have given prominent place in our transitional program to what we have called the GM Program, though the struggle of the GM strikers and the demands that issued from it, occurred long after the Death Agony was written.
Revolutionary socialism is the most vital of all political philosophies, constantly refreshed by the experience of the working class and the application of Marxian theory. Certain principles we consider basic; without them there is no revolutionary perspective: class struggle as against class collaboration, working class internationalism, anti-imperialist war, the building of the revolutionary party, and others of equal meaning. It is necessary to study these principles, to seek them in the writings of the great revolutionist and in the record of their work. They are the principles upon which we stand in the struggle against capitalist rule and Stalinist reaction. We will not tolerate class collaborationism or social patriotism in our ranks, though we welcome REVOLUTIONARY SOCIALISTS regardless of this, that or the other differences in approach or policy. As revolutionary socialists we are partisans of the Trotskyist movement, dedicated to building the international revolutionary movement, proud allies of the great teacher, Leon Trotsky.
 

Gates: How the “Old Man” Wrote the “History&8221; (19 August 1946)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
How the “Old Man” Wrote the History
(19 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 33, 19 August 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Many persons have had the opportunity to visit with and observe the habits of Leon Trotsky, the extraordinary hero and genius of the internationalist socialist movement. Those meetings and associations have been described, though not extensively. A biography of Trotsky has yet to be written, and those fragments which have been recorded of his life since his exile from Russia in 1929 will serve as source material for such biographical purposes.
What is written here is but one of those fragments of his life which left a vivid picture in my memory filled with many lasting impressions of Trotsky.
At the end of the year 1931, the latter part of October, November and part of December, I visited Trotsky in Turkey for what was to be a two-week stay. That it lasted longer was due to the circumstances which governed the life of Trotsky, his wife, Natalia, and the household at that time. A fire made his home on Prinkipo Island uninhabitable and brought him to an old paint-peeling frame house set in a large garden on the outskirts of the town of Kadikoy at the eastern shores of a cove-like extremity of the Marmora Sea. Across the water, several miles distant, lay Istanbul on the European side of the Bosphorus.
 
Work on the History
I had apparently arrived at a “very bad moment.” Trotsky was occupied with what is undoubtedly his greatest historical and literary work, the History of the Russian Revolution. I had already been told by others what a prodigious worker he was. But now I was actually to see that it was so.
I was soon to observe how completely absorbed Trotsky was in the writing of this monumental work. His main attention and energies were devoted to its writing. Yet at the same time he was to do some of his greatest political pamphleteering (the most prominent work was Germany: The Key to the International Situation) and to assist with advice his numerous co-thinkers in other countries, as well as to maintain an immense correspondence with many people on diverse subjects.
As I recall, Trotsky followed an undeviating schedule of work, the monotony of which was broken by one hunting trip during my visit, and frequent fishing trips in his 12-foot rowboat. He arose about seven in the morning and prepared his work for the day. Breakfast was served about eight in the morning. Thereafter, he returned to his second-story workroom to begin his work in earnest. This was broken by noon-day lunch. After dinner, he would read and prepare his material for the next day’s work.
His writing on the History was intense since, as he told me, the publishers were pressing him to complete the book. But he always needed “a few weeks more time.” You could hear him pacing the thin- planked floor dictating in his ringing metallic voice to a Russian stenographer seated at a typewriter. His hands held a sheaf of notes prepared earlier and there followed the steady outpouring of words and a rhythmic beat of the typewriter.
At times there would be a very abrupt halt in the work. Trotsky would appear downstairs on his way out to the garden. There he walked rapidly back and forth – ten, twenty, thirty minutes and suddenly he would disappear from the garden and you could hear again the sound of his voice and the beat of the typewriter. The garden walks served as a form of relaxation and an opportunity to think through problems which arose in the writing of the history of the Revolution. At other times it seemed that he dictated days without end.
 
A Scrupulous Historian
He was a most scrupulous historian. This is evidenced by the fact that the work he wrote has never yet been challenged even in its minutest details.
Intellectual life in Turkey was not highly advanced. The most serious lack of all was a library which could be utilized by Trotsky in his writings. And yet he would permit no data to go unchecked, no assertions to pass unverified. Quotations were checked and rechecked from different sources. He had constantly to send elsewhere for material: a library book from Paris to check an analogy with the French Revolution; old Communist International material from Germany; Russian material from other places in Europe. The reader can readily understand the difficulties this created. Yet, Trotsky was never long delayed by such irritating hindrances.
On a table in his. study workroom lay a number of topographical card maps of Petrograd (so named before the Russian Revolution) joined together like a completed jig-saw puzzle. These joined maps formed a picture of the city showing streets, buildings, alleys, squares and bridges. On the maps lay a magnifying glass which Trotsky used to determine the accuracy of the most minute geographical references to the street fighting at the capital, as well as other details.
When dictation for a section of the book was completed, he would take the manuscript, now a long roll of pasted typewriter pages, and begin a careful reading, editing and revision. Sections of the History were rewritten many times, until the precise and desired story was told.
Despite his intense interest in and occupation with the political events of the day and the life of the movement which arose to fight for his ideas, Trotsky concentrated on this historical work until it was finished. It is true that he never did meet the publisher’s dateline, but then Trotsky never hastened a work to meet the needs of an enterprise whose love for books is usually secondary to schedule, advertising and profits. But if he did not adhere to these demands of the book publishing business, the world is richer for it. It has the definitive story of how the Russian workers took power!
 

Gates: How Long Will the Post-War Economic Boom Continue? (21 October 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
How Long Will the Post-War
Economic Boom Continue?
(21 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 42, 21 October 1946, pp. 3 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The United States is now experiencing an economic boom featured by tremendous production and what is, economically speaking, full employment. On its face, this would appear to answer all those who forecast a post-war crisis. The capitalist economists quite naturally hail the present period as a living answer to the critics of capitalism. Yet the boom, unlike previous ones, does not seem to inspire genuine confidence in capitalism. The reasons for this are to be sought in the doubts produced by the long economic crisis of the 1930’s and the World War. An “instinctive” doubt in the strength of United States capitalism pervades the whole country, despite the appearance of economic strength.
Long before the war came to an end, the question of the future of American economy had already occupied the minds of the leading economists of the country, especially those employed by the government. Government economists, for the most part New Dealers, pictured post-war economic prospects under the influence of the crisis of the 1930’s. The crisis had taught these economists to be wary in their prognoses and to steer clear of that vapid optimism which characterizes the writings, speeches and prophecies of the “captains of industry” and their hired economists and statisticians.
 
Rise in Production During the War
While the war was still on, they observed the tremendous rise in production, the growth of productive plant technological advances, and the increase in the number of workers. They compared this general economic growth with the factors which produced the great crisis, the collapse of the market, the increase of productivity and the decline in working force, the shrinking of the domestic and international markets; and concluded that an economic crisis in the post-war period, marked by mass unemployment was inevitable unless protective measures were taken in advance. Using the year 1940 as their point of departure because it represented the year of greatest peacetime production, these economists pointed out that despite this high level of production 9,000,000 workers could not be absorbed by industry or agriculture.
The spectre of mass unemployment haunted these men, particularly since the war economy created a new labor force of many millions. If peacetime production did not succeed in far surpassing the production levels of 1940, they said, then the crisis is inevitable. The New Dealers, under the leadership of Henry Wallace, began a campaign for “full employment” and maximum production. By full employment they meant 60,000,000 workers based on production at a rate of from $150 to $160 billion annually. They did not ask that these levels be attained the day the war ended, but rather that this goal be adopted and all efforts directed toward reaching it as quickly as possible after the war, to prevent an inevitable post-war “depression” in the reconversion period.
In the minds of these New Dealers and in Wallace’s book the proposal is made that where private enterprise is unable to fully operate its industries and employ a maximum of workers, the government must step into the picture to guarantee the above aims. That means to support the economy with public works, subsidies and the operation of plants shut down where it would not conflict with private industry. Big business and its spokesmen turned on Wallace as the exponent of a “state-controlled economy” as against “free enterprise.” They argued that left alone they could achieve prosperity; that the evils of American society spring from government intervention (they begged for government intervention and government efforts to save big business during the ’30’s).
 
Post-War Crisis Is Inevitable
The New Deal economists, however, were not the only ones who forecast a post-war crisis of U.S. capitalism. For different and more fundamental reasons, the Marxists also forecast a postwar crisis. The difference is one of time. It is not a question of whether a post-war crisis is inevitable, but of exactly when it will come. The Workers Party, for example, has said that a post-war crisis is inevitable, but before it comes the country will experience a short period of boom made possible precisely by the conditions created by the war. In its resolution on the Unitfid States, adopted at its convention in June, the Workers Party authored some of these factors:
“While the HISTORIC prospect of American capitalism is that of declining production and mass unemployment as part of the social crisis of capitalism on a world scale, the IMMEDIATE prospect is for an economic boom with a high level of production and a relatively small amount of unemployment. The boom is based upon a conjunction of the following factors: (a) the ready market provided by five years of accumulated demand for consumer goods as a result of curtailed production during the war; (b) the potential purchasing power represented by cash reserves accumulated during the war-time period of full employment and overtime pay (over $150 billion dollars in bank deposits and war bonds of individuals); (c) the relatively high incomes of five million farm families whose prospects for continued prosperity are good as a result of the vast agricultural areas devastated by the war; (d) the large orders for heavy equipment placed by foreign countries through credits made available by the U.S. government loans (Great Britain, France, Belgium, The Netherlands); (e) the continued government expenditures for military purposes (though reduced, still higher than any previous peace-time budget), for various subsidies, GI loans and other allowances, and for necessary public works, including those of local government; (f) the huge cash reserves of corporations piled up out of war-time profits and available for extensive modernization of plants and equipment; (g) the swollen cash reserves of banks available on easy terms for industrial expansion and the financing of consumer credit accounts; (h) the prospect for continued employment and rising prices, both of which induce workers to invest their earnings in durable goods like houses, automobiles, refrigerators, radios, etc., rather than bank them.”
Not all the factors outlined in that resolution have occurred precisely in the way described. But in the main the picture presented in it is what we observe in the present economic situation. A few illustrations will suffice to prove the point.
 
The Boom Side of the Picture
On the boom side of the picture the following factors must be readily-acknowledged as its strong aspects, despite contradictory elements:
Production: Taking the 1935-1939 average of a 100, the production index rose to 174 at the end of July 1946 and continues to rise. In the terms of money, industrial production takes place at an annual rate of $172,000,000,000. Allowing for price changes, this is the highest peacetime production rate in American history, far beyond the demands of the New Deal economists. It compares favorably to wartime production.
Employment: 58,000,000 are now gainfully employed. This marks the highest employment levels ever reached in this country. As a result of this employment, unemployment is at the very-low point of 2,000,000. From the standpoint of capitalist economics, this really means no unemployment whatever and compares more than favorably with the prosperity period of the ’20’s. It is certainly an improvement over 1940, the previous high economic year when more than 9,000,000 were unemployed.
Business profits: These have reached a new all-time high annual rate of $11,000,000,000, AFTER TAXES!
Income payments: These are now paid at the annual rate of $167,000,000,000 and are also the highest in history.
Farm incomes: In contrast to previous periods when farm income also suffered in relation to industrial, at the present time it is at an unprecedented height, accompanied by a great reduction of farm debts and mortgages.
And finally, there is a vast increase in construction which employs a vast amount of capital goods.
But this is only one side of the picture. On the other side, we can see some of the factors which make for the future decline, great disproportions which exist between the classes in the present boom revealing that, within the confines of the boom, a new enrichment of the capitalist class takes place at the expense of the workers and the mass of people. Thus, there is a continuation of the process of development and the relationship of the classes that existed prior to and during wartime.
First of all, though not most important, taxes remain at a high rate for all the classes, but effect the working class most sharply of all; shortages in raw materials continue, as in freight transportation.
 
Real Wages Are Declining Rapidly
Most important factors, however, are the following:
Wages: While employment is at its height, take home pay has actually declined (8.5 per cent between April 1935 and July 1946). But worse than that, real wages have declined to their lowest point since the early years of the war due to the rapid rise of prices.
Prices: What the capitalist class has been unable to take directly from the working masses, it is taking by increasing prices. Prices rose higher since the expiration of the old OPA last June 30 than in the previous 38 months. Taking the August 1939 price index of 100 as our measuring point, the index of 28 basic commodities reached 250 by the end of July. Even under the OPA the price index rose to 199. Compared to the post-war period of the First World War, when prices rose by one-fourth, we find now that prices have risen by more than a third since the end of the war.
Inventories: Related to the decline in real wages and rising prices, is the increase in inventories to a record $30,000,000,000. Inventories continue to rise and although big business does not yet regard this as “excessive,” it is reaching a danger point. Two factors are responsible for this pile-up of goods and they do not conflict: (a) consumers are not buying goods in the amount forecast because of higher prices and fears for an unstable future; business is holding back goods waiting for an even greater kill on the market by holding out for still higher prices. At a not too distant point, saturation will be reached in the pile-up of goods which must result in a decline in production and a rise of unemployment.
Why cannot this boom period last indefinitely? Because long-term factors operate against it so long as the capitalist system continued to exist. The basic hope of American capitalism for prosperity rests upon a domination of the world market. The domestic market no longer provides the means for the present level of production since that would require a continuously rising standard of living of the masses, rising wages, declining prices and a decline in the profits of industry and finance. But under the capitalist system, wages can never equal production; on the contrary, production far outstrips wages. The greater the industrial potential, the more refined the technological organization of industry, the more vast is the production of goods, the greater is the narrowing of the domestic market.
It is this which drives American capitalism to enlarge the market for its goods beyond the borders of the country. If it can dominate the markets of the world, then it can safeguard the domestic market and keep a high level of production and employment. But it is precisely this factor which operates against the prospects of a future, extended period of economic boom.
In world economy, the United States meets with the sharpest rivalry of other capitalist powers in a struggle over control of the world market and sources of-raw materials. While it is true that American interests have been significantly advanced over pre-war years, the other powers are fighting back most desperately. This is especially true of Great Britain which is struggling to maintain the Empire against the encroachments of American imperialism.
In addition, there are political factors which intervene to make more difficult the realization of the American businessman’s new aim. Stalin’s Russia has already erected a fence around the Balkans and Eastern Europe. The United States meets the rivalry of her Allies in Western Europe who themselves rest upon the exploitation of their colonial empires. And it is precisely these empires which the United States wants to free from their control, to open them up for exploitation by American capital. Thus far we have mentioned only the factor of imperialist rivalry. But there is the factor of colonial revolt and the movement of national independence which militates against this long-term aim of the United States. American policy against these independence movements are qualified by the prospects that might exist for her exploitation of these “independent” countries.
 
The Prospects for Export of Capital
The devastation of Europe by the war has considerably reduced the prospects for an immediate export of huge masses of capital by the United States and for the present one cannot say with certainty that Europe offers any large hope for the end-products of American expansion.
These then are some of the factors of disintegration which face American capitalism. On the one hand, we have cited the elements which give rise to the present boom. On the other, are the elements which threaten its continuation. The principal reason for the boom lies in the scarcities, created by the war economy; the moment these are supplied, American capitalism must rest its hope on the conquest of the world market.
But even the present boom rests upon a diminishing share of the masses in the prosperity that does exist. Thus the struggle that occurs now is around the effort of’ the monopoly capitalists to squeeze ever greater profits from the masses of the working people, while the workers fight desperately to obtain a greater share of the national product. When one observes the real decline of wages and the continuing rise of prices which eats into the standard of living of the masses, it is clear why the struggle of the workers for wages must accompany an unrelenting struggle against rising prices.
The fact that the struggle between monopoly capitalism and the workers is so sharp in the boom period is the living proof that the boom is extremely tenuous, reflecting not a period of rising, expanding capitalism on a world scale, but a declining, narrowing capitalism which can exist only by depressing the level of existence of all the people in the world – as well as those in the United States. In this very fact, lies the necessity not merely for the struggle of the workers at home against imperialist capitalism, but also for the world solidarity of all who work in order to live.
 

Gates: Nuremberg Showed Moscow Trials Were Frameups (14 October 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
The Refusal of Natalia Trotsky’s Request
Nuremberg Showed Moscow Trials
Were Frameups
(14 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 41, 14 October 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Leaving aside for the moment the main purpose of the Nuremburg Trial [1], it did accomplish one historic act. In a negative way, it proved that the Moscow Trials against the Old Bolsheviks were calculated frame-ups by Stalin against the leaders of the Russian Revolution.
The negative proof was provided in the refusal of the Nuremburg Court to entertain the petition of committees in the United States and England, composed of trade unionists, writers and public men, including a petition from Natalia Sedov, widow of Leon Trotsky and mother of Leon Sedov, to investigate the charges of the Moscow Trials that Trotsky and his son, Sedov, had conspired with the German and Japanese governments to wage war on Russia. This was a real opportunity for the Allied powers, particularly Russia, to strengthen their case against the Nazis, IF there was only a grain of truth in the charges of the Moscow Trials. That there was not even a grain of truth in the trials is apparent from the Nuremburg Trial, as well as the trials held in Japan, where the defendants and the charges of the Moscow Trials have not been mentioned once in any way whatever.
 
World Doubted Verdict of Moscow Trials
The main charge of the Moscow Trials, you must remember, was that Leon Trotsky had conspired with Germany and Japan to invade Russia, overthrow the Stalin regime, seize power with the aid of his alleged group in Russia (Zinoviev, Kamenev, Radek, Piatakov, etc.) and then grant territorial and business concessions to the fascist and military dictatorships of the respective Axis countries. To accomplish this aim, Trotsky was charged with ordering his alleged group to engage in sabotage, and terrorist acts against the regime and its functionaries. Trotsky was also charged with having met the Nazi leader Hess secretly as well as representatives of the German General Staff. These meetings, it was further alleged, helped prepare the war against Russia and worked out the details of the master plan.
On the basis of these charges, Stalin’s secret police prepared a series of trumped-up charges and pre-arranged trials in which the outstanding leaders of the Russian Revolution, Lenin’s principal associates and the founders of the workers’ state were judicially murdered by the dictator in the Kremlin.
The world received the Moscow Trials and the verdicts with grave doubts. The pre-arranged trials and the extorted confessions, the self-abasement of the witnesses and their willingness to indulge in the lowest forms of self-incrimination and recrimination gave the whole spectacle a ludicrous though macabre appearance. The revolution was devouring its children, cried the opponents of the Russian Revolution. Here was the living proof that socialism was an inhuman system. For though there was nothing in common between Stalin’s regime and socialism, the ruling class in Russia conspired against the best interests of the Revolution in the name of socialism.
 
Stalinists Try to Justify Trials
The trials brought into existence committees in many countries to investigate the charges of the Moscow hangmen. The most famous was the Preliminary Commission of Inquiry which held hearings in Mexico to obtain direct evidence from Trotsky on the charges made against him. Socialists, radicals and liberals entered this movement for various reasons. The radicals and liberals to guarantee a measure of justice to the defendants; the socialists to preserve the theory, practice, morals and traditions of the socialist movement. Thus, long before Nuremburg, the Preliminary Commission had determined that the Moscow Trials were a frame-up.
In preparation of the movements that inevitably came into existence to doubt and challenge the brutal murder of Lenin’s associates, Moscow unleashed its own legions of hired liars and propagandists, in all countries to defend the trials and endorse the verdicts of the secret police trials. During the days of the Hitler-Stalin Pact these agents of Moscow had tough sailing to square the Moscow Trials, which had charged the defendants with being German agents, and the new alliance between Russia and Germany. In those days, the pact was defended on the grounds that Germany under Hitler wanted peace; that it was Great Britain and France and the United States which were the imperialist war mongers. But when Hitler invaded Russia in violation of the pact and to the complete surprise of Stalin, the latter’s agents throughout the world were saved their difficulties.
The new line was that the pact with Germany served to give Russia a breathing spell to prepare for war on the side of the Allies. And Germany’s invasion of Russia seemed to prove the veracity of the Moscow Trials. Former Russian Ambassador Davies wrote a fairy tale called Mission to Moscow, which was compounded of GPU lies fed to the gullible, conceited and ignorant diplomat. Hollywood turned out a movie from this book which helped to bolster up the lies of the Moscow Trials as seen by this duped Ambassador. But the Stalinists were unsatisfied with the results of this assistance from an official of the State Department.
They had two of their fellow-travelers and agents in the United States, Michael Sayers and Alfred Kahn, write another book called The Great Conspiracy, which set out to prove that the men who made the Russian Revolution were really foreign agents from the very beginning and that the Moscow Trials were wholly justified. This book, too, was inspired by the NKVD and reproduced all the official lies prepared in the Kremlin.
The new world situation which finds Russia and the Western Powers In a struggle for world power has once again brought into question the whole course of Stalinism and particularly the Moscow Trials. That is why the Stalinists are carrying out such a concentrated campaign to sell this new book written by their hired literary hacks
 
Unable to Prove Charges with Established Facts
The doubts about the Moscow Trials are again spreading and the verdict of the commission headed by the venerable John Dewey that the Moscow Trials were a frame-up has gathered new force.
The Stalinist frame-up artists, for example, charged:

Trotsky met with Hess and reached an agreement with the German General Staff.
 
Trotsky communicated his agreement with the German fascists and Japanese militarists for war against Russia to Piatakov, who flew to Oslo from Berlin in a German airplane.
 
The conspiracy was furthered by a meeting of Trotsky’s son, Leon Sedov, with one Holtzman on September 1, 1936, at the Hotel Bristol in Copenhagen.

There are literally hundreds of other such similar charges. None of them are corroborated. No details are given, such as: where did Trotsky meet Hess, and when? What name did Piatakov have on his passport when he went to Norway? Exactly where did he arrive and who manned the airport when he reached Oslo?
It is easy to understand why no proof was provided. These incidents were clumsily invented in the offices of the NKVD, and the Mexican hearings of the Preliminary Commission revealed the following uncontradicted facts:

The Moscow frame-up artists could not have Piatakov in Oslo earlier than “December of 1935” because it was too well known that he was in Moscow and in Berlin prior thereto, and as late as December 21 was in Berlin, according to all newspaper dispatches. But in December of 1935, the airport at Oslo is closed down because of inclement weather. No planes leave or arrive there. There is no record at the airport of the arrival of any plane from Berlin on the date given in the Moscow Trials and no evidence that any person resembling Piatakov was ever in Norway on or about the date given.
 
The meeting of Sedov and Holtzman in the Bristol Hotel was likewise an invention of the secret police and supported by “confession.” Sedov was not in Copenhagen on the dates given and the Bristol Hotel had burned down in the year 1917.
 
Trotsky never met Hess in his life, nor any other representatives of the German government, or the German General Staff.

But it was out of this kind of stuff the Moscow Trials were built. And it was on the basis of an acceptance of these lies that the gullible tourist in world politics, ex-Ambassador Davies, wrote his scurrilous book. But he was and remains at least unconscious of what he was doing. But the same cannot be said for the hired literary hacks, Sayers and Kahn. They are conscious Stalinist agents.
That is why we say that the Nuremburg Trial is a living answer to the frameups of the Moscow Trials. If the evidence of the Moscow frameups was real evidence, then it would
have been reintroduced into the Nuremburg hearings as additional proof of the Nazi conspiracy. The petition presented to the Nuremburg judges by the more than a hundred outstanding trade unionists, liberals, writers and teachers that Hess be questioned about his alleged meeting with Trotsky; that any other defendants be questioned on whether they or any of their representatives met with Trotsky or any representative purporting to speak for him or his son; whether any money was ever given by Germany, by the cabinet or the General Staff, to Trotsky or any of his representatives; whether Piatakov was given a passport by the German government to go to Oslo; and whether there were any documents implicating the Old Bolsheviks in any conspiracy against Russia.
But the Nuremburg judges saw fit not to pursue this line of questioning. That the Russian representatives did not avail themselves of this “opportunity” to prove their case is understandable. To have pursued this line of questioning of the defendants would have borne out the truth of the charges that the Moscow Trials were a frameup; that there was not a grain of truth in any of the charges contained in the indictment and the prosecution headed by the arch-conspirator Stalin and his agent, Vyshinsky. Vyshinsky was a prosecutor at Nuremburg. He could have, had he wanted to, easily continued where he left off in Moscow. But he did not; he was fearful of the results of such a line of questioning, fearful that it would disclose his role in the Moscow Trials as a Stalinist puppet engaged in murdering the leaders of the Russian Revolution whom he had opposed in 1917 and 1918.
Why then did not the prosecutors representing the Allied countries accept the proposals of the petitioners? For two reasons:

They could not embarrass their Russian allies in the prosecution, for undoubtedly the Russians objected to any kind of examination of the defendants relating to the “evidence” of the Moscow Trials.
 
The charges of the Moscow Trials were too palpably false and ludicrous to be rehearsed again.

*
Footnote by ETOL
1. Throughout the original printed version of the article the English name of the city is spelled incorrectly (Nuremburg), although it is spelled correctly in the title.
 

vis: Wm. Dunne Expelled by Stalinist Party (14 October 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Carl Davis
Wm. Dunne Expelled by Stalinist Party
(14 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 41, 14 October 1946, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

William F. Dunne is the most recent prominent Communist Party member to be expelled in the current drive of the Foster-Dennis leadership to to whip the membership into line behind the new policies of American Stalinism. Of the latest group of people so expelled, McKenney, Minton, Smith and Dunne, the latter is by far the most important. Not so much for what he counted in the Stalinist Party of today, but for his past.
Dunne came out of Montana as a leader in a state dominated by the copper interests. He brought with him to the young and militant Communist Party of twenty-five years ago the spirit of native American working class struggle and rose quickly in the leadership of the organization. At one time he was co-editor of the Daily Worker; at all times he was one of its leading trade union functionaries. The. protracted factionalism of the Twenties and the subsequent Stalinization of the party had a corrupting influence on this man. Charged with personal weaknesses fatal to a working class leader, Dunne was removed from leadership of even a Stalinist party which is notoriously corrupt politically.
For some years Dunne was completely out of Stalinist political life but he was maintained by the party, as they say, in the hope that he would rehabilitate himself and be of service to them. But apparently Dunne was never able to rehabilitate himself, even in the cause of Stalinism. The party was never able to make the use of him it desired in championing its anti-working class politics and practices. But this was not due to any serious political reasons. Dunne never really understood the nature of the struggle of Trotsky against Stalinist degeneration in the early days of the struggle. He finally found his way to support Stalin. But before that he once wrote back gleefully from Moscow in 1926 that “Trotsky was back with a vengeance.” Perhaps the Stalinists have never forgotten this and have inscribed it in his dossier.
But now, in the concrete situation arising out of the struggle against Browderism, which is only more blatant Fosterism – or, rather, the continuation of Stalinist policy in America with new emphases growing out of the new world political relations – Dunne was caught up with as an “oppositionist” to party policies from the “left.”
Still trying to mobilize the party behind the swift and sudden removal of the “beloved leader, Browder,” Foster finds it necessary to carry on the fight against what he calls the “left” in the party, those who advocate what they think is a class struggle policy. Since it is a totalitarian party, the CP finds it necessary to denounce its new victims for having advanced the “petty bourgeois, anarchistic slogan of ‘freedom of criticism’ to facilitate their propaganda of views hostile to the party.” And the party must carry on the fight against “both Browder revisions and ‘left’ sectarianism (which) challenge the basic strategy and tactical line which our party has worked out ...”
It is the same old story: Against the so-called right and the so-called left in what is actually a struggle inside of a movement which is as a whole anti-working class and counter-revolutionary. Even the criticisms of the Dunnes, Smiths and McKenneys flow from basic Stalinist premises. Most If not all of these people have lived too long with Stalinism, have too long endorsed its crimes against the working class to be of any service to socialism. They are in essence Stalinist hacks who stepped out of line and were, therefore, the victims of procedures characteristic of this movement.
We can only repeat what we wrote in our editorial of two weeks ago:
“Thus, the American Communist Party pursues an imperialist policy, completely subordinated to Moscow, and cannot tolerate the slightest differences of opinion within its ranks. The effort made to paint William Z. Foster with a leftist brush fails completely. It is obvious that the switch to him was made because Browder was so compromised that the present policies could not have been inaugurated under his auspices.
“The McKenney, Minton and Smith expulsions, however, reveal that underneath the heavy bureaucratic crust that covers the Stalinist Party, dissatisfaction takes place even to the point of struggle against the leadership and its policies. There are thousands of militant workers in that party who can and must be won away from its counter-revolutionary, anti-working class environment.”
 

Gates: Peace Was Not on Agenda of the Conference at Paris (28 October 1946)





Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Peace Was Not on Agenda
of the Conference at Paris
(28 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 43, 28 October 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE Tragic Farce of Paris, more popularly known as the “Peace Conference,” has just ended. History will record it as a unique gathering. The wartime allies came to the meeting as bitter rivals. But this is riot the first tithe that warring coalitions split into contending camps over a division of the spoils. The uniqueness of the Paris Conference is that it had no authority; no power of decision!
The dreary weeks of debate, deliberation, agreement and disagreement were all preliminary exercises. The diplomats were merely using the occasion to broadcast the views of their governments in the best possible light to the world. And the peace treaties which were agreed upon by the various commissions are not yet treaties. Everything that happened at Paris is subject to a higher authority, an authority which alone can make decisions: the Big Four, or what is the reality, the Big Three.
They, and they alone, will decide whether decisions arrived at “democratically” in Paris will stand or whether they will be revised in part, or rejected in whole. The monopoly of politics follows the monopoly of power. The smaller nations of the world who survive by the sufferance of the giant military powers have no genuine rights. They play the role of “advisers,” and the Paris Peace Conference had only an advisory capacity. This limited role had already been determined by the United Nations Conference held in San Francisco in 1945.
What else could the hierarchically organized UN achieve except a hierarchically organized peace conference? The Big Four permitted the small nations to participate in organizing the “peace” of the world—but only insofar as it conformed to the pattern drawn by the two imperialist camps. But since imperialist relations are not static, and since a deterioration of relations between the powers had taken place since San Francisco, Paris could not help but reflect such changing relations.
 
Power Is What Counts
Now, the United States and Great Britain are quite willing to accept everything decided at Paris on the theory that the compromise agreements reached there are the best possible achievements of the former Allies and should be allowed to stand. Behind this “democratic” gesture lies the imperialist advantage they have gained through a majority voting bloc which brought some partial victories over Russia and her bloc.
But Molotov threatens to overturn some of the treaties on the simple but obvious ground that they do not suit Russia and her satellites! The so-called compromises were not arrived at by agreement, insists Molotov, but by an accidental (!) majority which the United States and Great Britain had. How different it would have been if Russia had this voting majority. Then, everything decided at Paris would have been just and proper and democratic. The very argumentation of the big foreign ministers reveal that power, military and political power, is the determinant in world political relations. Everything else, the bathos about democracy, fairness, decency, justice, brotherhood of man, peace, disarmament were merely cynical evasions of the truth. The truth is, that the democratic rights of the people and their economic security had no place at Paris.
Paris was a meeting ground of imperialists carving up the map of Europe once more, shifting peoples from one country to another, annexing territories and placing indemnities against defeated countries. And finally, in its more decisive sense, the Paris Peace Conference was part of the diplomatic preparations for a new world war. Born out of an imperialist war, the Paris Conference could do little else except the first groundwork for another war.
The UN, no less than the League of Nations, is an alliance of imperialist brigands. If its sponsors find it a little embarrassing to speak confidently of democracy, self-determination and peace in an atomic world, it is because of the composition of its constituents. As a body purposely organized to “secure the peace” of the world in order to maintain the new imperialist division of the globe, the UN could not permit the Paris Peace Conference to get out of hand by the free actions of the smaller nations who could muster a majority vote.
Thus if the sponsors of the Paris Conference are a little in doubt about the UN, they were quite boastful about the peace conference. While violating every democratic right of the European peoples, they talked loudly about peace, democracy and national freedom. Not even the organizers of Versailles were so hypocritical, though they contributed their fair share to history. Lloyd George, Clemenceau and Orlando frankly admitted that their peace was one of revenge. They cynically acknowledged that all talk about self-determination of nations, democracy and peace were nothing more than propaganda; that such aims would be achieved only to the degree that they fitted in with the new Europe they were planning: Yet the organizers of the Paris Conference, if they are less frank than the men of Versailles, have produced results that far exceed the robbers’ peace of 1919.
 
What They Decided
An examination of Europe at the end of the Paris tragedy reveals the utterly hypocritical and cynical nature of the peace conference. The Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, subscribed to by all the powers, died even before the war ended. Their requiem was merely sounded at Paris. And here is what Paris accomplished, subject to the veto of any one of the Big Three, or Big Four powers:<(p>


The conference assumed and accepted the division of Europe into two spheres of influence, a Russian zone stretching from Stettin on the north to Trieste on the Adriatic. This division of the Continent between the Russian and Western blocs is the living answer to the claims of the diplomats that an acceptance of this “reality” is a guarantee of the peace and security of Europe. On the contrary, this very division of Europe is the basis for the coming war.
 
Because there is no agreement between the Big Four on what to do with Germany, or even on what was decided at Potsdam, Germany remains economically, politically and geographically divided. The Paris conference was unable to even discuss Germany and a peace treaty with her has been indefinitely postponed. In the meantime, this great industrial nation, inhabited by tens of millions of people, remains prostrate, economically disorganized, spiritually decayed. Astride the neck of Germany, which alone could bring about an economic revival of the Continent, stand the Big Four, fearful of each other and unable to achieve one constructive act which' would advance European civilization.
 
Drafts (!) of treaties with Rumania, Bulgaria, Italy, Hungary and Finland were adopted by a vote of 15 to 16. If Russia did not get everything she wanted in them, she nevertheless got her chunks of land and reparations against the peoples of these countries.
 
By evasion, the conference affirmed the incorporation of Baltic states into the borders of Russia. By some strange reasons, these countries, never at war with either Germany or Russia, were treated like defeated warring powers—their fate decided by stronger powers. The brigands at Paris were not at all concerned with the simple question: what did the people of Estonia, Latvia or Lithuania think and want.
 
The fate of Poland, over which the war began, was decided by the Big Three and its decision was not even subject to review by the peace conference.
 
Without consulting the inhabitants of the Trieste area, the conference decided to internationalize the area. Yugoslavia, the great “democracy” ruled over by that well-known “democrat,” Tito, just walked out of the conference at that point and declared it would not accept any decision except one which turned the city and its environs over to it.
 
The conference neatly avoided any discussion and decision on the question of slave labor, the use of prisoners of war as laborers without pay or time limit, and the right of self-determination, the guarantee of democratic rights for the people.
 

Imperialism Is the Enemy
The role of the Western powers and the United States could have been foretold in advance. As imperialist powers, with considerable wealth at their disposal, spine with vast colonial empires still at their command, they were able to appear a bit more magnanimous toward the smaller and defeated warring countries. Their strategy, however, was dictated by competition with Russia. The totalitarian nature of Stalinism only aided the capitalist powers to play this role to the hilt. For throughout Europe, Russia has conducted herself in a primitive, brutal conquerors way. And if Russia was highhanded in her treatment of the Eastern European and Balkan countries, her actions have in general been supported by the United States and Great Britain, as well as the Paris conference. Thus, all the imperialists share equal responsibility for the tragedy of Europe.
The large problem of European society remains unsolved. Europe is an economic wasteland; a continent economically impoverished and hopelessly divided geographically, her peoples starving by the millions. What did Paris do to alleviate this mass misery? What did it do to put the economic machinery of Europe in motion, to achieve a production of goods and food? Nothing!
Europe remains ground underfoot by the new imperialist rivalries which have emerged from the war. It is divided into two parts. Germany, a key to the problem of the continent is like an oasis in the Old World. There is no freedom in Europe. The people, having gone through years of war, must again pay for the costs of the destruction by unemployment, hunger, and reparations. They are made to pay for the crimes of their rulers—not only by the capitalist imperialists, but also by Stalin’s so-called socialist fatherland. The economic chaos of Europe has been guaranteed by the Paris conference.
This is one aspect of the great problem. But, what about peace? Did Paris further the cause of peace? Who is there that will really contend this? Quite the contrary occurred.
Peace is now a period of armed interlude between two wars. Is the next war on the agenda of today? No, but all the preparations for the next war are being made now. If war comes immediately, it will result only from the madness of the imperialist rulers, for logically it is yet too early. But the danger of war is not one-sided, not restricted to one imperialist camp. It comes equally from both camps, the Russian, as well as the Anglo-American. Those who see in the present world situation only an encirclement of Russia, the “imperialist attack on the Soviet Union,” are living in a dead past and preparing a future support of one imperialist camp against another.
The lesson of the war just fought remains: it was an imperialist war. The imperialists still are in power. They are preparing a new slaughter more deadly and destructive than the last. They are preparing an atomic war which will wipe out civilization. The hope of humanity, the hope for civilization and its survival lies in the abolition of capitalism, of the bureaucratic collectivist regime of totalitarian Stalinism and their replacement by the rule of the people, the democracy of the masses, by the socialist society of real peace freedom and security.
 



THE military reverses suffered by the Allied armies, to whom Roosevelt had long ago pledged economic. political and moral support, has resulted in the sharpest reactions in the United States, drawing this country closer to a military participation in the second imperialist war. Battle lines are no longer confined to Flander Fields. In the imperialist world of an international economy there is not a single section of the globe which does not feel the reverberations of the war in Europe. Germany appears to be winning the war and this possibility has fundamental significance for the future of American capitalism.
In a historical sense, under conditions of normal capitalist development (the absence of wars or revolutions) the main economic antagonist of the United States is England. The Empire, up to the outbreak of the present war, along with the United States, formed the two dominant factors in the world market, with the former possessing the largest area of colonies. Their economic rivalry penetrated into every continent. British capitalism, however, is a decaying capitalism ruled by a degenerated aristocracy. The United States, with the greatest industrial organization in the world, never feared the Empire, because it has always felt that John Bull could in time be easily subdued.
United States imperialism, however, does fear a dynamic Germany, under the rule of a totalitarian regime. German industry is the finest on the European Continent. Latest technological improvements, extreme rationalization of production, and an enslaved proletariat, have enabled the Ger-man ruling class to overcome its post-war debilitation and to make its way once more as a serious rival in the arena of world trade and the struggle for a redivision of the earth.
 
Post War America
The economic center of the world shifted to the United States in the post-war period. It emerged from the World War a creditor nation seeking to bring about a rehabilitation of Europe under its complete economic hegemony. Trotsky, in examining this phenomenon from the viewpoint of the continental proletarian revolution and the establishment of the United States of Socialist Europe (A Criticism of the Draft Program of the Communist International), foresaw an intense conflict between the revolution and America’s attempt to put Europe on “rations” (absolute control of economic life; dictating production, consumption, trade, wage standards, etc., in favor of American capitalism).
Throughout the twenties this was the prevailing tendency. In an effort to prevent complete economic domination of the continent by England and France, especially where it concerned German capitalism, the United States intervened time and time again to forestall the collapse of Reich economy (the Dawes Plan, the Young Commission, Hoover Moratorium, etc). The reasons were two-fold: to prevent a victory of the proletarian revolution in Germany and to balance off that country against Anglo-French imperialism.
The first problem was solved by Stalinism in a rather precarious way for the United States. Stalinism decapitated two revolutions and in concert with German social democracy paved the way for the victory of German fascism. The reactionary Hitler revolution resulted in a revivified Ger-man economy, a regrowth of Germany imperialism and the establishment of an enormous military organization.
Under Hitler, Germany has marched from victory to victory; it now demands a lion’s share of the world market and in particular, Britain’s colonial empire. But more important for the United States, it has closed the door to American economic domination of the Continent and has postponed – perhaps for many decades – the possibility of American imperialism placing Europe on rations. Naturally, an Allied triumph of devastating proportions, made possible through American military intervention in the war, would force the problem to the foreground once more, but this time American imperialism would proceed quickly to establish its domain over European economy. Europe under rations in that case and in the absence of a successful proletarian revolution, would become a fact! This development, however, is highly speculative when the fortunes of war point in an opposite direction.
Temporarily at least, there is a way out for the United States. Trotsky, in his brilliant observations on this problem, indicated that in the event of a successful continental revolution,
“The United States will try to overcome and get out of its difficulties and helplessness primarily at the expense of Europe – REGARDLESS WHETHER THIS WILL HAPPEN IN ASIA, CANADA, SOUTH AMERICA, AUSTRALIA or EUROPE ITSELF.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Under present-day world conditions, complete domination of South America has become America’s principal objective.
The probability of an early European proletarian revolution has been temporarily avoided by recent events. But the victory of Hitler created, in a totally different manner, the same problems for the United States. German industry under Nazi rule strives to control world economy and therefore must, in the event of a military victory over Anglo-French imperialism, move against the United States. These two mighty industrial nations would become enmeshed in a struggle to the finish.
“In a critical epoch,” wrote Trotsky, “the hegemony of the United States will prove even more complete, more open, more ruthless, than in the period of boom”. We are now approaching such a development which will, in the ensuing months, become clear to everyone.
 
America Moves Toward Autarchy and Totalitarianism
Roosevelt, his administration and the decisive section of America’s financial and industrial ruling class prepare to fortify their military organizations for the immediate future with two perspectives which are interlinked. The first, is an autarchic and totalitarian development in the United States so as to be in a position to engage an autarchic and totalitarian Germany. “Totalitarian means to fight totalitarian Germany”, is the watchword of the leading governmental spokesmen as they pay obeisance to democracy and democratic methods. The drive in this direction will gain added momentum with the continuance of the second imperialist war.
Revolutionary Marxists long ago predicted this development in the democratic states in the event of war. France and England have already adopted the necessary measures by which their governments more closely resemble the German example. These trends are being solidified so that even assuming an Allied victory, few expect a return to the pre-war democratic conditions in England and France.
 
American Economy as an International Economy
There are many who vainly hope that the United States may avoid all foreign entanglements, especially war, by a policy of economic and political insulation. This hope is based upon the erroneous belief that American economy is self-sustained; that it can withdraw behind the protection of its borders and prosper on the basis of an all-embracing domestic economy, that is, upon an expansion of the home market.
The living factors of American economic existence, however, precludes such a development. A few facts will suffice to bear this out.
While the United States enjoys a favorable balance of trade, a preponderance of exports over imports, it requires, nevertheless, a quantity of raw materials unobtainable in domestic areas. These raw materials are of enormous importance to American industry.
For example, American imports all of its coffee, tea, cacao beans, and most of its cane sugar. Rubber is obtained from Malaya and the Dutch East Indies; jute from India; and manganese from Russia, Brazil, the Gold Coast and India. Chrome ore is brought from Russia; tungsten from China, and vanadium ore from Peru. The indispensable tin is derived from the Dutch East Indies, Malaya and Bolivia. Additional petroleum is obtained from Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia, while Chile supplies nitrates. Without these raw materials, a large number of industries would be greatly handicapped.
More important is the manner in which American economy is interwoven with world economy. Isolationists insist that American property is not dependent upon foreign trade or the world market because of the small percentage of production diverted into the channels of export trade. Figures are cited to illustrate the validity of this theory. For example, it is shown that between the years 1909 and 1935, the highest percentage of American production so diverted, stood at the figure of 12.8 (1921); that in 1929, at the height of the prosperity period, the figure dropped to 9.8, and that during the thirties, in the years of crisis, the figures ranged between 6 and 7.
Such a view is extremely shortsighted, because it fails to take into consideration the following fundamental facts in the imperialist development of the United States. First of all, the United States is an imperialist nation, and having acquired colonies, embarked on the road of colonial exploitation. Within these colonies, or “possessions”, American finance capital has poured heavy investments. A profit economy demands continuous expansion, either in the direction of acquiring additional colonies, or by way of expansion on the basis of the existing empire.
Export trade is only one aspect of the international economic problem of the United States. More decisive than this, is the existence of American investments beyond her borders, both portfolio (investments in foreign government bond, government guaranteed corporations, bonds and stocks of foreign controlled and managed corporations) and direct (investments in American corporations abroad).
An examination of this field of American economy shows that in 1900, many years prior to American entrance in the World War, foreign investments reached the total of a half a billion dollars, confined largely to Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean. Immediately prior to the World War, this figure was trebled and American interests became international, even though from the point of view of world economy, it remained at a modest figure. But at the end of the twenties, portfolio investments increased to $8,238,700,000 and direct investments to $7,866,000,000, making a total foreign investment of $16,104,700,000. These figures show without the slightest doubt the development of American economy as a world economy.
Withdrawal from world economy would signify immediate paralysis and decay for American imperialism. Quite the contrary, the United States cannot withdraw from the struggle for domination of the world market. It must push ever onward toward complete world hegemony. This is the fundamental course of American economy. Roosevelt understands this. So does his Administration. It was long ago clear to America’s leading financiers and industrialists.
 
The War Dislocates World Economy
The outbreak of the present war brought about a dislocation of world economy. The European market, except for the Allies, is largely lost. Trade with England and France is essentially a war trade and its permanence is dependent entirely upon results of the battle. Under the given circumstances the European market is a completely distorted one and may cease entirely. In Asia, that is to say, China, Japan is today the decisive factor. Here the United States faces a challenge which it must ultimately face, but there is first Europe and Hitler.
Heretofore, Europe has been the largest single field of American investment, with a figure of $4,929,200,000. The safety of these investments is today highly dubious. It is impossible to foretell what will happen to them, since a Hitler victory will mean their complete usurpation. The loss of the Asiatic and European markets must therefore be compensated for in some other sector of the globe. There remains the Western Hemisphere, Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean and South America.
The Americas as a group are the largest area of economic penetration by the United States. Total investments in the Western world are, despite the economic crisis, near the figure of ten billion dollars. Canadian investments alone, reach almost four billion dollars, followed closely by South America, Mexico and the Caribbean.
 
What is Possible in South America?
In search for avenues of escape from the impasse created by the world economic crisis and the war, the United States prepares to dominate completely the western world, more particularly, South America.
Canada already forms a large area of investment and trade and expansion here is quite limited. The same is in a considerable degree true of Mexico and the Caribbean, areas which are of immense importance for politico-military reasons. But South America with a population of over a hundred million, is a vast and unexplored field for exploitation.
As we have already indicated. South America now supplies the United States with considerable quantities of tin, copper, petroleum, nitrates and rubber. Planned production of rubber and tin to satisfy the needs of an immense military America, would help solve the problem of losses resulting from possible adverse developments in Africa and the Dutch East Indies. In addition thereto, with in-vestments of great masses of capital, the United States could enhance the general supply of raw materials from this end of the hemisphere.
It is in relation to the great potentialities of South America that the Administration envisages the development of a hemispheric division of labor wherein the immense industrial United States would exploit the tremendous agricultural reaches of those countries and insure a continuous supply of necessary raw materials to the north.
But South America is militarily vulnerable. The long periods of anti-American sentiment has offered a fruitful field in many parts to the operations of the German, Italian and Japanese propagandists in the guise of trade missions and organizations. The great numbers of German military and air instructors who flooded the southern continent in the period preceding German rearmament, have left an indelible pro-German stamp upon numerous sections. They remain sources of irritation to the American aim of solidifying the western hemisphere against the totalitarian states, but precisely because of these conditions, the United States is preparing to intervene actively in the economic, political and military life of the Spanish American countries.
The Pan-American conference is the strongest weapon in the hands of Washington now. The existence of the Inter-American Neutrality Committee and the Inter-American Economic Committee serve to tighten the bonds between the colossus of the north and the southern continent, and as is patently clear, the preponderance of power rests with the United States.
In more recent weeks the drive of Germany across the lowlands offered Roosevelt the pretext of direct intervention in the affairs of South America. Secret discussions have taken place in the State Department with Brazilian representatives on the matter of common defense of that nation, as of the rest of South America. Brazil is presumed to be most dangerously affected by a victory of the Berlin-Rome Axis, since it is that part of the continent which projects deeply into the South Atlantic ocean, within bombing range of the totalitarian airmen. It is also the country where American military experts expect the first landings of foreign troops. That is why Brazil is the immediate object of American intervention. Plans already exist for American naval, air and army bases in that country. Arrangements have been concluded for the training of Brazilian airmen by the US army using American equipment.
In one country after another, daily discoveries of German Fifth Columns are announced and America offers aid to the smaller South American nations, who presumably cannot alone resist German espionage and sabotage organizations. The USS Quincy sailed for Uruguay as a symbol of American “protective” power, and a warning to Germany, Italy and Japan. A campaign of political pressure has been unloosed for the purpose of preparing more direct American intervention of a permanent character.
The State Department is now pushing plans for a Inter-American Bank. The purpose is to unite the 21 Latin-American countries in a system of hemispheric finance. But as Marquis W. Childs points out, American capital will make up the chief resources of this bank. Through this bank the United States will dominate the financial struc-trading structure of South America. Childs writes:
“... the State Department has been working for a more intelligent interchange of commodities and manufactured goods between North and South America. The Inter-American Bank would facilitate this exchange. What all this looks forward to is hemisphere trading.”
Eight countries have already agreed to the establishment of this bank. whose initial shares will be subscribed by the United States. These economic efforts are frankly directed against the totalitarian states.
The more recent events illustrate the manner of American intervention. The press reports Fifth Column activities in every Latin American country. General Marshall, US Army Chief of Staff, forecasts trouble in this hemisphere within a month, elaborating that he has in mind South America. That is the area within which the President desires the use of the National Guard in emergency services.
Leading commentators demand the seizure of all foreign colonies in the western world. Others propose that the United States shall buy them – take them in payment for war supplies, or defaulted war debts. The State Department announces that the United States will not tolerate a new foreign power in North or South America; that it will fight any incursion by Germany, Italy or Japan.
Under the slogan of “the Americas for Americans”, the United States envisages complete control of both western continents. This time, however, intervention is not aimed for a momentary economic and political victory. There is a far greater effort involved: Hemispheric control of the new world by the United States, the establishment of an inter-continental division of labor favorable to the United States, what Alsop and Kintner, in their American White paper, describe as a “modified imperialism.” What is certain by this is the establishment and an economic and political dictatorship of Washington in all the Americas. The United States is preparing to place South America on rations, to thereby replace its losses on other Continents.
Unlike former “normal” imperialist expansion, initiated by the private financial oligarchs of the country, followed by the sword and flag, the phenomenon of expansion under the direct leadership of the government has emerged. In the case of the present American aims in South America it is Washington itself which initiates and directs the movement toward domination. Acting for the government the Inter-American Bank, as previously stated, will effect a financial dictatorship over all the Americas. The primacy of American industry in this hemisphere and the subjugation of Latin-American agriculture will be the task of the Administration, whether of Roosevelt, or any other to succeed him. To make conclusive this control of the New World, the American government will establish what will be tantamount to a political and military dictatorship over the two continents. All of this, to be sure, will be done in the interest of American finance and industry. That is to say, the Sixty Families, whose whole interests the government represents.
These developments are certain unless the bourgeois order is overthrown, unless the era of socialism replaces the decaying capitalism of the New World. The future rests with the enormous proletarian reserves of the United States and the many millions of oppressed in Latin America.
Albert GATES
 



On July 20 at Havana, Cuba, the twenty-one Pan-American nations will gather under the immediate direction of the United States to consider ways and rneans of organizing the western hemisphere politically economically and militarily against the threat of Hitler.
The powerful American delegation will be headed by Secretary of State Hull and Assistant Secretary of State Adolph A. Berle, the man who developed the idea of the inter-American cartel, the main problem to be considered in Havana. This delegation is fortified by a number of experts in Latin American affairs.
Although, Argentina. Brazil and Uruguay expressed a marked coolness to what they regarded as a Yankee imperialist maneuver when the proposal for this conference was made, the overwhelming majority of the countries will participate actively with leading representatives. Brazil and Argentina, the most important South American nations will probably attend, but they have as yet to make any proposals to the agenda of the conference, or to the problems already posed to it by the United States. Pressure from the United States, however, will be exerted and there is no doubt that Washington will compel a full representation. And one way or another it will force some kind of agreement on the points up for consideration.
The conference meets under the shadow of the European war. The quick and astounding military victories of Germany raise the question of the relations between the Axis and South America. Germany and Italy threaten American imperial-interests in this hemisphere. Thus, the conference has as its main purpose to insulate the western world against any type of invasion by the Axis powers. The aim of the United States is to compel economic cooperation of the American nations. While the plan is as yet vague, it is outlined generally as (1) to take up the surplus food and raw materials produced by the South American countries; (2) to establish an export cartel; and (3) to organize and develop the resources and industries of Latin America with simultaneous hemispheric control of production.
 
German Penetration
The economic penetration of South America by Germany was carried out by the fascist regime through the barter system, whereby industrial products required by the South American nations were exchanged for agricultural commodities and raw materials. Germany became an increasingly important economic factor in the southern hemisphere up to the beginning of the war.
Confident of a quick victory over Great Britain, Hitler is therefore preparing for a continuation of economic relations with South American offering commitments for as early as September of this year.
In the meantime, the South American nations suffer sharp economic disturbances because of their inability to dispose of the great surpluses accumulated since the opening of the war. The conflict in the production of commodities between the United States and Latin America precludes the kind of exchange that would automatically relieve the stresses upon those countries. Up to now the European markets have been decisive to the economic existence of Latin America, and unless the United States can bring relief to that area by arranging to dispose of the surpluses, the conference is doomed to failure. To effect such relief, this country would have to compete on the Axis level.
The proposed inter-American cartel has exactly this in mind. It is intended to pool the resources of the western hemisphere, to organize the production of agricultural goods and industrial manufactures and to dispose of them through the cartel organization, thus preventing trade by Hitler with individual nations. America is prepared to carry the cost of the cartel, said to require an initial sum of $200,000,000. Through the cartel, trade will be carried on with Europe on a continental basis.
The success of the cartel would signify the elimination of Germany, or for that matter any other country, from the new world’s markets on a nation to nation trade relation. Recognizing this. Germany is waging a war of cajolery, coercion and economic inducements to prevent the success of the cartel.
The cartel, however, will have to overcome many difficulties of and by itself. The Latin American nations fear that the cartel will mean a greater domination of their countries by Yankee imperialism. Then there is the conflict in commodities to be considered. Inter-American cartel trade will require a uniform inter-American currency and complete financial reorganization to simplify economic activity. And most difficult of all, it will require a very rigid control of production.
 
Means Dictatorship
All of these factors will be difficult to overcome, unless the United States pays the initial costs and then follows up the economic reorganization with a virtual economic dictatorship over the Western world. If the Havana conference accepts the American proposals and proceeds to put them in effect, the dictatorship of Washington is inevitable.
Commenting on the conference in the Nation of July 13, Freda Kirchwey, the editor, proposes the establishment of an American League of Nations to fortify the program of the Roosevelt Administration. In recognizing its real significance, she suggests the erection of a “democratic totalitarianism” to combat the fascist totalitarianism of Germany and Hitler. What she meant to say was that the inter-American cartel and hemispheric unity can not be realized without dictatorial and totalitarian control by the United States.
The South American governments are well aware of this too. But they want to be certain that whatever course is adopted by the United States, it will be continued even through changing administrations, because above all, they want to be sure, as one journalist put it, “who butters their bread,” and keeps it buttered.
 
May Agree on Colonies
The conference will no doubt arrive at an agreement on the policy to be pursued in relation to possessions of the erstwhile allies in this hemisphere. A majority of the countries are now disposed to an inter-American control of these colonies, with the actual defense placed in the hands of one country (they are all agreed that the one country is the United States). There is general agreement on the Administration’s invocation of the Monroe Doctrine to forbid the seizure of these colonies by any new European power. This problem, however, is of minor consideration when related to the main purpose of the conference.
Under present-day world conditions, in the event of a decisive defeat of England it appears likely that there, will be a temporary imperialist concentration, if only as a stop-gap, in three decisive areas of the world: Europe under Hitler, controlling the colonial empires of France and Great Britain; the United States, dominant power in Latin America, and Japan in the Far East.
The conference in Cuba will act swiftly since time is a decisive factor in the solution of these problems. Thus, the Havana meeting is a decisive event in the development of the new American policy toward international problems as they are reflected in the western world. This is made abundantly clear by Roosevelt’s declaration that no American troops will fight on European soil. In other words, America’s attentions are directed mainly toward the problems in this hemisphere, and [it] is consequently preparing to wage a war to insure her complete domination of the western continents.
 



Another week has passed. But there has been no let-up in the preparations for war. Increased taxes, measures for the suppression of militant working class organizations, defense of profits, persecution of aliens – these are part of the general campaign.
 
The Alien’s Bill
The President signed the bill requiring the registration and fingerprinting of all aliens. Already the post Office and Justice departments have started their work which will stretch over a four month period. An “educational” campaign is to precede the registration and fingerprinting, in which 45,000 post offices will cooperate. Thus one measure to control the population in the ensuing period has become a law. complete organizational el
This legislation on aliens has been followed by a number of bills introduced in the House and the Senate calling for the liquidation of all political organizations advocating the abolition of capitalism. The bills aim at the severest censorship of political activities as a means of bringing about their complete organizational elimination.
Along with the passage of the anti-alien bill, Roosevelt announced an emergency situation and provided for the control and seizure of all shipping, American and foreign. It is not difficult to understand at whom this measure is directed. It is directed against French and British vessels, or neutrals engaged in carrying materials to the Axis powers. German and Italian shipping has been driven from the seas. Therefore, the only possible conclusion is that the United States is preparing for any eventuality, perhaps the complete defeat of England. To prevent vessels, both warships and merchant marine, from falling into the hands of Germany or Italy, Roosevelt intends to seize them for the United States.
Simultaneous with these measures, the State Department at Washington is strenuously engaged in preparing for the Inter-American conference to be held in Cuba on July 20. The drive for hemispheric unity, which is another way of saying United States domination of the western world, is meeting with some opposition from Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay. Argentina has already protested the presence of an American warship in her waters, Uruguay, which only two weeks ago under instigation from Washington, unearthed a shocking Nazi plot, has suddenly, under the sharpest pressure from Germany, dropped the whole matter.
Brazil continues to hem and haw. It demands that the United States lay it on the line in the form of huge loans. That is a cheap price indeed the United States must pay for the inter-American front against the Axis.
At the time of this writing it is still not known how many Latin-American countries will participate in the Cuban conference, and if they attend, how far they are willing to go in lining up with the United States. But Washington does not intend to let the matter rest there. The government will exert the greatest pressure upon the most important South American countries to force through pan-American “unity.”
 
New Taxes
The new tax bill enacted to defray part of the cost of the huge war budget now in operation. The bill presumably effects “luxuries”. It is quite clear, since consumers goods or so-called luxuries are involved, that the American masses will be subject to additional penalties to help pay for the war. And this is in addition to the drive against the actual living standards of the American workers and their working conditions. The new tax bill applies to future manufactures on a number of products. “Floor taxes” are immediately applied to cigarettes, beer and liquor. (Floor taxes are those applied to stocks on hand.) For stocks now on hand, the following taxes are assessed, a half a cent on a package of cigarettes, seventy-five cents on a gallon of liquor and one dollar on a barrel of beer. The tax on movies, with a penny for every ten cent ticket, beginning at an admission of twenty-one cents, starts at once. Other articles taxed are toilet preparations at ten to eleven per cent; automobiles, radios, refrigerators, matches, gasoline, lubricating oil, playing cards, club dues and initiation fees.
To sooth the deep resentment of wide sections of the population against these taxes, Roosevelt, in his congressional message of July 1, called for an excess-profits tax for the purpose of spreading the cost of war preparations over all classes. This is presumably the measure designed to prevent the growth of new millionaires out of America’s war preparedness measures. The demand for a measure to limit profits is not unfamiliar. Such steps were taken in the last war – but they did not prevent enormous profits and a new crop of millionaires. It is well to bear this fact in mind since Speaker Bankhead has already declared that the bill would be “along the lines of the World War excess-profits tax, aimed at stopping the creation of war millionaires.” England enacted similar measures with the outbreak of the present war, yet reports on British industries, especially the war’ industries, showed the greatest profits in years, and this in the midst of England’s life and death struggle.
No one really takes the excess-profits tax seriously, because it is obviously offered to allay resentment among the workers and poor farmers who are asked to give everything for the sake of “national defense” while the bosses enjoy greater and greater profits. Thus, while the warmonger in Washington prepares to conscript the youth of the nation as cannon-fodder, and the workers in industry as industrial slaves to war machinery, not a single step is taken to conscript the great wealth of the Sixty Families. On the contrary, all measures are taken to guarantee their property and profits.
 



Casting tradition to the wind, Roosevelt upset the Republican convention by announcing this week the appointment of Colonels Knox and Stimson to his cabinet as Secretaries of Navy and War respectively.
The naming of the two interventionist Republican leaders to the Cabinet has as its purpose: (1) to insure national war unity by creating the impression that partisan politics cannot be tolerated in the life and death struggle to maintain and extend America’s imperialist interests, and (2) to obtain a strategic advantage in the coming elections.
Roosevelt’s action is in part a maneuver. But is also an integral part of his campaign for national defense and war preparedness.
The surrender of France and the occupation of her territory, by Germany and Italy, which increased the military difficulties of Great Britain, has had an immediate reaction in the United States.
Upon the announcement that armistice was to be signed, Roosevelt dispatched a note to Germany and Italy declaring that “the United States would not recognize any transfer and would not acquiesce in any attempt to transfer any geographic region of the Western Hemisphere from one non-American power another non-American power.” At the same time that Roosevelt sent this warning to the Axis powers, plans were laid to establish a $2,000,000,000 Inter-American Corporation, whose basic capital will, be supplied by the United States, for the purpose of preparing the economic war with a victorious Hitler. The aim of this corporation which is in the nature of an inter-continental cartel, is the complete control of all surplus commodities of the South American Nations. The corporation would undertake to dispose of these surpluses by agreements with the dominant European powers through a system of barter. But whether or not these commodities are disposed of, they shall be controlled by Washington to prevent the Latin American countries from entering into direct economic relations with Germany.
In this manner, American capitalism prepares to completely control the economic life of the Western World and accomplish the first step in the program of resistance to the encroachments of German industry. The United States is prepared to foot the bill for all losses through a failure to dispose of these surpluses. But even this is regarded as a small loss if Germany can be completely eliminated from the American markets.
The plan for the establishment of the cartel has already met with a favorable response from many Latin-American countries who fear treading on the toes of their powerful Northern neighbor. They realize in addition, that the cartel would guarantee them against losses and they are quite willing to take that chance.
Heretofore Pan-Americanism was essentially a political objective. It has now become also economic and military. To enforce its policy in the South American areas, the Administration is going to enforce its demand for naval and air bases in the main countries.
 
New Appropriations
During the week, with the drastic turn in the war, the advocates of increased, militarization of the United States have been extremely active, the big navy promoters pushed through the House a $4,000,000,000 building program, calling for a 70 per cent increase in the fleet to enable the United States to have a “two-ocean navy.”
Dovetailing with the entire Roosevelt program came the introduction into the Senate of a compulsory military training bill, by the reactionary Senator Burke of Nebraska. This bill follows the speech of Roosevelt in favor of universal service for America’s youth. Statisticians calculate the figure at 17 million youth who are immediately qualified for this compulsory training.
To help finance these tremendous expenditures in the economic, political and military endeavors of the Administration, the President had proposed a bill which passed the Senate and has already been signed, calling for a revision in taxation which is calculated to increase the nation’s revenue by one billion dollars. The tax program places heavier burdens on many millions of workers and poor farmers, since it is spread over many necessaries and hard-earned small luxuries.
What we are witnessing now is the development of an all-sided war program, invading every form of American life. In preparation for war, the Roosevelt Administration pours many billions into the armaments industries, enriches the great financial and industrial ruling class, while it reduces the living standards of the masses and prepares to fill up the columns of the army and navy with millions of youth who are asked to give their lives in the interest of American imperialism.
 



(From last issue)
II.
Under the protection of the marines, the “Committee of Public Safety” (!) proceeded to the government building and read a proclamation dissolving the native government, setting up a provisional state to exist “until terms of union with the United States have been negotiated and agreed upon.” Within one hour, while the native government was still in possession, the U.S. minister recognized the “provisional government.” Lilinokalani was prepared to send her troops against the usurpers, but was persuaded otherwise by her aides, in the hope that Washington would intervene on their side! Commissioners of the provisional government were dispatched to the United States to discuss the question of union or annexation. They found President Harrison and his Secretary of State Foster extremely friendly. Together they drew up a treaty of annexation, signed it, and sent it February 15, 1893, four weeks after the outbreak of the revolution!
 
Blount Report
The Cleveland administration, however, took office on March 4. It withdrew the treaty from the Senate and proceeded to investigate the Hawaiian situation. There followed the struggle in Washington between the expansionists and anti-expansionists. The Cleveland investigation brought out a number of ugly facts to show that the revolution was principally the work of American business interests who were determined to obtain unobstructed control of the island in order to more thoroughly exploit its land and its people. One thing was made clear by the Blount report. He stated that “The leaders of the revolutionary movement would not have undertaken it but for Mr. Stevens’ promise to protect them against any danger from the government (the Hawaiian Government – AG) ... had troops not been landed no measures for the organization of the the new government would have been undertaken.”
In order to overcome the shock of many “respectables” on the mainland, who reviled “revolutionary actions”, the new Hawaiians sought to prove that their revolution was a respectable one. In an Address by the Hawaiian Branches of the Sons of the American Revolution, the Sons of Veterans and Grand Army of the Republic, to their Compatriots in America Concerning the Annexation of Hawaii, they stated: “The Revolution (1893) was not the work of filibusters and adventurers, but the most conservative and law-abiding citizens, the principal taxpayers, the leaders of industrial enterprises, etc.” Minister Stevens referred to the leaders of the revolution as “... highly respectable men with Judge Dole at the head ...” In his book, Since the Civil War, C.R. Lingley wrote: “In Hawaii the more influential and propertied classes supported the revolution and desired annexation.” For you see, the only non -respectable revolutions are those which threaten the vested interests of big business – a revolution in the interests of private profits is quite a respectable and necessary thing and the conservative business and land owning classes are not averse to resorting to revolution to obtain their ends. In this case the revolution sought annexation and union with the United States, the principal sugar market for Hawaii. Such a union would automatically mean the abolition of tariffs against the Islands’ products, permit it to compete successfully with the products of other countries and thereby enrich the American plantation owners. Not without reason and some humor did one plantation owner answer the question on what caused the revolution: “Simply two cents a pound on sugar – to get some treaty or some arrangement with America.”
Recognition from Washington was slow in coming, and the planters fearful of losing what they had gained from the revolution declared their sovereignty as a republic (July 4, 1894) and sought recognition from other nations. President Cleveland in turn, fearful of what the “patriotic Americans in Hawaii” might do, recognized the new government “without regard to any of the incidents which accompanied or preceded it.”
With the election of McKinley, the imperialist program of the Republican Party was put into operation. It called for American control of the Caribbean Sea and the admission of Hawaii as a territory of the United States. Shortly after his inauguration the president presented a treaty of annexation before the Senate. But the democratic bloc, under the two-thirds vote rule, blocked its passage. The Republicans, however, more far-sighted than the democrats as regards American imperialist interests, did not stop at this point. Specifically, in relation to Hawaii, the chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs announced the Administration’s policy as follows: “The importance or the question lies, first of all, in the necessity of possessing these Islands for a defense of our Western shores, the protection and promotion of our numerous interests, and the welfare and security of our country generally.” Thus did the imperialist aim broaden and become more inclusive. Annexation, however did not occur until the outbreak of the Spanish-American War. Then, under the hysteria of war, a joint resolution, requiring only a majority vote, carried and Hawaii became a possession of the United States.
 
III.
The post-annexation period has largely followed the pattern of other colonial possessions. Concentrated financial interests enjoy a monopoly in land ownership, industrial plant, transportation, communications, food, housing, etc. The pre-annexation trends of development were intensified. The production of sugar and pineapples increased manifold under monopolistic control. The vicious contract labor system was broadened; thousands of laborers were imported from the Orient to the great profit of American financial interests. Expropriation has reached a point where the small remaining native population has little or nothing left in its homeland.
We have already shown that only 20,000 native Hawaiians remain of the original 300,000. The Japanese now compose 37 per cent of the population; Caucasians 26.1, Filipinos 12.8 and the Chinese 6.9.
There are 50 thousand workers on the Islands, 30 per cent of whom are employed under the contract system on plantations. They live under a feudal system of labor and existence, completely at the mercy of the plantation owners who own the homes, the stores and all other means of life.
The New York Post quoted an old Hawaiian on the new situation in the Islands: “When the white man came they had the bibles and we had the land; then, we had the bibles and they had the land.” In that remark is graphically described what had transpired since the Hawaiians lost their land and their independence.
 
The Big Five
Hawaiian economic life is today dominated by The Big Five. This group, through interlocking directorates control everything.
The Big Five are the following: Alexander and Baldwin, American Factors, C. Breuer & Company, Castle & Cook and Theo. H. Davis & Company. Actually they are one enterprise. They control the Matson Navigation Company which has a shipping monopoly and is the principal link to the mainland. Through this monopoly they control the delivery of all supplies and equipment coming to the Islands, completely controlling prices of all commodities. They control the shipping of all exports. The Big Five owns 37 out of 39 sugar plantations, the largest industry on the Islands; that is, it controls not only the plantations, but the special gauge railroads that deliver sugar cane to the refineries and the refineries themselves. Subsequently their shipping takes the sugar to markets. It owns the Hawaiian Pineapple Company (Dole’s) and two smaller companies. The two main resort hotels, Royal Hawaiian and Wakaiki, are also their property They own, too, the Inter-Island Steam Navigation Company, the only connection between the eight islands; they control the airline. Still other enterprises in The Big Five monopoly are the telephone and telegraph. the street railway company, light and power companies and the Piggly-Wiggly store.
The monopoly also controls all farming in a country where there is no diversified farming. Food, which comes from the mainland is high priced because the Matson Line brings all of it and charges high freight rates. Forty ships carry sugar and pineapple to the United States and bring food on return trips. Since they own all the plantations, houses and stores, they sell their commodities at such high prices as to keep the workers in a constant state of debt, and therefore subservient to the bosses. But that isn’t all! The Big Five owns the one department store in Hawaii and a number of smaller enterprises. Congressional hearings showed that it also controlled the polls, the legislature, the territorial executive department, the judiciary, the bar, press, radio, churches, the army and navy, the national guard, the University of Hawaii (and professor Coulter) and all labor.
 
Labor and Wages
E.J. Eagan, an investigator for the National Labor Relations Board, pointed out that The Big Five pays plantation labor a base rate of a dollar a day, operates a speed-tip system, intimidates labor organizers and incites racial antagonisms to keep labor divided and thereby impotent to fight for its own interests. An explosive situation exists underneath the apparent placidity which is publicized by a powerful advertising agency.
Big Five employs the Pan-Pacific Press, a subsidiary of Bowman, Deute, Cummings of San Francisco, to control all news from Hawaii. That Press suppresses all labor news, “presenting the sugar barony as a paternalistic 100% American group and keeping to a minimum all reference to the Japanese (155,000), so as not to frighten away from the islands any of the $20,000,000 a year tourist trade.” The co-directors of this publicity program are Harold Lord Varney, ex-Wobbly and former editor of the Fascist magazine. The Awakener, decorated by Mussolini for his work in behalf of Italian fascism, and regarded as a labor “expert”; and Dr. F.B. Robinson, the reactionary former president of City College of New York. A third member is former governor Judd, manager of the Hawaiian Industrial Association, “an organization engaged in espionage and anti-labor activity.”
One might ask with some justification, what is Hawaiian about the Hawaiian Islands? The population has been decimated. They no longer own their land. They have no governmental power. Sugar and pineapple, the principal agricultural products, are in the hands of U.S. capitalists, as are all other enterprises. Japanese. Chinese, Americans, Portugese and others make up the overwhelming population. The American army and navy are dominant on the Islands. All agencies of thought and expression are in American hands. All that remains of the original islands is the name: Hawaii.
The revolution of 1891 has, in contrast, gained much for American business: their complete control of the Islands. Sugar and pineapples have enriched them beyond their highest expectations. They control everything: they own everything! A truly “respectable” revolution!
And now listen to the two professors from the rich man’s university (Northwestern), Haas and Cox: “It is ... difficult to imagine a situation in which the Hawaiian Islands would be happier or more prosperous, whether independent or subject to another world power.” Yes, it is difficult to imagine ...
 



The Samoan Islands have many times been cinematically acclaimed as a paradise without equal, the simplicity of its natives, the beauty of this South Pacific archipelago. Its capital, Pago Pago, has been immortalized in at least one ribald song and a dozen movies. But to the U.S., Samoa has more than pictorial importance. While the Islands are not of immense economic importance, being only a minor American possession, they do have strategical military-naval importance.
The way in which Samoa became a colony. of the United States is an illuminating story, for it illustrates some of the class measures employed by imperialist nations in their quest for territory, markets, raw materials and military-naval bases.
The Samoan group is not over seventy-five square miles in area, with a population of about ten thousand. Its chief product is copra (coconut) from which copra oil is derived, a commodity used in the making of soaps, candles and similar products. With an extremely small population, it is not a formidable market for manufactured goods. But Samoa, situated in the southern part of the vast Pacific Ocean on the route from Honolulu to Australia, is an invaluable military supply base.
The Islands were known for many years to American missionaries. They were also known to New England whalers. But in 1872, again as a result of a naval cruise, the United States became definitely interested in the Samoan Islands.
 
The U.S. Navy Acts
After his defeat in the matter of annexing Santo Domingo, President Grant “turned his imperial glance upon the islands of Samoa.” In the aforementioned year, Admiral Meade of the United States Navy, while cruising in the south seas, discovered what he regarded as a strategic center for sea power in the small island of Tutuila. With the customary independence of the Navy Department, and apparently with little difficulty, the Admiral obtained from a native prince a treaty granting to the United States a naval base at Pago Pago, the capital of the Island of Tutuila. The Senate failed to appreciate “the delicate diplomatic action” and ignored the document. The matter, however, did not rest there.
President Grant, “pressed by certain highly respected persons,”, sent out a confidential agent, Colonel A. B. Steinberger, to investigate the Samoan situation at first hand. The Colonel, with money and the prestige of a great power behind him (this combination always works “wonders” in colonial countries and small islands), fomented a revolution, made himself prime minister, and placed the island under the protection of the United States.
The work of Grant’s confidential agents never struck a responding note in the American Senate. As in the case of Santo Domingo, the Senate failed to be impressed by Steinberger’s action and turned its back on the offer. But not for long. A second uprising followed; the American flag way raised above the “capitol building”, and a high chief by the name of Mames took a long and expensive trip to Washington. There, through connections with “friends”, he obtained a treaty which ceded a part of the country to the “Great White Father.” The United States obtained the use of the harbor of Pago Pago and the Island of Tutuila as a naval base. In return, it promised that, “if unhappily any differences shall have arisen of shall hereafter arise between the Samoan government and any other government in amity with the United States, the government of the latter will employ its good offices for the purpose of adjusting these differences upon a satisfactory and solid foundation.” (U.S. Congress, House Ex. Documents)
 
Germany and England Move In
The peculiar wording of the treaty was not without good reason. There were Germany and England to contend with. Germany already enjoyed a considerable prestige through her trade, the major part of the Island’s business, and wanted possession of the whole archipelago. England likewise sought to expand her domain to include this group. Each in turn proceeded to bribe tribal chieftains in the manner of the American representatives, with the result that for a period of almost ten years, the Islands were torn by internal dissension which resulted in their easy submission and subdivision.
The treaty with the United States, ostensibly to insure Samoa’s independence, was in reality America’s means of keeping control out of the hands of Germany and England. Those countries, too, were embarked on the course of colonial expansion and each in turn sought to control the Islands. The conduct of the powers was directly responsible for the ten year’s turmoil that settled down upon the heads of the innocent, but duped natives. Internal quarrels continued over “consular jurisdiction”, over the theft of pigs owned by an American half-caste named Sanlan. There were protests and counter-protests, flags hoisted up and flags lowered, national honors insulted and apologies demanded. In these struggles, the Germans favored “King Tamasese” while the English, with the support of the United States, took up cudgels for “King Mataafe.”
 
The Tripartite Protectorate
In 1886, the American consul suddenly proclaimed a formal American protectorate over all the Samoan Islands, but he was quickly repudiated by the State Department in face of the tense relations which existed between the three powers. Two years later a committee was sent to investigate island conditions and to negotiate an agreement with Germany and England. But in the following year, 1889, with no agreement in sight, the powers determined to resolve the dispute by armed might. Warships patrolled the Island waters and a sharp conflict threatened, when “Providence” came along in the form of a terrible hurricane which destroyed all the warships. When the hurricane left, only one British steamer remained.
The aftermath of the hurricane was a truce between the three powers, which, under the “General Act of Berlin”, established a German, British, American protectorate over Samoa. This treaty, which brought the United States into an international agreement over some land in the far Pacific Ocean, led Secretary of State Gresham to state that it was a departure from the “traditional and well established policy of avoiding entangling alliances with foreign powers in relation to objects remote from this hemisphere.” But the Secretary was living in the past. The tripartite protectorate, however, did not bring peace to the Islands. The native king was dissatisfied with what he regarded as rank discrimination when he learned that the budget plan which gave him a monthly income of $9,500 was six times less than the amount given to a Swedish employee, under “Christian” auspices, to administer justice. Local chieftains, already corrupted by the conduct of the three powers, were still more dissatisfied. Having been eliminated from the throne by the settlement, they coveted the small revenues, as they did the titles associated with them.
The disputes were cruelly “settled” by the white soldiers, “adding anguish to the Samoan misery”. Even the ailing Robert Lewis Stevenson, protested against the atrocities, “perhaps with a certain tenderness to British concerns ...” Those to whom Stevenson protested were themselves still engaged in a terrific struggle for complete control of the Islands.
The conditions in Samoa at that time are graphically described by Charles A. Beard, in discussing the effects of the activities of the three powers:
“Their merchants struggling for the petty markets, their capitalists buying up native lands, their missionaries saving souls for the hereafter, their consuls sparring for fine diplomatic points, and their naval officers punticiously watching with eagle eyes for Imperial advantages, filled the foreign colony in Samoa with gossip, intrigue, and rancor.”
The natives, naturally, were not unaffected by the morals of the “Christian civilizers” from the rich capitalist countries whose primary aim above everything was profit. Such were the conditions in Samoa up to the Spanish American war. When the seizure of the Phillipine Islands revealed the United States as a world power. In 1900, the Senate ratified a treaty which disposed of Samoa in the following way: Tutuila and several smaller islands went to the United States; Germany received the remainder of the group; and England was satisfied by concessions in other parts of the world. The war of 1914 ended Germany’s proprietorship. She lost her share of the Islands to England. Official control of the Islands, however, was established by the United States in 1929. In this way, the Samoan Islands lost their independence to a great power which required them in the interests of her growing imperialist empire.
(The third article in this series on the History of the U.S. Empire will appear in the next issue of Labor Action.)
 



The Hawaiian Islands are situated in the Pacific Ocean, some two thousand miles southwest of San Francisco. Many merchant ships use Honolulu as an anchorage. There are twelve principal islands in this group, nine of which are inhabited, one with a population of two. Although not the largest island, the most populated is Oahu which has as its capital Honolulu. The greatest wealth and industry is concentrated there; it is the principal port through which the bulk of the Island’s commerce passes.
The history of Hawaii is connected with its principal crop – sugar. True, there were other reasons for the white man’s interest – a mid-Pacific harbor, a strategical military and naval base, etc. – but sugar pushed everything else into the background.
 
I.
First American contact with the Hawaiian Islands goes back to 1790 when the merchant ship Columbia sailed into Honolulu. In those days, sandalwood desired and prized by the Chinese, was the principal export. The Chinese soon afterwards began to settle on the Islands. By 1822, sixty New England whaling ships anchored in Honolulu; twenty years later, four hundred such ships availed themselves of the harbor.
The Islands were legend in many countries, Europeans, Portuguese and English, Chinese and Japanese, began flocking to Honolulu. But Americans were the most powerful single group of colonists. They set up the first businesses in the capital city. They were accompanied, sometimes proceeded, by missionaries, who were no little factor in the developments which led to the loss of the natives’ independence. Charles A. Beard aptly wrote: “Among the motley throngs came also the fishers of men, the first vanguard of Congregational missionaries landing in 1820 to prepare the way for the conquering church militants.” The presence of so many nationals made it patently clear that the struggle over Hawaii would and must ensue.
The climate of Hawaii made it an extremely fertile region for sugar raising. To be more precise, that land which was available for cultivation, although a small percentage of the total island area, was especially adapted to the growth of sugar, and later on, of pineapples. Because most of Hawaii is lava formation and coral reefs, only 8% per cent of arable land, 72% is used for sugar, 22 per cent for pineapples and only 6 per cent for other crops. Thus, the struggle for the control of sugar led to the extinction of almost the entire native population (one time numbering three hundred thousand) and the occupation of its land by aggressive Americans.
 
The New Rulers
The Hawaiians were unable to hold their own against the “pushing Yankees, the thrifty Chinese, and the tireless Japanese.” The new competitive economy (imported with the new foreign populations), whiskey (the white man’s great ally in conquering primitive peoples), and the diseases of civilization “cut them down like corn before a sickle.” By 1940, there were only 20,000 native Hawaiians left on the Islands, and another 35,000 Caucasian-Hawaiians and Asiatic-Hawaiians.
It did not take long for the Hawaiians to be done out of their lands. From the first days of foreign settlement the natives found their land passing into the hands of the “aliens”. By 1890, more than half of the real estate was owned by foreigners, and two-thirds of the personal property was in the hands of outsiders. The Americans were the leading owners, followed by the English and Germans, At the end of five more years, the Hawaiians owned one-third of the land, and only six per cent of the capital invested in the Islands; such was the rapid rate of expropriation brought about through “sales”. “It was then boastfully claimed ...” wrote Beard, “that two-thirds of the sugar business belonged to Americans, many of whom were sons of missionaries, who had chosen the way of Dives rather than the thorny path of Paul.”
While the royal government continued to exist, the real rulers of the Islands were five thousand whites, mainly Americans. Since they had acquired the best lands, and operated all the businesses, they actually dominated the lives of more than eighty thousand natives, Chinese and Japanese. The big sugar plantations operated under a contract labor system “more efficient than the old plantation methods of Virginia and South Carolina.” They imported labor from the orient, paid them small wages, put them up in company houses, where they traded in company stores and lived “company” lives.
How conscious was the United States of the value of the Hawaiian Islands? Even before sugar became an important money-bringer, the United States had coveted the country and warned the rest of the world not to trespass its interests thereon. In 1851, Admiral Du Pont reported that: “The Hawaiian Islands would prove the most important acquisition we could make in the whole Pacific Ocean – an acquisition intimately connected with our commerce and naval supremacy in these seas.”
As early as 1875, a treaty was concluded with the royal government which contained the pledge that Hawaii would not alienate any territory except to the United States. In the reciprocity treaty of the same year, it was agreed that certain grades of sugar would be admitted to the United States (the principal market) free of duty. This one act led to an extraordinary rise in the export of sugar to the mainland and resulted in enormous profits to the American plantation owners. A bridge was erected between the vested American interests in Hawaii and Washington, even though, at times, events at the American capital were to vex the businessmen on the Islands.
In 1887, a supplementary treaty gave Americans the exclusive use of Pearl Harbor, which is today the biggest military and naval base in the world and can accommodate the entire Pacific fleet of the United States Navy.
Three years later, however, President McKinley signed the tariff bill which removed the tax on imported sugar, placing the Hawaiian product in the same category with Cuban, Javan and Brazilian sugar. The bill was directly responsible for the sugar crisis visited, upon the Islands. The rich planters, owning large tracts of lands, suffered great losses. American businessmen began a great agitation for annexation of the Islands. For the moment, two roads were open to restore plantation profits: 1. Annexation by the United States; and/or 2. The imposition of a duty on sugar which was competing with Hawaiian production.
 
The Revolution
The American minister to the Islands, J.S. Stevens, announced that “... wise and bold action by the United States will rescue the property holders front great losses.” What this “wise and bold action” was we shall soon see. The American businessmen and land-owners in Hawaii proceeded to organize a revolution, calling for annexation by the United States or the establishment of a sovereign state. The revolution itself was preceded by its “propaganda stage.” The native monarchy was denounced as a corrupting influence; better roads were needed and were unobtainable by the existing government; sanitary conditions were required on the islands and withheld by the Queen. The insurrectionists also demanded that Pearl Harbor should be fortified by the United States. It is well to bear in mind that the business interests in Hawaii were extremely serious about this question of the revolution. Having chartered their course, they proceeded to set up the organs of the revolution. “A Committee of Public Safety” was set up in 1873, under the chairmanship of Chief Justice James Dole (the pineapple man) who resigned his judicial post to undertake the leadership of the businessman’s revolutionary committee. The ascent to the throne in 1891 of Queen Lilinokalani sharpened the conflict between the “revolutionaries” and the native government. The special favors and grants given the foreigners by her predecessor were challenged and threatened by the new monarch as she advocated “hatred of the missionaries” and an “anti-foreigners” policy – a policy of exclusion.
But the Americans, who led and organized all the foreigners for the revolution, were ready for action. Minister Stevens sent a request to the State Department for a warship to protect American lives and property. On January 16, 1893, at his direction, the commander of the U.S.S. Boston landed marines at Honolulu. The government of Oahu and the native foreign minister sent a protest to the United States saying that the marines were landed “without permission from the proper authorities.” But it was clear that the State Department recognized no authorities except the minister and the marines.
(Continued in next issue)
 



The response to the New York May Day issue of Labor Action exceeded our greatest hopes. Some four thousand copies have been completely sold, making it impassible for the business office to meet the many requests that have come in from cities for additional bundle orders. The same is true for individuals who have not yet subscribed seeking copies of the special issue.
The May 15th number marks the first' regular edition of Labor Action as the official weekly organ of the Workers Party. It will feature news on the second world war, labor articles, analytical stories on economic conditions in the United States, the problems of the workers political movement and special educational features.
No workingman interested in the welfare of labor will want to be without Labor Action. The only guarantee for receiving the paper regularly is to subscribe, and do it right away! In that way you will know that the paper is yours every week. Subscription rates are listed in another column.
In a very short time we shall list the places in various cities where you will be able to purchase our paper. Such distribution centers are being set up now.
Any workingman who desire to avail himself of a small bundle for distribution among his shopmates can obtain it by writing in to the [words missing].
 



The United States of America is an imperialist nation, just like Great Britain. France. Japan. Germany and Italy. It has a colonial empire which was gained in the same brutal and ruthless manner in which the other imperialist powers acquired their colonies. Chicanery, outright thievery, financial bribery, organized “revolutions” and direct military intervention were some of the means employed during the years when this country carried out its most promiscuous land-grabbing activities. It got results: Within a short period of time, the United States acquired a colonial empire of 281,044 square miles, and 18,000,000 inhabitants,
Nevertheless there is a popular myth that the United States ruling class has no empire to defend and desires none, This is pure hokum. Though the economy of this country does not depend on a vast world empire, to the same degree as England. Wall Street, that is, Standard Oil Company, National City Bank, Chase National Bank, etc., have more than a small interest in America’s colonies. But this is not true for the great mass of American people.
Under the “good neighbor” policy of the Roosevelt Administration, which has been dinned into the minds of the people, no mention is made of America’s possessions – but only of relations with the independent countries of Latin America.
Older generations can, of course, recall the odious Spanish American War. Many people know that the United States has colonies but are not too greatly concerned with this fact. Yet almost every schoolboy in England knows that India is the backbone of the British Empire; that the empire is the very heart and blood of Great Britain. Yes, despite the absence of “colonial consciousness” in the United States, this country has a colonial empire which is a living problem, commanding the deepest interest of the financial and industrial ruling classes. Hence the gigantic military preparations now taking place in this country.
It is interesting and instructive to see how the United States got its empire and what this empire means to American capitalism. In this and future articles we will trace the history of the American Empire. We begin with the Pre-Civil War Day.
*
American interests prior to the Civil War were generally confined to internal expansion, toward extending and completing the borders of the nation. It is true, that at the beginning of the 19th Century, the Southern Slavocracy had more than once glanced in the direction of Cuba. and proposals had been considered at the Capitol to forcibly seize the sugar island and incorporate it into the United States. But internal problems were of greater moment.
The Louisiana purchase had increased the territory of the States many times its original size. Migration and land settlement gripped the ever-expanding Republic, The War uf 1812 had won her new respect and the right to “freedom of the seas”. Prior to 1812 warships were sent against the Barbary Coast privateers, who were raiding American merchant ships. Settling accounts with England seemed a permanent thing and always took a little time, but the United States treated such problems militantly, always threatening to go to war to obtain what she wanted.
The Texan settlers who came into conflict with their government in Mexico city, engaged in a successful civil war with the aid of influential government offices in Washington and achieved their independence. Texas then was incorporated as a new state. In 1847, the unpopular Mexican War was fought for the purpose of acquiring new territories (the southwest).
 
Webster In the Saddle
Prior to the Civil War, the Webster-Hamilton policy was dominant in domestic affairs. These men favored a high protective tariff, which, placing high duties on foreign goods, help to build native industry. The administration of which Webster was Secretary of State, helped establish a sound currency and centralized banking. The government was extremely benevolent to the needs of business and kept its ear cocked to their grievances and desires.
Foreign trade was growing and became an important factor in the new industrial economy. The first commercial treaty with China was signed through the office of Daniel Webster. Covetous eyes were cast in the direction of the Hawaiian Islands. In 1840, trade with China amounted to $9,000,000. It was with the object of increasing this trade that Webster sent a commission to China to arrange a trade treaty. Coming as it did after the British had defeated Peking in the Opium War, the treaty was a simple matter indeed. Commercial privileges were obtained in all open ports, and Americans were to be tried in consular courts for breaking Chinese laws! Caleb Cushing, leader of the delegation was led to remark: “By that treaty, the laws of the Union follow its citizens and its banner protects them even within the domain of the Chinese Empire.”
Japan, which had insulated itself from the rest of the world for more than 200 years was compelled to open her doors when Commodore Perry, with a few warships, violated her territorial waters, disregarded her laws and spurned her protests. British and Russian warships were standing by ready to lend a helping hand to the Americans if the occasion should arise. There was no need for it. A treaty of “friendship” was forced upon Japan in 1854 and a commercial treaty followed in 1858. This was only the beginning.
 
Seward Moves Ahead
Foreign trade continued to grow. Even though no great surpluses of manufactured goods were produced, industry expanded at a rapid rate. The home market, while constantly saturated, was just as constantly renewed by the tremendous inner expansion and the great rises in population resulting from unhampered immigration.
Secretary of State Seward was a powerful and militant advocate of the Webster-Hamilton policies in the Lincoln cabinet and under his tenure of office, foreign commerce increased and new markets were opened to American goods.
The Monroe Doctrine had already warned the European powers to keep hands off the New World. But the ambitious Napoleon III, taking advantage of the Civil War, seized Mexico in order to establish a “catholic empire” and to collect on defaulted “loans.” He installed Maximillian as emperor, but his disciple’s rule was a stormy one since the Mexicans were in permanent revolt against the new regime. The American government frowned upon Napoleon’s action and when the Civil War ended, Congress declared that “it does not accord with the policy of the United States to acknowledge any monarchical government America under the auspices of any European power.” Troops were mobilized on the Mexican border, but they were not required since the French venture ended in a fiasco. The Mexicans, certain of the attitude of their powerful neighbor to the North, completed the revolt with the execution of Maximillian.
In 1867, the United States purchased Alaska from Russia for $7,000,000, a legitimate acquisition, yet the lower house fought against what it regarded as an unwarranted expenditure of money, in the same way as the legislative bodies opposed Jefferson’s Louisiana purchase. But skillful negotiations and a little bit of bribery “won” the legislature to the purchase of what has since turned out to be an extremely profitable investment in the interests of American capitalists. The hesitancy on the part of the “representatives of the people” in accepting the purchases with enthusiasm, was only evidence that for the most part, American interest directed toward national growth.
Seward, however, was an advocate of colonial expansion, particularly in the Caribbean Sea. Using the Navy Department which had been cruising in the neighborhood of Santo Domingo, he obtained a treaty for the acquisition of Samana Bay as a naval base. The government in Santo Domingo was in bad financial straits and in trouble with other European powers. It was prepared to grant this naval base in exchange for American protection and financial support. Seward, at the same time, proposed the purchase of the Virgin Islands, for which, he had already obtained a treaty from Denmark; and he had obtained, also, a treaty giving the United States control over the Isthmus of Panama. Both the Senate and the House rejected these treaties and the “unwarranted” expenditures of money involved in the transactions. The defeated South had lost all interest in Latin-American expansion; the Republican Party, completely absorbed in post-war reconstruction, had not yet arrived at the period of her “awareness” of the country’s “manifest destiny.”
 
Grant Takes A Hand
These efforts at expansion, however, were renewed by the hero of the Civil War, President Ulysses S. Grant. The Navy Department, always keenly aware of its own special interest, again asked for a base at Samana. Conditions in Santo Domingo at this time appeared favorable to a renewal of Seward’s original overtures. Without informing his Cabinet, President Grant dispatched his personal secretary. Colonel Babcock, to negotiate a treaty with the island. Babcock was met by “President” Baez, who claimed that he was the head of the country. This claim was contested by another. “President” Cabral. But even before Colonel Babcock had departed for Santo Domingo, Baez had proposed that his country be annexed by the United States. The “President” proposed, in his discussion with Grant’s representative, to sell the island for $1,500,000! The two of them then drew up a treaty of annexation and Babcock returned to Washington, bringing with him specimens of ores, hardwoods, coffee berries and similar tropical products. Grant declared to an amazed cabinet, who sat glaring at the Dominican samples: “Babcock has returned, as yon see and has brought a treaty of annexation. I suppose it is not formal, as he had no diplomatic powers, but we can easily cure that.”
 
What The Senate Did
Not a few embarrassing moments were spent in that meeting of shocked cabinet members. Grant, discomforted by the conduct of his confreres, passed on hurriedly to the next point of business. Hamilton Fish, his Secretary of State, offered to resign because the treaty had been negotiated behind his back. But the President persuaded him otherwise, and Fish before leaving the cabinet meeting agreed to fight for the treaty of annexation.
But Grant had not foreseen that Charles Sumner, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, would be grossly insulted by the high-handed action of the President of the “Graft” Administration engaging in such foreign sallies without his knowledge. The “insult” was aggravated when Grant erroneously referred to him as “the Chairman of the Judiciary Committee.” Sumner organized the fight in the Senate against the treaty and when it came before that body on June 30, 1870, the presidential plea for ratification was rejected.
Grant was highly incensed at Sumner’s conduct and the action of the Senate, but it brought a halt for a number of years to the endeavor to annex Santo Domingo. In his final message to Congress, made some six years afterward. Grant disappointedly, but with great candor, declared that if his treaty had been adopted, Santo Domingo “would soon have fallen into the hands of the United States capitalists.”
America was definitely on the high road toward the acquisition of an empire. It was not yet the imperialism of monopoly or finance capitalism, but the meteoric rise of industry was accompanied by colonial expansion. With the defeat of Grant’s venture in Santo Domingo, such efforts were directed to other parts of the globe, and we shall see how quickly the United States was to “learn” the art of building a colonial empire.
 



The bloodstained assassin of the Kremlin and his jackal hordes of the GPU struck down our Leon Trotsky. By that murderous act they have wounded us in our hearts and in our minds. The loss of L.D. has shorn us of our friend, our comrade, our leader.
We knew Trotsky as the co-worker of Lenin, the leader of the October insurrection, the organizer of the Red army, and with Lenin, the initiator of the once great Communist International. But he was much closer than that to us. He founded the International Left Opposition which began the historic struggle against counter-revolutionary Stalinism. He taught us to fight this cancerous affliction in the workers movement with revolutionary weapons. He founded the Fourth International as the movement of Marxist regeneration. Through all the periods of our existence we came to know our Trotsky. What we have learned we learned from him for he was the Marxist theoretician of our time!
Driven from country to country, a man without a visa, hounded by the decaying ruling classes of Europe, stalked by Stalin and his GPU, he came nearer to us.
Our relations to Trotsky were not impersonal. We came to know him as our genial L.D., warm-hearted, full of pleasant wit, intensely human – the friend of all of us.
There is not a person in the movement of the Fourth International who does not feel a great loneliness, an overwhelming personal loss – this is true for those of us who had the good fortune to know L.D. personally and those who knew him only through his gigantic work.
On so sad an occasion as this we re-echo the words of Friedrich Engels, who, upon the death of Marx, had written:
“BE THAT AS IT MAY, MANKIND IS SHORTER BY A HEAD, HAS LOST THE GREATEST HEAD OF OUR TIME. THE PROLETARIAN MOVEMENT WILL CONTINUE ON ITS COURSE, BUT WE NO LONGER HAVE THE CENTRAL FIGURE WHOM THE FRENCH, THE RUSSIANS, THE AMERICANS AND THE GERMANS SPONTANEOUSLY TURNED IN DECISIVE MOMENTS, AND ALWAYS RECEIVED CLEAR AND IRREFUTABLE COUNSEL SUCH AS NOTHING BUT GENIUS AND PERFECT KNOWLEDGE COULD SUPPLY.”
Comrade Trotsky would not have us abject or sorrowful. His was the spirit of the proletarian warrior and that is the spirit he would have of us.
He has left an enormous heritage. His active life alone would guide us in the days to come. But he has also left us brilliant Marxist writings which will serve as enriching searchlights to guide us in the approaching future, in the struggle for the liberation of mankind. There is but one way to avenge the murder of our heroic Trotsky: To carry on the struggle with audacity, devotion and courage! To fight for the victory of the oppressed masses of the earth! To fight for the victory of the world socialist society! That would be his way, that is how he would have us be.
It is in this spirit that we mourn our loss and pay tribute to the memory of Leon Trotsky, the titanic figure of our time.
And it is in this same spirit that we pay tribute to our Natalia Ivanovna, his great comrade and companion whose life was one with his, through the long decades in which they marched side by side in victory and defeat. Farewell Leon Trotsky ... We are marching on!
 



The Struggle Begins
THE murder of Leon Trotsky culminated an epoch. It marked the end of the epoch of Old Bolsheviks, for Leon Trotsky was the lone survivor of that grand school of revolutionary Marxists. His murder at the same time was the final personal victory of Cain Stalin, and, if any more evidence was required, of the irrevocable counter-revolutionary degeneration of his bureaucracy in the Soviet Union and therewith the Communist International.
The struggle in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union between the Russian Left Opposition and the Stalin regime was accompanied by the introduction for the first time of A SYSTEM OF TERROR as the means of deciding inner-party political disputes. The system of terror inside the Party became inevitably a system of terror in Soviet life. Here it was not merely a matter of an isolated physical encounter or some altercation not part of the normal life of the revolutionary party, the trade unions, the Soviets or the collective. Here was systematized terror developing with increasing tempo beyond the party, into the very life of the Soviet population and thenceforth into the Communist International, penetrating the most gigantic world events of the past decade.
The struggle against the Russian Left Opposition which began initially as a normal political struggle gradually exhibited tendencies of dangerous portent. For the first time in the history of the Russian Communist Party hooliganism, planned in advance by the leaders of the Stalin clique, entered into the discussions. Physical outbursts against Oppositionists were so frequent as to become the rule at all meetings. Stalin promoted all persons who demonstrated their adherence to his faction by attacks, singly or in group fashion, upon Oppositionists.
Discussion meetings in the years 1924-1927 were characterized by great disorder. Squads of Stalinist hecklers moved from meeting to meeting disrupting them by cat-calls, hooting, whistling, denunciatory outbursts, which provoked fights and broke up discussions.
These measures employed against the Russian Left Opposition, at first regarded as the result of over-zealousness, were only the beginnings of a far more intensive period of repression. Hooliganism gave way to the dominance of the GPU in the life of the Party and in the existence of the Old Bolshevik Guard, hitherto free of supervision by the secret police. Thereafter the police regime controlled. The failure to disperse the Left Opposition by the measures of suppression inside the Party, essentially due to the vigorous struggle led by Trotsky, brought about a complete transformation in the manner of life of the party leaders as well as the ranks.
 
The End of Thinking
In the dark of the night. Oppositionists were dragged from their beds, sent to prison or exile without any charge except that of opposition to Stalin. Failure to capitulate to the unrelenting bureaucratic regime meant at best imprisonment or deportation to the icy wastes of the Siberian tundras, life in a solitary, in either case without visible means of support, loss of contact with the movement, suffering severe cold, police brutality and political persecution.
It was not sufficient for the Left Opposition to declare in 1927 that it would accept the discipline of the Stalinist majority has demanded that the Left Opposition renounce its views, that is, the THINKING of them. It was to this demand that Leon Kamenev was compelled to declare at the 15th Party Congress in 1927:
“But if to this unconditional and complete submission to all Congress decisions, the complete cessation, complete liquidation, of every form of factional struggle and dissolution of the factional organizations, we should add a renunciation of our views – that in our opinion, would not be acting like Bolsheviks. This demand of renouncing views has never been put forward in our party. If we should renounce views which we advocated a week or two ago, it would be hypocrisy on our part, and you would not believe us. If I should come here and say that I renounce everything I published in my theses two weeks ago you would not believe it. It would be hypocrisy on my part and such hypocrisy is unnecessary. This hypocrisy would bring decay into the very essence of the matter from the very beginning, from the moment the cornerstone of peace is being laid. No one wants that. Of course, I speak of the views which are really our views ... (Voroshilov: ‘We want the renunciation of your Menshevik views!‘) – the views laid down in our document – the platform and theses – signed by us and not of the exaggerations which are often ascribed to us.”
It was not enough that the Opposition pledged to carry out the decisions of the Party congress and end the factional struggle. The Bureaucracy sought proscription of thinking. Thus Kalinin, in answer to Kamenev, declared: “The authors of that statement (the Statement of the Opposition Bloc accepting the decisions and discipline of the Congress – AG) say that they renounce the propagation of their views ... they ‘renounce‘. They ‘promise‘ to submit to all Party decisions. But ... they consider their views correct. (!!!)” Severe pressure brought about recantations and capitulations. But recantation and capitulation was not enough because the totalitarian regime could not afford the luxury of permitting the active existence of people, who even though they had surrendered, might at one time or another revert to previous positions. Capitulators, declarations of fealty notwithstanding, began again the long trek to Siberian exile, or to prison.
The genuine Trotskyists, that section of the Left Opposition Bloc which maintained its integrity, refused to capitulate but rather intensified the struggle against Stalin, suffered the worst repressions. Whether in prison (or in Siberia), they were under constant surveillance. In this period, more than three thousand Oppositionists were thus deported or imprisoned. These direct measurer designed to smash the Opposition were accompanied by an economic reign of terror against all Party and trade Union members. The threat of unemployment which, in the Soviet Union, meant complete starvation, was held like a Damoclean sword over the heads of Party militants and the general population to warn against opposition to the regime. Economic measures had already been employed against the Left Opposition and the moral effects of this regime of political and economic terror was devastating upon all sections of the masses.
While all these measures could not at once be transferred to the International, to the degree to which they were employed they introduced a new method of political struggle in the world parties. The writer well remembers the birth of the Trotskyist movement in the United States in 1928. Unfamiliar with the extent of the Russian experiences, how scandalized we were when we encountered for the first time, physical assaults, disruption of meetings, homes burglarized, and attempts at economic bribery. We were soon to learn, however, that this system had become the way of life in the Stalinist movement; it had become natural and normal in its relationship to all opponent movements.

Repressions Become Terror and Assassination
Symptomatic Beginnings
There were shadows of a more intensified regime of repression as far back as 1924. Glasman, a secretary of Trotsky‘s and close follower of the Left Opposition, unable to withstand continuous hounding, committed suicide. Terrifying implications of what was yet to come! But then, he was not a leading figure – only a secretary to Trotsky. Not too great attention was paid to the loss. The political struggle had only just begun around the issues of bureaucratism, industrialization, collectivization. Socialism in One Country and international policy. But the hooliganism of 1924–27, the suicide of Glasman, the early arrests and deportations were to give way to the most macabre developments. The 15th Party Congress sealed the fate of the defeated Opposition. It not only sealed their fate inside the Russian Party, the Comintern, the trade unions, and the fast disappearing Soviets, it also gave Stalin the signal to go ahead with his aim to “exterminate the Opposition.” Therewith began the violent period which has not ended to this day.
International defeats in China, Austria, and Great Britain, the weariness of the masses in the Soviet Union, strengthened the reactionary and bureaucratic elements and gave birth for the first time since the revolution of a powerful nationalism fostered in the first place by Stalin and his clique. The heroes of the October Revolution began to fall at first one by one, then in groups and finally by the hundreds and thousands. There was considerable shock when the great Joffe committed suicide. His last letter addressed to Trotsky described how unbearable life had become to him as he watched the degeneration abound. But they were few who understood what Joffe vainly tried to explain. At the end of 1927, the activist Pitersk was shot. The GPU report stated in cold police language: “killed in an attempt to escape.” On November 17, 1928, 300 Oppositionists from Moscow were arrested. In the proletarian centers of the USSR another 300 comrades were imprisoned, 118 in Leningrad, 55 in Moscow, 42 in Kiev, 15 in Baku, 35 in Kharkov, 9 in Odessa, 8 in Saratov. Beatings of the arrested were daily occurrences. In Leningrad and Kharkov the GPU “proceeded with special violence.” There were new capitulations, rearrests of the capitulators and repeated return trips to Siberia. In 1928, Trotsky, already expelled from the Party was exiled to Alma Ata. It would appear that the terrific defeat of the Left Opposition, the arrests and decapitations would result in a lifting of the repressions. But it was only the beginning, for the revengeful Stalin had not yet accomplished his task to “exterminate the Opposition.”
 
The Trotsky Deportation
At the beginning of 1929, Trotsky was deported from the Soviet Union to begin anew his world wanderings, this time from Turkey. The deportation of Trotsky was highly symbolic. If it was not understood by the revolutionaries then, who continued to hope for a regeneration and reform of the regime and the Comintern, it is clear now, that the deportation of Trotsky signalized the complete and irrevocable decay of the Stalinist bureaucracy. We are too prone to overlook the significance of resultant factors of political and economic policy, when we do not yet clearly foresee the significance of the latter. Our hopes of reformation were in reality shattered when Trotsky took up exile in Prinkipo.
In the same year Blumkin, once a member of Trotsky‘s military secretariat, a hero of the October Revolution, visited Trotsky at Prinkipo while on an official Soviet mission in Constantinople. Upon his return to Moscow, the unsuspecting Blumkin informed the capitulator Radek of his visit, who thereupon reported the facts to the GPU and Blumkin was shot. It was in 1929 that the Oppositionists Rabinovich and Silov were reported to have committed suicide in prison. Haenrichsen, a Leningrad metal worker and active Oppositionist, was reported to have committed suicide in prison. Yet an examination of his body showed the marks of terrific beatings. His wife also was arrested.
Butov, Trotsky‘s secretary, who accompanied him to his place of exile in Alma Ata was arrested for this act along with 150 Bolshevik-Leninists. Accused of espionage, he went on a hunger strike that led to his death.
 
Conditions in Exile
In preparation for the Party congress in 1930, 300 Bolshevik-Leninists were arrested in Moscow. A large number of Oppositionists arrested in the provinces were sent to Butirskaia prison (Ukrainians). For refusing to implicate others, Zabrovskaia, Blumenfeld and dozens more were placed in solitaires. Up to the month of May another 500 were arrested. Once arrested they lost their RIGHT to work. In prison and in exile they were without money and without means to buy provisions in order to supplement their meagre allowances. No relations were permitted among those exiled. In protest against conditions unheard of under Czarism, the exiles went on a hunger strike which was followed with brutal beatings and forced feeding. Yanovskaia, a militant Oppositionist had her new-born baby taken from her and was sent to solitary. Golodni was sentenced to 10 years. in solitary. The Stalinist turnkeys would taunt the suffering Oppositionists when protesting their brutal treatment by saying: “Go to Moscow.”
At the end of the same year, M. Joffe, the wife of the famous Joffe, was arrested together with Okudjava, Kinkadze and others. Endless persecution drove her to death, like so many other exiles. Vladimir Mayakovsky, the great revolutionary poet, could not withstand the “new life”, and in April 1930 committed suicide. The rate of suicide rose tremendously in this period throughout the USSR. It was one form of protest against the regime of terror.
Kote Zinzadze, old Bolshevik, valiant revolutionist and an old-time friend of Stalin died in exile in 1931 for lack of medical aid and general means of livelihood. Between 1931 and 1934 there was an apparent lull in the terror, with only the trial of the “industrialists” to disturb what appeared to be a placid atmosphere. Yet the preparations of a bloody future was laid in these years. The “industrialists” trial was a rehearsal for the Moscow Trials which began in 1936, and allowed the GPU to gain experience, burnish its roughened edges and make certain, so they thought, insuring the legal murder of the old Bolsheviks. In this period the “ideological” steps were taken. Opponents of the regime were denounced as terrorists, saboteurs, diversionists, espionage agents, and traitors.
The exiled Trotskyists were like doomed men. In exile or in prison they were constantly harassed by the GPU agents with the single aim of making life even more unbearable than it already was. But these revolutionary Bolsheviks remained steadfast. Capitulators were few indeed. For every known leader of the Left Opposition who gave way to Stalin, there were tens and hundreds of young stalwarts. While yet in Turkey, Trotsky, who still managed to receive an occasional letter, postal card and even theses from his Siberian comrades, spoke in glowing terms of the rise of a new school of young Marxists. I remember him saying that if these people were able to live free and active lives, they would surpass the pre-war Marxists. Some of their economic studies according to him were characterized by elements of genius. But the mistakes of Czarism were not the mistakes of Stalin. He had learned and he made doubly certain that none of the exiles would return to live their normal lives in the centers of the Soviet Union. They were living corpses awaiting only their demise.
 
Consequences of the Kirov Murder
The assassination of Sergei Kirov in 1934 was the signal for the opening of the most nightmarish period in the history of the Soviet Union. Here was murder on the grand scale. It is not yet known for certain what the inner relations were of the Stalinist political committee, but it is known that the murder was committed with the direct knowledge and participation of Stalin and the Leningrad GPU operating directly under orders from Yagoda.
Nationwide dissatisfaction with the regime was current. The difficulties of life had increased after the “glowing” successes of the five year plan and the “irrevocable victory of the socialist society.” The Kirov assassination became the lever which the bureaucracy employed to forestall the rising resentment of the masses, to instill fright in their very hearts, to consolidate even more their monstrous power.
Nikolaiev and his group of 16 Komsomolists were tried and executed. In December of the same year 100 more were shot. Purges, arrests, deportations followed with endless precision. There were no charges, no trials; the GPU acted swiftly and vengefully, their methods not unlike those of the dreaded Ovra and murderous Gestapo. Thousands were forcibly removed from their homes in Leningrad and deported to Siberia, many of them enrolled into convict labor battalions. The nation was a veritable graveyard. Fear became the all-influencing factor in the life of the masses. The years of the witchhunts were coming. Denunciations brought thousands of new victims.
With devilish mockery, Stalin announced in 1935 the establishment of the constitutional commission to complete the draft of the “most democratic constitution in the world.” The liberal sycophants of the world, the new fellow-travellers, the Stracheys, Bates, Hicks, Barbusses, Schumans, and their ilk, heaped paeans of praise upon Stalin, “the gentle father of all the people.” Behind the facade of the new constitution, the murderous regime marched on in its mission as the mortician of the country. Of the framers of the constitution, six were shot, one committed suicide, and nine were missing.
Zinoviev, Kamenev and their followers were held “morally and politically” responsible for the Kirov Assassination and were imprisoned. Their turn was to come. In the mean-time the terror continued unabated. In the trial of August 1936, sixteen were shot. Among them were Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov, Yevdomkimov, Mrachkovsky, Bakayav and Dreitzer. But this was only the beginning. Information was lacking, but it was certain that throughout the reaches of the Soviet Union the same method operated.

The Hangman’s Years
The Moscow Trials
The year 1937 is the hangman‘s year. The sadism of the regime reached its height. From August, 1936 to October 1937, 808 were executed, some with trial, most without. Data from 20 provincial papers showed that 403 were executed from September 5 to October 10, 1937. On November 8, 14 were shot, adding to the eight who were executed three days previously. Goloded, following Cherviakov as the president of the Council of White Russia, committed suicide. Baletsky, head of the Ukrainian Communist Party was recorded as a suicide victim. Luibchenko, the president of the Council of the Ukraine committed suicide. In Ulan Ude, Inner Mongolia, sixteen were shot.
In the Piatakov trial of January, 1937, thirteen were executed, including such figures as Piatakov, Muralov and Serebriakov. This trial was followed by the decapitation of the military staffs. Tukhachevsky, Yakir, Putna and others were shot. There followed the executions of Mdivani and Okudjava. People disappeared without leaving a trace. No one had information, no one dared to speak. Each one sought to improve his own position by denouncing his neighbor or comrade. Despite the veil of secrecy it was possible to determine from official records that 1,203 high functionaries were executed in this frightful year in which additional “Moscow Trials” were held to give the executioners axe a “legal” status. Ambassadors were removed and replaced in rapid succession. In a brief period the ambassadors from Finland, Esthonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Germany, China, Roumania and Poland disappeared, and considering subsequent developments, the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact and the invasion of the Baltic countries, it is easy to understand, at least in part, reasons for their disappearance.
Other well-known figures of the Communist International who had found haven in the Soviet Union and functioned in the various apparatuses of the Comintern and the Russian C.P., likewise began to disappear. This was especially true of the exiles, those revolutionaries who fled their countries to seek safety in the “socialist fatherland.” In 1937, Bela Kun, whose name is associated with the Hungarian revolution was shot. Piatnitsky was executed, as were Magyar and Valetsky. From the German Communist Party, F. Wolf was shot. Eberlen was shot. Hermann Remmele, who began his revolutionary career in the International Socialist Youth movement in 1907, was shot. There were many rumors about the great Marxist scholar, Riazanov. He was erroneously reported dead on many occasions, until it was ascertained that this terrible information was correct. Stalin killed him.
The Spanish Civil War was not to evade the heavy hand of the Kremlin assassin. The revolutionaries were marked men of the GPU. Andre Nin was seized by the Russian agents and tortured. He was taken from a Madrid prison by the GPU and they found his dead body weeks later. POUM leaders were assassinated. The same was true of the Anarchists. Moulin of the Fourth International was shot. Edwin Wolf, a secretary of Trotsky, was seized in Catalonia by the GPU and murdered. The list continues to grow.
 
Stalin Settles with Former Allies
Poor Tomsky, he foresaw what was to come. He knew that Stalin would not rest until the entire Old Guard was liquidated. Unable to observe the murderous course continue he committed suicide. He would not be part of the indignity of the trials. Yagoda, the foul director of the GPU who organized the Nikolaiev trial in 1934, the Zinoviev trial in 1936 and the Piatakov trial in January 1937, was himself removed for clumsiness and subsequently executed. The truth was that he knew too much, and he was replaced by the sadistic nonentity, Yeshov. Yeshov was entrusted with the trials of the Right, of Bucharin and his comrades. When that was done he too was removed. But what a holocaust. Nicholai Bucharin was shot. Alexis Rykov was shot. Aveli Yenukidze, for many years an intimate of Stalin, was shot. Jan Rudzutak, Leo Karakhan, the Meshlauk brothers, they too were shot. And they were followed by Grinko, Krestinsky, Rosengoltz, and Zeiinsky. And next? The generals, Alksnis and Garmarnik, and Admiral Orloff.
The Polish Communist Party was dissolved. To insure its death, fourteen members of political and central committees of the Polish Party residing in Moscow were executed. Lensky, Bruno Jascensky, Domsky, and Lapinsky, after Valetsky, fell in the slaughter.
The leaders of the German Communist Party who had followed Stalin loyally in capitulating to Hitler were repaid for their devotion. Look at the list of the dead: Kupfersten, Ottwald, Heinz Neumann, Schubert, Werner Hirsch, Ziskind, Birkenauer, Sauerland, Gerber, Professor Halle and Rudolph Haus.
It is impossible to list all the martyrs. Their names are legion. We have not touched the trial of March 1933 when Connor, Kovarsky and Wolf, along with thirty-two other functionaries and agronomists, were executed; of the disappearance of the heroic Vassili Pankratov and the suicides of Bogdan and Lominadze. Everyone knows how Nina Trotsky, a victim of tuberculosis, was permitted to die, without medical aid. How Anna Lvovna, Trotsky‘s first wife was persecuted to her death and of the disappearance of Sergei Sedov. The hopelessness of life and persecution drove Zinaida Trotsky to her death. Then followed the mysterious death of Leon Sedov, who until his illness was in apparently good health. Rudolph Klement, secretary of the Fourth International, disappeared and was later found beheaded, his body floating down the Seine River. Sheldon Harte fell a victim of the bloody GPU in the year 1940 while a guard at Trotsky‘s home in Coyoacan.
It is impossible, in an article of this character, to give a proper evaluation of the lives and roles of each of these great figures of the international revolutionary movement. They fell, one by one, the victims of a revengeful assassin, who consolidated his power in the interests of the counter-revolution. But each of them were only stepping-stones to the murder of the titan of them all, the heroic and courageous, Leon Trotsky. Stalin at last achieved his goal. The chapter was now closed. The Kremlin murderer stands dripping with the blood of countless proletarian martyrs.
 
What Is Left of the Old Bolshevik Guard
Let us examine the wreckage and see what remains. Who are some of the dead? Let us list some of them and years they had spent in the revolutionary movement: Ivan Smirnov, forty years; Gregory Zinoviev, thirty-five years; Leon Kamenev, thirty-six years; Georgi Piatakov, twenty-seven years; Gregory Sokolnikov, thirty-two years; Leonid Serebriakov, thirty-two years; Nikolai Muralov, thirty-two years; Yacob Drobnis, thirty-one years; Sergei Mrachkovsky, thirty years; Alexis Rykov, thirty-four years; and Trotsky himself with more than forty years, all of them devoted to the cause of the working class. And the host of others? Their service in the movement would read in the same way. But let us see what these losses have meant to the Bolshevik Party and the Comintern.
 
Then and Now
At the 6th Congress of the RCP, July–August, 1917, there was a central committee of twenty-one elected. Of this committee, seven died of natural causes; six of the remaining fourteen abandoned political life and became ordinary functionaries. Of the other eight, seven were shot as counter-revolutionaries. Only Stalin remained.
At the 7th Congress in March 1918, a central committee of fifteen was elected. Six died, while two ceased political activity. Seven remained. Six were shot as counter-revolutionaries. Only Stalin remains.
Nineteen members were elected to the Central committee at the 8th congress held in March 1919. Three died. Three ceased political activity. Thirteen were left. Eleven were shot or assassinated as “counter-revolutionaries.” Only Stalin and Kalinin remain.
In March and April 1920 the 9th congress was held. There were 19 members elected to the central committee. Three died. Two retired. Fourteen remained. Of the remaining fourteen, eleven were shot or assassinated as “counter-revolutionaries.” Only Stalin, Kalinin and Andreyev remain.
Of the Central Committee of the RCP, between the years 1917 and 1921, the years of the revolution, the civil war and the consolidation of the Russian Revolution, Lenin, Dzherzinsky, Artem and Stutchka, died. Zinoviev, Kamenev, Yevdomkimov, Smirnov, Serebriakov, Rykov, Smilga, Krestinsky, Preoboshansky, Bucharin, and Rudzutak were shot, Trotsky was murdered and Tomsky committed suicide. Only Stalin, Kalinin and Andreyev remain.
Of the program commission of seven elected at the 7th Party Congress in 1918, Lenin died, six were executed by Stalin and he alone remains.
Of the Political Bureau of seven elected at the 13th Party Congress in May 1924 six were shot or murdered. Only Stalin remains.
From 1919 to 1929, all the essential and fundamental reports were read and all the essential and fundamental resolutions were written by five persons: Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Bucharin and Radek. The first four are dead. Radek lives the uninspired life of a cravenous capitulator and informer.
Gone is Shliapnikov, Old Bolshevik; the historian Anishev; Shatzkin, leader of the Young Communist League and an organizer of the Young Communist International; Sharov, one of the founders of the Russian party; Eismont, Old Bolshevik; Yakovlev, Kudlin, Medvediev, Uglanov, Riutin, Putna. Gone too, is Sliepov, former editor of Pravda; Jan Sten, former leader of the “Stalinist Left,” Vuyo Vuyovich, brilliant leader of the youth, Fedorov, the historian Seidel, Arkus and a host of others. All of them had contributed mightily to the development of the Bolshevik Party.
The Marxist theoreticians of the Russian Revolution, the makers of the revolution, the founders of the Communist International, those great figures who helped to educate many thousands of revolutionaries the world over, are dead, the victims of the counter-revolutionary degeneration of the Stalinist bureaucracy, victims of the revengeful Cain Stalin. We have not done their heroic lives the justice they deserve in this review – but we have not forgotten them. Their lives are indelibly recorded in the history of our time, in the first gigantic victory and experiment of the modern proletariat.
ALBERT GATES
 



I.
The Dream of Bolivar
SIMON Bolivar, the great South American revolutionary, first conceived of a plan for the unity of the Western World. Bolivar’s ideal was never realized despite the enormous energy he spent to fuse the countries of the two continents. The Panama conference of 1820, was representative enough. Most of the countries were present, although of the American delegation of two, one had died in transit and the other arrived only after the conference had adjourned. Yet, despite the general acceptance of Bolivar’s proposals at the conference, one country alone ratified its decisions.
Bolivar had hoped to establish a single powerful united states from the Hudson Bay to Patagonia. He looked forward to a unified economic, political and military development of the new world as the sole hope of civilization. Thus, the new world would be contrasted to the decay of Napoleonic Europe then engaged in mutual self-destruction. Bolivar, it is clear, did not understand the positive effect that Napoleon’s campaigns had upon future capitalist development in the old world, nor did he understand, that the Little Corporal had dealt mortal blows to the remnants of the feudal order.
The collapse of the conference had a disastrous effect upon him. The failure to ratify the Panama decisions brought an end to the movement toward hemispheric unity. It was not to arise until more than a hundred years later and then only as a result of the imperialist needs of the most powerful nation in the world, the United States.
The one country which could have strengthened Bolivar’s ideal was America. But in 1820, the United States was completely absorbed in its own development as a nation. The War of 1812 had only shortly been concluded. The Louisiana Purchase opened gigantic vistas in the westward movement of the new people, and as the frontier pushed toward the Pacific Ocean the product of Bolivar’s dream world was realized on a national scale by the new vigorous republic of the North.
 
Bolivar’s Plan Utopian
Bolivar’s plan, however, was essentially utopian. Most of the South American countries had, primarily through his efforts, only just achieved their independence. Others were still under the heel of European feudal and new capitalist powers bent upon colonial expansion. The economy of the Latin American countries was almost wholly agricultural. Handicraft production could not supply anywhere near the simplest needs of the many millions of people. As in the United States, national developments were incomplete and the cultural level of the masses insufficient to grasp the significance of hemispheric unity. Above all, in the period of rising capitalism, of national unifications, the idea of hemispheric unity was totally incongruous.
If hemispheric unity appears to be a reality in the twentieth century, it is due essentially to the imperialist epoch of modern capitalism, the triumph of international economy, the existence of a world division of labor and mass production, the period of social decay. Under these conditions, however, hemispheric unity is possible in only two ways: Either under domination of the most powerful capitalist nation, or through the victory of the socialist revolution and the establishment of the Socialist United States of North and South America.
 
America’s Orientation
At the recently held Pan-American conference in Havana, Cuba, the United States presented its program of hemispheric unity. In my article, A New Horizon for American Imperialism, (The New International, June 1940), I traced the effects of a possible German victory on American diplomatic and military policy and showed it to be obligatory for the United States to make up its losses in the European and Far Eastern markets by a complete domination of the entire hemisphere. Having failed to put Europe on rations, faced with a permanent loss of the European market, likely to fall to Nazi Germany, and having been rudely expelled from the Far East by Japan’s policy for “a new order in Asia”, there is no avenue of escape for the United States other than complete control of the two Continents. The success of American policy means driving Germany, Italy, Japan and England out of the new world.
In the same article I treated with the possibility of a conjunctural stalemate in the struggle for world domination. Under such a condition, the United States would control the Americas while Germany is master in Europe, Africa and the Near East, and Japan dominates Asia and the Far Eastern Pacific. This situation could be only temporary, preceding war on a planetary scale between these three powers.
In the meantime, while she remains outside of the present conflicts in two decisive areas of the world, the United States is rushing its plans. How does the present Administration propose to achieve hemispheric unity? What methods will be employed? What are the possibilities of their success and what effects will they have upon the future development of the new world and the struggle tor socialism?

II.
Inter-Continental Unity and The War
Inter-continental unity in 1940 is an American plan based upon imperialist needs. In its decisive aspects, especially economically, it conflicts with the needs, aims and interest of many Latin American nations. The Administration in Washington is clearly cognizant of the great barriers that rise before it, and therefore, the program is developed in progressive, but natural stages.
At the outbreak of the war in Europe, the State Department pushed into existence the Inter-American Neutrality Committee for the ostensible purpose of keeping the war from American shores. In reality it made possible oceanic surveillance by the United States navy of American shores. It served as a warning to the Axis that the United States was determined to make this part of the world its “sphere of influence”. At the same time, it opened the way for military collaboration with South America for the purpose of establishing American bases there. Secret discussions have been and are taking place on the subject of military defense of the hemisphere in the event of any untoward development in the European war. The extension of the military arms of the United States in Latin America must necessarily impose the closest political and economic collaboration between them, whether it is voluntary or not.
 
The Havana Conference
The Havana conference, which met under the initiative of the United States, marked a tremendous step forward in the plans of the Roosevelt Administration. Persistent pounding by the American delegation forced Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay into line. They finally succumbed to Hull’s proposal to oppose the transference of European colonies in the new world, which is to say, to Germany or Italy. The agreement was reached, when it became clear that the United States was prepared to make genuine economic concessions to Latin America, that is, was prepared to foot the bill for the terrible economic dislocation that has taken place since the outbreak of the war and the establishment of the European blockade.
In the midst of the conference. President Roosevelt asked congress for a half a billion dollars for the Export-Import Bank which has heretofore engaged in improving trade relations between the United States and South America, providing the necessary capital to ease the existing stringent conditions. While dull-headed and ignorant congressmen and senators object to what they believe to have discovered as a “subsidy” to South America, they will soon learn that it will be necessary to increase that sum many times in the interests of American capitalism.
 
Havana Deliberates
An interesting and significant decision of the Havana conference, was the Act of Havana. Relating directly to the question of the European colonies, the clause permits the military action of a single nation in preventing their transference without first awaiting the agreement of other Latin American countries. It is clear that this permission is given to the United States and only to it. No other country is in a military position to act on the basis of the clause, and no other country is so vitally effected by a transference of the colonies to Germany and Italy as is the United States.
The agreement on the struggle against “Fifth Column and subversive movements”, while presumably directed against Germany, Italy and Japan, is more in the nature of a warning to dissident groups and native revolutionary movements in all countries. A meeting of American jurists is scheduled to discuss the legal means of enforcing the Havana agreement. Already, the conference agreed to aid each other by exchanging information, carrying out joint forays, and in general to perpetuate the existing systems of government in power. Thus, the struggle against “Fifth Column” activity is at once the most treacherous action and the most dangerous to the movement of socialist emancipation of all the Americas.
Finally, the Havana meeting came to the question of economic cooperation of the United States and Latin America. The American delegation did not press for the creation of the long discussed inter-American cartel. The brain-child of Mr. A. A. Berle, assistant to Secretary Hull, and regarded in many quarters of bourgeois opinion as the leading intellect in the State Department, met with powerful opposition prior to the conference which resulted in its temporary abandonment. It was patently clear beforehand that insufficient spadework had been done to enable its passage with the active cooperation of the twenty countries. There-upon, the conference merely decided to establish “close economic cooperation and to consider at some future date the more extended American plan.” The next stage will witness a determined drive to set up the cartel.

III.
What Is the Cartel
Cartels as a phenomenon of capitalist economy arose at the turn of the century. It was one segment of the monopolistic development and became a basic feature of economic activity. Cartels were established by capitalist enterprises for the purpose of pooling resources, controlling conditions of sale, terms of payment, division of the market, fixing prices and dividing profits. Unlike the huge trusts in which the single enterprise was integrated into the trust at the loss of its own independence, the cartel is a much looser organization. At any time, the cartel may be dissolved, or any one enterprise may withdraw from the organization. Thus, on a national scale, cartels arose naturally in period of rising trusts and syndicates, to meet competition in the market and to wage a more effective struggle for existence.
The plan of Mr. Berle proposes to establish a similar organization on an inter-continental scale. Its magnitude already creates new conditions which hitherto could not and did not affect national cartels. International cartels and trusts have existed and do exist, to be sure. But these trusts and cartels are agreements between private financial and industrial organizations. The American proposals are govern-mental proposals! The inter-American cartel is conceived of as a cartel initiated and directed by the governments of Latin and North America in collaboration with private industry and finance. By that very fact, totalitarian development in government and autarchic development in economy are inevitable.
On the face of it, the inter-American cartel appears to be a simple plan. It proposes 1. to take up the surplus commodities and raw materials of Latin American which have been accumulating since the war destroyed the European markets of the leading Latin-American nations, 2. to establish an export division of the cartel to dispose of these surpluses to the advantage of “all” the Americas, and 3. to establish a controlled and “planned” production of agriculture, and exploitation of the resources and industries of Latin America on an intercontinental plane. No secret is made of the fact that this measure is proposed as the economic means to fight Germany, Italy and Japan, to drive them from the markets of South America. What is not made clear is the fact that the inter-American cartel is a plan by which the United States will establish its hegemony over the entire western world.
 
U.S. Hands Out A Subsidy
America already dominates the smaller and unimportant countries. To achieve the cartel she must obtain the agreement in one way or another of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, Peru, and Uruguay.
The cartel aims to meet the German barter system of low prices and credits, and Germany is determinedly fighting the cartel because, if successful, it will eliminate her from the American markets. But the cartel, on the other hand, is not merely an economic weapon in the hands of Washington. It is a first line measure of defense, and the United States is determined to succeed in its establishment. When congress agrees to the additional $500,000,000 capital for the Export-Import Bank, a total of $700,000,000 will have been given to it for the purpose of strengthening American relations to the southern countries. Anywhere from $200,000,000 to $2,000,000,000 are estimated as the initial capital required to organize and sustain for a time, the cartel.
Yes, despite the obvious desire of Washington to hand out necessary capital to the Latin American, those countries are extremely hesitant to accept the cartel. Argentina led the opposition to it. The permanence of the cartel has been a subject of discussion. Will the cartel remain if the war is ended? Will the cartel destroy economic relations between the South American countries and the European markets if it dissolves at the close of the war and normal relations are reestablished? What are the U.S. intentions in urging the cartel? Will it lead to complete Yankee domination and destruction of the independence of South America? These questions, as can readily be seen, are decisive for the orientation of all the Americas since they contain the very essence of the future development of American imperialism, and they will decide the character of existence of every South American country.

IV.
Economic Conflicts
The chief obstacles to the realization of the inter-American cartel is the economic conflict between the United States and Brazil, Argentina, and others. The South American nations have relied primarily upon European markets tor disposal of their commodity surpluses. While South America is the largest area of American capital investments, the American market absorbs only a small part of the South American agricultural production. South America is potentially an important field for American export, but under existing relations, the United States establishes a favorable balance of trade with it, and conversely, creates an unfavorable trade balance for those countries.
The simple fact is that the economies of the U.S. and South America are not interdependent. Trade is most important to the existence of those countries. They are primarily agricultural nations, sources of raw materials and minerals of great variety and importance. The greater part of Latin America is unexploited and a rich field known to contain millions of tons of coal, iron, silver, copper, oil, platinum, manganese, and vast acres of timber. In the agricultural field, we find that the southern continent is an exporter of enormous quantities of corn, wheat, cotton, coffee, rice, wool, – in most instances, commodities in competition with American agriculture, or minerals and ores obtainable in vast quantities in the United States.
 
What South America Produces
While much of the economy of Latin America is a “colonial” economy (resources developed by foreign capital), native capital is reinvested in native lands, and as in the case of Argentina, invested in other Latin-American countries. Argentina, the most powerful opponent of the cartel, is the richest nation in South America. With only thirteen million people, she is the strongest nation on her continent. Immensely wealthy, with an economy dependent primarily on her export of agricultural commodities, Argentina is decisively interested in the European markets. At the present time, with over 64 million acres in cultivation, she is the largest agricultural nation in the world excluding the United States, China, India and the Soviet Union. She is the 4th largest wheat producer in the world, the world’s greatest exporter of wheat, and the world’s greatest exporter of corn. Her conflict with the U.S. is expressed in the slogan: We buy from those who buy from us. America buys little from Argentina. To increase imports from that country is to invite a veritable crusade by the American agricultural interests. Remember Argentine beef!
Brazil is the coffee center of the world, capable of supplying one hundred per cent of the world’s needs, where she now supplies about seventy. Two-thirds of South America’s cotton crop is grown in Brazil, and she has taken away much of the American cotton market. She is the largest tobacco grower in Latin America as well as the greatest source of vegetable oil in the world. Brazil also has the greatest timber reserve in the world. With the exception of coffee and cocoa, Brazil is a competitor of the U.S.
Chile vies with the United States in the production of copper, while her tremendous nitrates industry is now being displaced by the production of synthetic nitrates. Venezuela has tremendous oil reserves which are exploited in the main by the United States. Bolivia is an important source of tin, as yet not fully exploited and still dominated by Great Britain. The other countries, without exception, in one form or another produce similar agricultural commodities or have resources akin to the U.S.
The one-sided agricultural development of the South American nations has brought into existence movements of “national self-sufficiency”. The aim of these movements (Mexico, Argentina, etc.) is to establish a balanced economy, industrial and agricultural, improve economic standards, and reduce reliance upon exports and foreign capital. Proceeding with greater independence, Argentina has made tremendous headway in the direction of industrialization. Mexico, as is well known, has exceeded all other Latin American efforts to establish economic independence and attempts industrialization with a partial system of planning. But the efforts of Cuba to adopt a plan of national self-sufficiency was brought to sharp halt through the direct intervention of the United States in the person of Under-Secretary of State Sumner Welles.
 
The Difficulties of The Cartel
One can readily imagine the immense problems which confront the United States in her efforts to establish the inter-American cartel. American economy rests upon the greatest industrial apparatus in the world, an industry which is becoming more and more dependent upon the world market, that is, upon export trade. The capture of the entire trade of Latin-America, which is what is required to drive the Axis powers from this world, means that the United States must take the huge agricultural surpluses of those countries and become the tradesman of the new world. But despite the enormous development of an industrialized America, she too, has a large agricultural economy. The agricultural population of the United States is around the figure of 32 million that is, almost three times the population of Argentina alone. American agriculture, it should be remembered, has been in a permanent crisis since the World War. While the United States is herself a great exporter of agricultural commodities, wheat, corn, cotton, and meat products, she can in no way solve the economic problems of the Latin American countries. The situation is the same in the oil industry.
Thus, J.H. Carmical, in the New York Times points to the problem when he writes: “Since Latin America and the United States have as good as the same products to sell in the export markets, the question naturally arises as to how production can be maintained at or near current levels, and the surpluses thus created disposed of in other areas which will probably be self-sufficient, or nearly so, in a few years. In the meantime, the question is how are any of these groups going to be in a position to buy our products on a large scale without exporting their goods, since their gold reserves are being rapidly depleted.
“Formation of a Western Hemisphere cartel probably would have a disturbing influence, particularly at first, for it would disrupt established trade channels.”
The view of the New York Times writer is essentially correct. And yet, the United States must overcome all of the aforementioned obstacles, because American imperialism cannot exist without overcoming them. Unless she is able to obtain control over the western world, she cannot hope to control the world. If she loses in South America, that is the beginning of the end of American imperialism.

V.
America Must Control
It is not merely an economic question. It is a political question of the first magnitude. Since the war closed the European market and Japan holds the key to the Far Eastern situation, America must move fast. The domination of South America, as we have already pointed out is a question of defense. Thus, the owner of the Nation, Freda Kirchwey, proposes the establishment of a “democratic totalitarianism” as a means to “resist the absolutist totalitarianism of the European continent. Planning is necessary, centralized control is necessary, and some sort of merchandising cartel, as suggested by the Administration, may be the best instrument through which to achieve both.” And then, this pathetic woman adds, “But such a system must be worked out and administered collectively and not under the domination, however benevolent, of the United States. Otherwise it will not work at all.”
Under the conditions of Laissez-Faire, given a completely industrialized United States with no agriculture to speak of, the establishment of American domination of this world would be a relatively simple one, and in some respects a natural one. An inter-American customs union would in all likelihood have already existed for some time. A balance of trade could easily be established which would redound to the interests of all the countries. But capitalist economy has long passed that period. And American capitalism is not English capitalism. How then can the United States succeed in the establishment of the cartel and make it function?
 
Toward Hemispheric Reorganization
It can do so by first creating the political and military conditions to affect such economic relations and make possible “a unified hemisphere”. There is entailed a reorganization of economy in the western world. It means market control, price control, and above all, production control. Economic unity of the hemisphere means a reorganization of finance, the establishment of an inter-continental currency under the domination of Wall Street and the United States Treasury. Above all, for the cartel to be successful, for American domination of the new world to become a fact and a bulwark against her rivals, agriculture in the United States must be liquidated as a potent sector of American economy. The United States must seek to establish an inter-continental division of labor between the industrial Yankees and agricultural Latin-America. It will have to call a halt to the endeavors of South American nations to industrialize themselves, to attempt national self-sufficiency. We do not believe that the United States is “the legitimate heir to Canada, New Zealand or Australia”, or any British possession, but it is clear that when it will become necessary in the interests of American imperialism to establish its heirship over those countries, as well as South America, it will do so, legitimately or illegitimately.
The movement toward the cartel is only in its initial stages. The complete program will be long in being achieved, if ever it is completely realized. But it should be clear to every class-conscious worker, to every revolutionist, what is in store. America is preparing to become the greatest military power in the world. If domination of North and South America does not come with the “assent” of the Latin American countries, it will come about through the forceful intervention by U.S. arms. And if the cartel is established, then the United States will move swiftly toward “economic unity”. It will mean putting South American economy on rations. It will be told what it can produce, when it can produce, where it shall produce and what will be its share. Clearly, the United States cannot permit a balanced economy in South America. It must make of South America a vast agricultural area, a source of supply of raw materials, minerals and ores. In this process, the United States must itself be transformed into a vast work shop.
Thus, the American orientation! Dominating the new world it can begin the struggle for world mastery with powerful reserves at hand. We shall witness a new series of wars, far more gigantic, far more destructive than any yet experienced. But that period will bring with it the unrest of millions. It will provoke the revolutionary protest of the great masses of the world, not in the least, the toiling mil-lions of the western hemisphere.
 



What happened in the private meetings between the United States and Argentina, the main stumbling block at the Pan-American conference to the Washington plan of political, economic and military unity of the Western Hemisphere, may not be known for a long time, but the conference has formally, at least, proved to be a triumph for the State Department.
The American delegation arrived in Cuba with a definite plan for preventing seizure of European colonies in Latin America by the Axis powers. the question of the colonies was linked to the economic problems of the American continents, it had therefore to be solved first. The capitalist press therefore treated this question as the major one at the conference.
 
Not the Main Problem
In reality, however, this question was secondary. The bait for an agreement on the colonies lay in the tremendous wealth of the United States and its willingness to use it in solving the economic problems of the Latin-American countries. President Roosevelt gave a practical demonstration of this fact when in the midst of the conference he asked for $500,000,000 for the Export-Import Bank to finance trade between the Americas and thereby relieve the glutted warehouses of the Latin American nations.
The decision arrived at is a simple one. The American nations will not recognize the transfer of any colony in this hemisphere to any new European power. In this way, the twenty-one American nations have partially subscribed to the Monroe Doctrine as it is conceived by the Roosevelt administration. The conference declared that they “would consider any transfer or attempt to transfer sovereignty ... as contrary to American sentiments, principles and rights of American states to maintain their security and political independence.” No mention is made of the right to self-determination by the existing colonies, nor of the return of these same colonies to the nations which formerly owned them. The acquiescence of Argentina caused considerable surprise in view of its previous opposition to taking a definitive position on the colonies. Argentina argued against “innovations” and “actions taken before the fact”. But following Melo’s conference with Hull, Argentina gave its assent to the conference action when it was agreed to use the term “administration of the colonies” in place of “trusteeship” or the establishment of “mandates”. There is no reason to doubt but that the United Slates made sufficient economic guarantees to Argentina to win its cooperation.
 
Gets Free Hand
The conference adopted two decisions on the matter of the colonies. One is a convention which must be ratified by the countries present; the other is the Act of Havana which grants any country acting alone or in concert with others, the right to take such steps as are required for its own defense or the “defense of the continent”. By this Act the United States could, for example, act without first getting approval from the countries ratifying the decisions of the conference. But then all the countries recognize that the United States is the only nation which can carry into effect the conference decisions. The nations present were prepared to hand over the military and financial problems involved in the “administration of the colonies” to the United States.
Economic cooperation was at once he most important and the most difficult problem to solve. While the major objections of the leading South American nations to Hull’s proposals for economic unity flowed from the fact that their economies were more closely linked to Europe than the United States, the war which closed the European markets temporarily altered the situation. Huge surpluses of goods have piled up, especially in Brazil and Argentina. These countries are quite willing to establish economic cooperation with the United States if it means that through the Export-Import Bank and American finance, their acute economic problems will be modified. The same holds true for the other nations.
The resolution adopted by the conference is general and vague. Hull described it as establishing the necessity “to create and set into operation machinery of action”. Many things are implied in “economic cooperation.” but the details have been referred to the Inter-American Economic and Financial Advisory Committee. The economic problem will hereafter become the decisive one with the United States seeking complete domination over the western world against any nation seeking to establish an economic foothold in the hemisphere.
 
Danger for Labor
The most dangerous decision of the conference so far as the labor and political organizations of the working class are concerned is the decision to fight “fifth column” movements. Under the resolution adopted, the twenty-one nations are to aid each other in the defense and maintenance of the existing governments, to supply information to each other, to jointly struggle against any and all “subversive” movements. Under the guise of combating German, Italian and Japanese propaganda, any opposition to the existing governments will be labeled “fifth column” and “subversive.” In this way, the resolution becomes a means of perpetuating in power the present governments.
While the press speaks of the “twenty-one republics,” it is a fact that in most countries the severest dictatorships exist. Democracy is the exception rather than the rule.
The coming conference of jurists and police experts which is to study the question, will undoubtedly devise ways and means of suppressing the organizations of the working class. A new catalogue of crimes is to be set up and they will have an extremely wide range.
Undoubtedly, the United States won a tremendous diplomatic and political victory at Havana. But it is only a beginning. Henceforth, Washington will move more quickly to achieve its main aims.
 




Some weeks ago the New Republic printed a chart indicating trends in salaries and wages that is highly interesting and instructive, showing how in the most recent years of the crisis, particularly from 1933 to 1934, salaries increased and wages held their own, after a heavy decline in previous years, despite the supposed aid to wages in the form of the NRA. The figures according to the New Republic are taken from two sources, the Securities Exchange Commission for salaries and the U.S. Department of Labor for wages.
The report on salaries are for the leading officials of the outstanding companies in this country and for wages, the average of the workers in the corresponding industries. Weaknesses in the report are many. It does not contrast the salaries and, wages for the years 1933–34 to the years preceding the crisis. It does not show the salaries for subordinate officials whose incomes are not far below the highest paid officials of any company. Likewise the report, being purely factual lacking any kind of analysis, does not show that for the officials, salaries did not stop with the opening of the crisis not during its entire existence.
 
Important Facts Omitted
On the side of wages the report does not indicate whether these wages include also foremen, salesmen, office workers, etc., which in most cases would raise the average. As in the above, it does not compare wages for the years 1933–34 with those preceding the crisis. Being factual it does not mention the fact that wages in this period were raised on an average because of forced employment through the NRA and indirectly through government projects. That too would raise the average wage. Such a fact as the years of unemployment and the loss of income for the mass of workers is not mentioned. Thus no average wage over a period of five to ten years is presented. Such a figure would again depress the average to a far greater level than is presented in the report.
Granting all the weaknesses indicated in the above it is nevertheless possible to gather the trends in the report. The report concerns itself with 107 leading companies including such as the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Diamond Match Co., International Business Machines Corp., Montgomery Ward and Co., Pullman Inc., Standard Oil Co., Westinghouse Electric, U.S. Rubber, Goodrich Rubber, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., etc., etc. While the automobile industry and most of the tobacco companies do not appear in the report, steel, textile, coal, transportation and the like are reported on.
Taking the 107 companies the average salary paid to the leading official is somewhat over $61,000 a year, for the year 1934. Ten officials out of this total received between $100,000 and $360,000 (the top salary). Forty officials received a salary ranging between fifty and a hundred thousand dollars while a like number received between twenty-five and fifty thousand dollars. The remaining salaries ranged between ten and twenty-five thousand dollars a year. The inclusion of automobile and tobacco would find additional numbers in the upper brackets, these industries paying enormous salaries to its officials.
 
Average Wage – $21
In the column of wages the year 1934 reveals an average wage of somewhat over $21.00. Not one company paid an average of $30 a week and certainly not over $30. Fifty-four companies paid wages between twenty and thirty dollars a week, these being divided equally between those paying twenty-five to thirty dollars a week and those paying twenty to twenty-five dollars a week. Thirty companies paid an average of between fifteen and twenty dollars a week, the remaining 23 companies averaged between ten and fifteen dollars a week for the same month.
The figures reveal that the Cluett-Peabody Company paid an average wage of $12 a week, the Beechnut Packing Company $13, Pet Milk Company $13, Phillips-Jones Corp. $12, U.S. Tobacco $14, etc.
All the above figures represent the average for the month of Dec. 1934. While they may not be entirely accurate for a complete survey for all industry over an entire year they do represent the trends in the leading industries.
One thing is positively clear: The owners of industry received either slight losses in comparison to the pre-crisis period, equal salaries or in many instances greater salaries. But not for any period did their salaries cease. The workers, for the most part, suffered losses. In considering these wages it must be borne in mind that the great unemployment periods during a single year would depress these averages sharply, bringing them to even lower levels than the now already low figures when related to the minimum needs of workers’ families, even according to the U.S. Department of Labor standards.
 
Marxist Conception Confirmed
The collapse of the NRA will serve only to further reduce wages of workers. Almost immediately upon the announcement of the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court a few weeks ago, wages took a sharp drop, hours of work increased, and the general standard of working conditions worsened. The collapse of the NRA, the long periods of unemployment, the increase in the cost of living, the spread of wages to include more than one family, but taking in relatives, etc., all further depress the real average of workers’ wages. The polarization between the owners of industry, the capitalists, and the workers, are presented very sharply in the report. A more absolute analysis than the one presented in the New Republic would only bear out the trend indicated in its report. But the report is sufficient in itself to demonstrate the complete validity of the Marxian conceptions.
The increasing differentiations between the classes pushes for a greater class consciousness on the part of the American working class and their increasing will to struggle. This has already been present in the wave of strike struggles occurring in the last two years. They are bound to become more intense in the immediate future. The heavy reduction of the standard of living of the American workers will only help to drive them further on the road to class consciousness.
 

Gates: Burnham and His Managers (July 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Burnham and His Managers
(July 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 6 (Whole No. 55), July 1941, pp. 144–8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

THE publication of the book The Managerial Revolution by James Burnham has caused a considerable stir in numerous circles. The book, shrouded with an aura of mystery, is receiving a clever publicity campaign designed to make it sell in large quantities. Here at last, the publishers say, has come a man who not only explains many things about our world which is not widely understood, but provides an answer as to what will be the character of the future society. Naturally, a man who can tell the bourgeois world what the future holds in store, providing it is not socialism – even though he predict the end of capitalism – is a highly welcomed individual, for the bourgeoisie, in any case, has long ago learned to distinguish between dangerous theories and those which are merely exciting, diverting and unusual. The bourgeoisie does not feel that way about the theory of the managerial revolution because this theory, when stripped of its own brand of semantics, is fundamentally a justification of fascism and all forms of totalitarianism. In the case of Burnham, and a host of others, it is issued forth as the result of objective scientific research, but is nonetheless a product of a mental rationalization which justifies the “wave of the future.”
The theory of the managerial revolution is a product of the economic, political and social chaos of decay monopoly capitalism. It forms part of world ideological confusion arising from the salient and unavoidable fact that capitalism is dying; that the socialist victory which many awaited has not yet occurred; that socialism has suffered uninterrupted defeats; that capitalism resorts, in one country after another, to methods of barbarism and acknowledged abnormalities in economy in order to maintain itself. It is a theory which springs of hopelessness and despair.
Theories similar to Burnham’s managerial revolution have been published, but none with the simplicity and fullness of the erstwhile member of the Workers Party. He has presented a complete blueprint of this managerial revolution: the decay of capitalism, the emergence of the new society, the time element involved, the character of the new state, the new class struggle and the future of mankind in the next period of history! The presentation is schematic, mechanical and static. It is grounded upon little or no facts, and this is, as we shall shortly illustrate, no slight or unconscious omission, for despite Burnham’s constant allusion to the need of scientific procedure (about which he has so often lectured Marxists) and the necessity for verification (empirically) by the facts of history, there is little of this in the book.
 
In Passing ...
In the course of elaborating his theory, Burnham writes:
“Nor have the managers themselves been constructing and propagating their own ideologies: this has been and is being done for the most part by intellectuals, writers, philosophers. Most of these intellectuals are not in the least aware that the net social effect of the ideologies which they elaborate contributes to the power and privilege of the managers and to the building of a new structure of class rule in society. As in the past, the intellectuals believe that they are speaking in the name of truth and for the interests of all humanity” (page 73).
Thus a considerable agitation takes place for a new society. It is characteristic of this situation that none of the proponents of the new order are conscious of what it is they agitate for or theorize about. A seemingly sad situation for the new society, but it is made all the sadder by the fact that the new “ruling class,” the managers, are abysmally ignorant of existing historical currents which seek to place them into power as the new dominant class in a new social order.
It is apparently Burnham’s “historical rôle,” however much he declines the honors at this time, to enlighten the “new class” to its gigantic social rôle, even though he “has no program to offer” and has no subjective feelings one way or another about the new society, so that it may understand whither it is drifting, what it is fighting for (even though it is not fighting) and, above all, to understand the power it already has.
The purpose of this review is to objectively examine the central features of the managerial theory and to reserve specific analysis for another time. An agitational denunciation of Burnham because he is a renegade from socialism solves not a single question involved in the instant case, for it is incumbent that his theory be scientifically analyzed to determine whether or not it has any merit. There is a time and place for everything. The fact that Burnham is an apostate would not automatically prove the invalidity of the managerial theory, though it will help to establish some of the inner urgings that prompted more flagrant statements contained in the book. A reading of the book will amply show that the author cannot be separated from his theory.
Burnham’s theory of the managerial revolution may be summarized as follows:

Capitalism is doomed. Unable to solve a single one of its contradictions, it cannot maintain itself and has already retreated under the pressures exerted by the onward rush of the new social order.
 
Socialism “is not possible of achievement or even of approximation in the present period of history.”
 
The managerial revolution occurs before our very eyes. In truth, it began in or at the close of the First World War, has continued uninterruptedly ever since and will be completed within fifty years. Its victory is inevitable; it is worldwide.
 

Capitalism, and the Present Epoch
The justification of the theory of the managerial revolution can be partially sustained by proving the irremediable collapse of capitalism and the impossibility of socialism, for only then is it possible to pose alternative social solutions. Thus, Burnham proceeds to prove first of all the collapse of capitalism. But it is precisely herein that the basic error of his theory is exposed. Burnham’s analysis of capitalism is highly superficial and composed of half-truths. In outlining seven characteristics of capitalism, long ago described by Marx and Engels, he omits mention of the decisive structural changes which occurred at the close of the nineteenth century, namely, the development of monopoly capitalism as a world economic order in which the world market, the world division of labor and world trade have become paramount. The era of finance capital, the significance of which was recognized even by enlightened bourgeois economists, and the internal economic changes wrought by this development, the attendant political changes which followed, and the increased intervention of the state in the economic process – all of this fails to find a place in the Burnham analysis, though reference to it is made in the latter portion of the book, where he discusses the Berle-Means theory of ownership and control, and “statification” of the economic process is his theme.
This omission is interesting because Burnham constructs his theory on the concept of “free” capitalism, laissez-faire, simple class relations and the relatively simple rôle of the state.
Capitalism has been in a state of permanent crisis since the outbreak of the First World War. The rise of the imperialist epoch, while it increased the production of goods, raised to a small degree the world standard of living and increased the total wealth of capitalism, at the same time intensified its inherent contradictions on a world plane. The forecasts of Marx and Engels were fully verified. Technological improvements, the organic composition of capital and the falling rate of profit, the growth of mass unemployment on a world scale, the limitations of the home market and in turn the world market, polarization of wealth, all of these characteristics create the capitalist doom.
The Marxists have demonstrated that these insoluble capitalist contradictions based on socialized production lay the basis for socialism. Socialism can solve the contradictions by removing the primary cause for their existence: private ownership of the means of production, production for profit and the market (world), bourgeois class relations to capital. Unless capitalism is abolished these corroding contradictions make life a hellish nightmare for the millions and millions of inhabitants in this world. Unemployment, poverty, misery and war are not merely conditions offering the possibility of agitational activity against the bourgeois social order; they are economic and political problems of the highest magnitude.
The nature of the capitalist crisis, its cyclical character was established by Marx many years ago, while bourgeois economists sailed in a fog and never understood this phenomenon. Many of the latter have paid obeisance to the founders of scientific socialism for their acute observations on this riddle of capitalist economy. It was therefore both surprising and amusing to read that Burnham, while he agrees with much that Marx and Engels wrote about the capitalist crisis, feels that they did not answer everything in relation to it, had left much unsaid and therefore only partially answered the question. However, one is disappointed, for, having been led into the belief that Burnham would supply that which is missing, one finds that the sponsor of the new social order immediately passes over this point as if it were not decisively important.
 
“Free” Capitalism and the State
The development of capitalism has not proceeded in a straight line; it has been uneven (industrial, agricultural and colonial nations) and combined (the merging of advanced industrial and backward agricultural methods, overlapping, development by leaps, etc.). The role of the state as the instrument of the ruling classes, has likewise reflected this uneven and combined development of capitalism and was subjected to particular changes on the basis of peculiar national developments. But whatever the nature of the particular development of any national state, its fundamental role has been that of a bourgeois state representing the historical social interests of the dominant economic class, the bourgeoisie.
The state in Germany was possessed of features quite different from that of the United States; the French from the English; the Russian from the Scandinavian. The form of the state in all countries was dependent upon the manner in which their capitalism arose, peculiar national traditions, the way in which the proletariat and the bourgeoisie as classes came into existence, the share of the national economy in the total world capitalist economy, etc. But no matter what the form, whether it was democratic, absolutist, constitutional monarchy, in all instances the state represented the interests of the dominant economic class.
To say, as Burnham says, that the state was the true capitalist state which governed the least, and permitted free, unbridled development of competition, is only a half answer. The state “which governed the least” was itself the product of the particular nature of a national economy. It governed the least in the early history of the United States where the development was completely internal, free and unlimited. Yet even in the United States, the state in the field of foreign affairs was a forthright representative of the rising bourgeoisie. But foreign affairs, the relation of one national bourgeois state to another, are based essentially upon economic relations; the affairs of state are political counterparts of the economic needs and relations of the various national capitalist classes.
In Great Britain, however, the development of capitalism occurred in a way which involved the intimate and direct intervention of the state in the creation of the British Empire, the basis of British capitalism. It is universally known, too, that German industry began almost from the start as a cartelized industry nurtured along with the utmost consideration and intervention of the Hohenzollern regime and the Reichstag, which subsidized a large section of the national economy.
 
The Root Error of Marxism
If Burnham adds little or nothing to our knowledge of capitalism, he at least supplies something new in description, designed to avoid simplicity and understanding. The class character of capitalism and the r61e of the bourgeoisie was never difficult to describe nor difficult to understand. In any case, the bourgeoisie knew that it owned the instruments of production and controlled, as a class, the total distribution of the total production. It remained for Burnham, ever the innovator, to describe this property relation in as obscure a language as possible. Burnham writes that the bourgeoisie “controls access to the instruments of production” and maintains a “preferential control of distribution”! This point is many times emphasized throughout the book in the manner of a discovery, which presumably provides a startlingly new insight on the nature of capitalism. According to him, it is this “control of access to the instruments of production” and “preferential control of distribution” which has been replaced by the “state ownership of the major instruments of production”; or will be so replaced, since the process is now occurring.
It is in elaboration of this point that Burnham weaves his theory of the managerial revolution. State ownership of the instruments of economy signifies control of distribution. The new state is controlled by the managers, who, as we point out in another section of this article, by their control “own” the instruments of production and thereby control the distribution of the total product of the new economy. The character of the state is necessarily altered in this process. Such a development was never foreseen by the Marxists; they were blinded by their belief that capitalism must inevitably be followed by socialism. Their failure to understand that this is not true, that capitalism is inevitably being followed by managerial society eliminates them as a serious and decisive social force. The root of the Marxist error is to be found in their false estimate of the state and its rôle in present-day society. If this were true, we should owe the professor a debt of gratitude, but there are many good reasons for our failure to acknowledge the debt.
 
The Epoch of Monopoly Capitalism
Marx and Engels sixty years ago forecast alterations in the functions of the state. They prophesied the necessity of state intervention in the economic process as an inevitable development of capitalism, of monopolized and trustified capitalism. In my article, German Society and Capitalism (The New International, April 1941) I outlined the fundamental characteristics of the present epoch in replying to Dwight Macdonald, who also adheres to the notion that a new social order has emerged in Germany – the same kind of social order that exists in the Soviet Union. Macdonald calls his society “bureaucratic collectivism” and mainly differs from Burnham in his rejection of the latter’s theory that it is the managers who rule in the new social order. He asserts that a new class of politicos has arisen in Germany and it is that new class that rules – the same class rules in the Soviet Union.
Oddly enough, it is Macdonald who attempts, however unsuccessfully, to prove his theory upon economic grounds, namely, that there is an absence of production of profit, production for a market, an end of wage labor, and, most important, state control of the economic process (equated by Macdonald to ownership). Burnham says the same things, without attempting any proof, yet both agree that it is a new society. Though their differences are not decisive, we believe Macdonald has more authority for his conclusions than Burn-ham has for managerial society.
For that reason, my reply to Macdonald applies equally well to Burnham. I wrote in my article the following:
“Monopolist capitalism has marked the end of simple capitalism, laissez-faire capitalism. Under these structural changes, the role of the state to the classes has undergone changes, although its basic r61e remains identical: the instrument of bourgeois society. Macdonald speaks of the democratic bourgeois state as bourgeois apologists describe it, but as it actually never was and certainly could not be under monopoly capitalism.
“The state fuses with monopoly capitalism and has a more direct and intimate interest in the economic well-being of the ‘nation.’ In declining capitalism, the duties of the state are magnified, since the increased conflict of ‘national capitals’ marks the struggle between states.”
Any serious student of economics and history can readily understand the ramifications of the above description. In a class society, the welfare of the nation is identified with the ruling class and the state necessarily acts in the best interests of the total capital. The permanent economic crisis of world capitalism, the permanence of modern war, the paralyzing conflict between mutually exclusive classes, require the economic, political and social intervention of the state in all affairs of the nation.
Engels wrote in Socialism, Utopian and Scientific:
“... the modern state, again, is only the organization that bourgeois society takes on in order to support the external conditions of the capitalist mode of production against the encroachments as well of the workers as of the individual capitalist. The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage-workers – proletarians. The capital relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head.”
This development, as described by Engels, has nowhere been completed except in the Soviet Union, where, however, we have a totally different set of historical conditions which make it impermissible to discuss simultaneously with a discussion of the capitalist world. But no matter, Engels described a prevailing tendency inherent in monopoly capitalism. It is this tendency which is in the ascendance. Whether or not this tendency will ever be completed, i.e., whether the state becomes the single capitalist, is highly questionable. In any case, it has not occurred, nor does it appear likely to occur. However, if one understands the nature of the general tendency, he can understand what now appears to be, superficially speaking, non-capitalist developments in world bourgeois society.
For the sake of argument, let of assume that the capitalist class disappears, the state becomes the sole capitalist, operating under managers’ or politicians’ control, the proletariat becomes a slave class, the markets disappear, profits disappear, planned production prevails, all in the interest of a new state form. Should this occur, naturally we would be standing at the threshold of a new society. But none of this has occurred. Neither Burnham nor Macdonald has established that it is occurring, and the facts of current history prove that it has not come to pass.
 
Efficiency and Proletarian Enslavement
In the course of an elaboration of the nature of fascism Trotsky once pointed out that there was a significant parallel in the existence of fascist regimes in those countries which were economically poor, or were poor in relation to their needs in the world market. The powerful and rich democracies did not require the installation of totalitarian regimes, whose first task is the solution of the class problem – the subjugation of the proletariat. The secret of Germany’s economic revival and military rearmament is to be found not in the inherent superiority of “bureaucratic collectivism” or “managerial economy,” but in the barbaric exploitation of the masses.
Failure to appreciate these fundamental factors leads Burnham, as it did Macdonald, in an exaggeration of superficial and secondary occurrences. Thus, Burnham, in endeavoring to prove the superiority of “managerial economy” (fascism) shows that in Germany finance is controlled, there is no inflation (when as a matter of fact, in the true economic sense, you do have inflation, measured by the tremendous growth of savings in the absence of purchaseable commodities, and in the complete disproportion in production between war goods, heavy capital goods and consumer goods); Germany has rapidly increased her territorial borders; that she “makes war better” than the capitalist nations; that the Hitler regime inspires “fanatical loyalty,” etc.
We prefer to leave this phase of the question for the moment and turn to the concrete development of the so-called managerial revolution.
One final remark, however, is necessary. The conditions which compel statification and state intervention in the economic process, naturally increase the specific weight of that organ, increase its personnel, give it great powers of control. The tendency toward bureaucratism is enhanced. The power of the bureaucracy grows and it enjoys a large measure of independence. But always, until now, its aim is the maintenance of the bourgeois social order, no matter whose rights it may invade to accomplish that aim.
 
How the Managerial Revolution Occurs
On page 75 of his book Burnham asserts:
“The managerial revolution is not just around the corner, that corner which seems never quite to be reached. The corner of the managerial revolution was turned some while ago. The revolution itself is not something we or our children have to wait for we may. if we wish, observe its stages before our eyes.”
Elsewhere, the professor writes of the managerial revolution that “This drive will be successful.” We are to expect, according to him, that the revolution which began some twenty-five years ago will be completed in fifty years. The managerial revolution has already conquered in Russia, Germany, Italy (of Japan we are not yet certain) and was begun in the United States with the advent of the New Deal.
Having observed the “establishment” of the managerial revolution, we are then told who the managers are and in what manner this revolution occurred; the relation of the state to the revolution and the economy.
“... the managers are simply (!) those who are, in fact, managing the instruments of production nowadays,” writes Burnham on page 77. They are, he declares, production managers, operating executives, superintendents, administrative engineers, supervisory technicians (in government), administrators, commissioners, bureau heads, etc.
Where, in fact, do the aforementioned “managers” actually manage and control industry? What is their relation to the bourgeois owners of the instrument of production? The answers to these questions are evasively given. Reference is made to Germany and Russia, to the New Deal and Italy. But neither in Germany nor Russia do conditions obtain to support the theory of managerial control. Nor will one find this “conclusive evidence” in the New Deal. Something quite different is to be observed in these “examples.” If Burnham seeks refuge in the fact that his revolution has not yet taken place, or is not completed, then he contradicts himself, for his theory is posed variously in the past, present and future; namely, that it has occurred, is occurring and will occur.
The managerial society exists. The leaders of the revolution are named. How does this revolution occur? In Russia it came as a result of the proletarian revolution which degenerated into, or as Burnham prefers, developed into the managerial state. It came there as the result of the expropriation of the bourgeoisie, a social revolution. In Germany it came with the victory of Hitler. In America it is coming through the impulses engendered by the New Deal.
 
Belief and Reality
In each instance
“The basis of the economic structure of managerial society is governmental (state) ownership and control of the major instruments of production.
“On a world scale the transition to this economic structure is well advanced” (page 118).
It is explained that while parliament “was the sovereign body of the limited state of capitalism,” the bureaus, as governmental bodies, “are the sovereign bodies of the unlimited state of managerial society” (page 148).
Burnham states it in another way as follows:
“In the new form of society, sovereignty is localized in administrative bureaus. They proclaim the rules, make the laws, issue the decrees. The shift from Parliament to the bureaus occurs on a world scale. Viewed on a world scale, the battle is already over” (page 148).
Where do such conditions actually exist? In no country except the Soviet Union, and there in other forms and under an entirely different set of circumstances.
Among other things, Burnham portrays the new society as another exploitative social order, within which the proletariat remains an enslaved class, the class struggle continues unabated between the proletariat and the managerial ruling class (the capitalist class has been destroyed, some entering the ranks of the managers, others the proletariat). On a world scale, wars will continue on a more destructive level as between managerial states which will no longer be confined to the original borders of the dominant managerial powers, but will be wars between different areas of the world (Japan – Far East; Germany – Europe and Africa; the United States – the Western Hemisphere). Thus the blueprint!
If the above appears schematic and unreal, that is exactly the manner in which it is outlined by Burnham. As a rule he confines himself to generalities and assertions. They are so debatable as to make impossible conclusions, because we speak different languages.
In what country do the managers rule the state, control or even manage the instruments of production? We are not here concerned with the control, or management, of a single technical operation in a factory, as Burnham would at times seem to imply in some sections of his book. We are concerned with the totality of the social order. Except for Russia, the de jure and de facto owners, controllers and managers of the instruments of production are the capitalists.
In what country has the state become the owner of the instruments of production? Only in Russia is the state the owner of the means of production, and this was not due to a managerial revolution; it resulted from a socialist revolution (no matter what eventually occurred to that revolution) and the expropriation of the capitalist class.
 
The Managerial States
In Germany you had a political Bonapartist assumption of power by the fascists – a political revolution, for the sake of argument – but in no fundamental sense was this occurrence a social revolution, a transfer of economic power from one class to another. As I have already pointed out in my articles on Germany, the bourgeoisie in that country remains the bourgeoisie. Class relations to capital are bourgeois. The state, it is true, functions differently in many ways from that of the American or the British, but its fundamental character is not at variance with the states of the democratic powers.
The conflict between Nazi Germany and Great Britain can not be explained as the struggle between opposing social orders, but only by the nature of the power of these imperialist nations and then- relation to the world market. Every feature of bourgeois economy, the profit system, wage-labor, private ownership of the means of production, the financial structure, the character of the war and the manner of their prosecution of this war are unchanged in either nation.
It is not necessary to restate the figures I have previously produced to show that the foregoing is the fact. The present German state corresponds in a large measure to the character of the bourgeois state outlined by Marx and Engels. The political bureaucracy in Germany exerts an enormous power. To a considerable degree, it controls the economic, social and political life of the nation. However great the abnormalities inherent in the nazi power, they do not conflict with the fundamental nature of the bourgeois economic order. They result from contradictions emanating from a powerful productive apparatus isolated from the sources of profitable existence by the nature of world capitalism. The status of the proletariat remains unchanged. Political changes have been many and for the Nazi Party they have meant state power, economic sinecures for many thousands of previously disfranchised and declassed elements; it has meant riches and entrance into the ranks of the bourgeoisie for the Brown shirt hierarchy.
What of the managers in Germany? They remain “managers,” operating executives, superintendents, administrative engineers, etc., in the employ of the bourgeoisie, from whom they receive their orders and their salaries, even though that bourgeoisie may be compelled to subordinate itself to the demands of the state under the conditions of the war. Otherwise, what has happened to the bourgeoisie in Germany, to the powerful association of Ruhr industrialists or the Junkers? Have they been liquidated or economically expropriated? Are they now salaried individuals who obtain the lion’s share of national income, merely on sufferance from a triumphant managerial state which has no need of a bourgeoisie? The question answers itself.
 
The Class Position of the “Managers”
Let us return to the United States. The managers in this country play even less a special rôle, industrially, politically or socially, than in Germany. It is not an accident that the “managerial class” is unaware of what Burnham considers the overwhelming fact of present-day society: the managerial revolution. The “managerial class” happens not to be a class. It cannot be identified by common economic interests which claim their adhesive organization. Burnham’s assertion that the binding quality of the “managerial class” is the all-powerful desire to produce, to continue producing, and to operate industry is a kind of subjective individualistic desire (we do not for a moment grant that this feeling exists) which has no great social, political or economic significance, certainly not the significance which enables one to conclude that this disorganized, goal-less, idea-less conglomeration is now engaged in taking or has already conquered power.
Is Stettinius a manager? Is Knudsen a manager? In the simplest meaning of the term, yes. But they are also members of the bourgeoisie, like so many others of their rank. Their economic interests, their habits and associations, their psychology is bourgeois, for they are, economically, politically and socially, members of the ruling class.
The thousands upon thousands of other “managers” who fit the description given by Burnham make up a part of America’s middle class. Their consciousness, their activity, their basic role in the national economy is to be likened to that of the total middle class. What superior aptitudes and greater social consciousness do superintendents, operating engineers, draftsmen, production men, foremen, have over other equivalent economic groupings? Because they do not represent a basic and fundamental class, with common ideas and common aims, because they have no goal, no program, either for themselves or society as a whole, because of their unstable economic position, it is futile to assign grandiose historical tasks, such as “managerial revolution,” to them. The whole of this group are employees, who decide nothing, but carry out orders, each doing his specific task in a given industry, which is coordinated at the pinnacle. They in no sense determine or direct production. But Burnham does not prove what he says about them, he merely state his point and lets it rest there.
* * *
Burnham’s scientific objectivity suffers in discussing the question of Managerial Society and Socialism. Like all apostates, his socialist past is embarrassing and he must needs salve his conscience by “proving” the impossibility of socialism, at least in his own lifetime. Thus he lays his pattern: the specific social weight of the proletariat diminished with technological developments, the proletariat declines in numbers; the development of war science foredooms the socialist revolution since you cannot take power with “street barricades and pikestaffs.” In any case, the managerial society Will precede socialism in the next period of history. We shall return to these questions in our next article.
If thus far we have failed to answer concrete data in favor of the managerial theory, it is because the author has not supplied any; his theory is composed of assertions which, whether true or not, one is asked to accept.
(To be continued)
 

itler's Attack on Russia - A New Turn in the War (July 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Hitler’s Attack on Russia
A New Turn in the War
(July 1941)

From New International, Vol. VII No. 6 (Whole No. 55), July 1941, pp. 131–7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

THE LIFE OF THE political prophet, in recent years, is a most exciting one. If he cannot be consistently correct in his forecasts, he can, in any case, observe the rapidity of changing events, for, indeed, there is no lack of gigantic overnight transformations having decisive political and military consequences in the very midst of World War II. War is one of the sharpest forms of the social crisis. Occurrences are rapid and successive; many appear to be illogical and without reasonable foundation. Sad, indeed, then, is life for those who have no sound political moorings. Events beat mercilessly upon their heads whilst they bend and break under the blows, seeking catchholds in every direction, but never once landing upright and able to understand clearly the reason of it all. Marxists search for the root causes of events and if they do not always answer every problem, they can and do reasonably approximate the true answer.
In August of 1939, the hangman of the Russian Revolution “Cain” Stalin, signed a solemn pact of non-aggression with that sterling dove of peace, Hitler. Thus the arch-enemies became bosom friends. The pact of peace was to cover a period of ten years! Its justification was, said Molotov, Commissar of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, that it “guaranteed peace in the world.” The immediate effect of the pact was the collapse of the campaign, planned and initiated by Stalin’s international agent, the Comintern, for collective security, the Peoples Front and the war of the democratic nations against the fascist. Although the Stalinist parties throughout the world were literally speechless for several days while awaiting cabled instructions from Moscow, the drive for collective security ceased abruptly.
 
The Aftermath of the Pact
Thereafter came the dawn. The capitalist world personified in Anglo-French-American imperialism denounced Stalin and the Soviet Union as “cheats, double-dealers, dishonest and godless people” without “integrity or shame,” and concluded that, after all, the democratic imperialists should have been prepared for this double-cross (one must not forget that the Hitler-Stalin pact was long in the making and at the time of its announcement an Anglo-French military and political mission was in Moscow attempting to bring about an alliance of its own with Stalin) since Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union were merely different sides of the same coin.
Hitler and Von Ribbentrop hailed the pact as a great historical achievement on the ground that Germany and the Soviet Union were in reality “natural” allies; that the democratic imperialists were responsible for hitherto keeping apart these “natural” friends; that there never was the slightest reason for a conflict between the two countries and that the pact which guaranteed their peace for ten years would be renewed for many decadesl
The brown shirted murderers were not alone in their praise. Stalin graced the diplomatic conferences with an ebullient smile, as if to inform his world cohorts that this was really “the goods”; it wasn’t just a Trotskyist slander. The pact was justified as a measure of peace, the single guarantee of peace on the European Continent. Fascism was a matter of personal taste, according to Molotov. There was no real point of conflict between the two countries.
 
The Common Interests of Stalin and Hitler
In a speech to the Supreme Soviet Council on August i, 1940, Molotov declared:
“The good-neighborly, friendly relations between the Soviet Union and Germany are not based on fortuitous considerations of a transient nature, but on fundamental state interests of both the USSR and Germany.”
What transpired in a few weeks after the seal was set to the treaty is now history. Assured of her eastern borders, the German military machine began to march, and Poland, its first victim, fell. Stalin marched, too. He took part of Poland in agreement with Hitler. Stalin also took Lithuania, Latvia and Esthonia. In the midst of the outbreak of the Second World War, which came as a mockery of Molotov’s declarations about the insurance of peace, Stalin’s Red Army crossed the borders of Finland. Throughout the world, the Soviet Union became indistinguishable from Nazi Germany. The explanation given for these movements of the Red Army was the need for protection of the borders of the Soviet Union from aggression by Lithuania, Latvia, Esthonia and Finland. The latter country was denounced as a tool of Great Britain and America! Great Britain was declared to be the main enemy of the Soviet Union! Russia thence became a source of material support to Germany in the war; it was also the base where were formulated the policies of what remained of the Comintern in the bourgeois world, and the subsequent chaos and confusion created by the Stalinist parties in all countries was without bounds. Stalin sought, by his adventures, to increase “the power, prestige and revenue” of his enormous bureaucracy.
In the United States, in Great Britain, in France, the war was denounced as imperialist. Germany, according to the Stalinist penmen, was fighting a defensive war to protect itself against Great Britain. Thus, on May 19, 1940, the Sunday Worker, quoting a Red Army commentator, wrote:
“The official memorandum of the German government states that German troops are going into Belgium and Holland in order to prevent its enemies from using these countries for the struggle against Germany. It is quite probable that this is the main objective.”
The Communist Parties, wherever possible, developed campaigns against the Anglo-American sector of the war front. In England, the People’s Convention was called for the purpose of fighting for a People’s Government Which would proclaim as its immediate purpose the establishment of peace. In the United States a desperate struggle was organized against aid to England, the Lease-Lend Bill and American preparations for entry into war. The Stalinist propaganda was neither anti-militarist nor anti-imperialist. It was opposed only to one camp in the war, the Anglo-America. One way or another, by innuendo or directly, it justified Germany’s participation in the war as being forced upon her; omitted references to the Axis in its pretended anti-war tirades, or pleasantly chastised fascism when the expediency demanded it. But there was no mistaking its genuine policy: the Soviet Union was an ally of Germany, a junior member of the Axis, but, nevertheless, a member in good standing. As a subordinate member of one of the warring camps, it was integrally a part of the imperialist war. Its propaganda and agitation conformed to its place in the war. The Communist Parties became, automatically and not always subtly, propaganda agents for the Axis. That was the necessary and logical result of the Hitler-Stalin pact.

What Impelled Hitler’s Attack Now?
The German attack upon the Soviet Union came as swiftly, and as surprisingly, as the Pact of 1939. The pact, ostensibly designed to keep the peace and secure the neutrality of the Soviet Union for at least ten years burst asunder one year and ten months after it was “sealed by the blood of both countries” (Molotov). The explanation for this event can not be found in the philosophies which govern the two countries. Those who complacently asserted that the coming together of the two countries was “a natural,” are now stunned. It cannot be found in the supposedly “socialist character” of Stalin’s Russia. The explanation of the attack on Russia is to be found solely upon military grounds. In war, countries which pursue a purely national policy (all the participants in this war do), govern themselves primarily upon, and act in accordance with, their vital national interests. Thus, to understand Hitler’s policy one must understand the development of the war.
 
The War at the Present Stage
We do not propose to make a thorough military analysis of the war. But certain important facts emerge from the whole panorama of the conflict. They are:

Hitler hoped, with the signing of the Russian pact, to conclude the war in a short time. His military staff apparently knew the state of Allied arms and had promised a quick victory. The theory of the blitzkrieg was predicated upon the idea of a rapid, all-out attack upon the enemies, employing immense air armadas, wave upon wave of tanks, great formations of artillery batteries and masses of men, all coordinated in one mighty offensive. Being well aware that a prolonged war might end disastrously for the Reich, Hitler promised the nation immediate victory and peace, with enormous gains in Europe, a colonial empire and economic prosperity, yea, even (sic) socialism.
 
Securing its eastern border, Germany turned to the west. There it was faced with the combined armed might of the Anglo-French alliance, an opposing force which soon disintegrated before the new military methods of the modernized and mechanized Reich army. France capitulated, adding her name to the long list of conquered nations. The number of victims was imposing and yet Hitler, even though he had so far achieved many small victories, failed to bring the war to a conclusion.

Germany now occupies and controls the entire western coast of Europe. It controls the Baltic Sea. It defeated England in the Balkans and won the Island of Crete. The Battle of the Atlantic is still being fought, but Hitler is truly master of all Europe west of the Soviet Union. However, he is still a long way from achieving his cardinal objective.
 

The British Continue to Fight On

The British Empire, to the utter surprise and amazement of many and the chagrin of Hitler, while battered and groggy, continues to stand up. Moreover, it is fighting back with great courage and determination, since British imperialism is struggling for its very life. The great industrial machinery of the United States moves ahead with giant strides and, as production increases, enormous quantities of war materials are shipped to England, enhancing the strength of John Bull, whose military power is rising rather than diminishing with the passage of time. In addition, the Empire has enormous resources which are only first beginning to make themselves felt. English losses, except on the sea, are not actually debilitating. Her army remains intact, her navy is still dominant over the Axis, her air force, surprisingly efficient, is growing quantitatively and her arms are constantly increased.
 
The United States is a more belligerent opponent of the Axis. Roosevelt long ago placed America in the camp of the “democracies” presumably engaged in a great struggle against the ideology of fascism. America daily moves closer to actual military participation in the war. The occupation of Iceland by American sailors and marines, and Roosevelt’s warning that he will not tolerate Axis attacks on the North Atlantic sea lanes, is an open invitation to Hitler to make the first move ere the American Navy goes into action. Intervention of the United States has brought home to Germany the conviction that this war will not end quickly, that it must now prepare for a long, long struggle.
 
The war is now approaching the close of its second year and has long since passed “the blitzkrieg stage.” The concrete state of the war and its apparent endlessness belie its blitzkrieg character. In recognition of this salient fact the German military machine now charts its course.
 

Why the Attack Is Made Now
With this brief summary, it becomes clearer why Germany turned east against its erstwhile partner. If the war is to be a long one, if Germany must face the material might of the United States and its probable entrance into the war, she must have the means whereby a prolonged war may be fought. Russia offers a material source for waging a prolonged war. With her western borders presently inviolate, the north impregnable, the Mediterranean shores well guarded, Germany could attack Russia without paralyzing interferences from other fronts. Thus Stalin reaped a harvest from seed planted long ago.
There is not the slightest doubt that the break between Hitler and Stalin came over the demands made of the Kremlin dictator. The precise character of these demands is not definitely known. But it is bruited about that Hitler demanded the whole production of Russia oil, all the grain produce of the Ukraine and, above all, demobilization of the Red Army, which did appear as a Damoclean sword and which, through its mobilization, was using up enormous quantities of materials needed by the Reich. In addition, it is reported that Hitler demanded control of Russian economy, to subordinate it to Germany’s war requirements. It was all or nothing. Rumors of a conflict between Stalin and his military staff do not appear to be fiction. Stalin was ready to yield, at least in part, to Hitler. But the demands were so paralyzing that capitulation could not be carried through without sharp internal reverberations.
It is reasonable to suppose, on the basis of the latest turn of events, that the Hess trip to England was taken for the express purpose of working out some modus vivendi with the British, in preparation for the German attack on the Soviet Union. It is reasonable to suppose, too, that England may have forewarned Stalin and that this fact was responsible for his sudden assumption to the post of Premier – to be able to command, no matter what course would be chosen. The Red Army, at the very least, was in partial readiness for the attack which came without the preliminary declaration of war.
No matter, once German troops were on the march Stalin had no choice. Capitulation now was precluded by the military situation. It was necessary to fight to the grim end. But the attack itself was a measure of desperation on Hitler’s part also. His huge army can not remain immobile. He must constantly produce victorious results for fear of repercussions at home. The war thus drives him to desperate acts.

Why Was the German Attack a Surprise?
The idea that Germany might attack the Soviet Union, at one stage or another of the war, was forecast in many circles. For many it was merely a guess. Others who took a long-term view on the war regarded it as inevitable, but nobody expected it so soon, and least of all the Soviet Union, the Communist Parties and their peripheries.
On June 19th, the June 24th issue of The New Masses appeared for public sale. Rumors had been rife for several weeks about strained Russo-German relations. But an editorial of The New Masses sought to calm the fears of the more agitated by saying:
“Useful as the (war) rumor was designed to be, it also indicated the course of the British government’s wishful thinking. Remember that a Soviet-German war is only conceivable if Germany first reached an understanding with Great Britain.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
How come then? Why was the Stalinist movement taken by such unalloyed surprise by the German attack? Because, as our Labor Action correspondent pointed out, Stalin was prepared to capitulate to Hitler’s demands! In the end, either German demands were too great, or German patience was exhausted, or both. Once the Russo-German war broke out, the international game of changing horses mid-stream began.
In correspondence with the “new line” brought about by the new world situation, an editorial in the Daily Worker offered the following post-mortem explanation of past relations between Stalin and Hitler. It said:
“One of your (the bourgeois press) favorite inventions which you have used ad nauseam was the ‘alliance’ which you said existed between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany. Hitler’s war aggression has demonstrated that this was merely a fiction, created in your offices. It was non-existent, as the Daily Worker has said times innumerable.”
 
How They Continue to Lie
Obviously, the Daily Worker lies! If surprise and confusion are now rampant, it is due in the main to the manner in which the Soviet Union initiated its pact with Hitler, the course it pursued in the furtherance of the same, and the lengths to which it was prepared to go to maintain its hitherto “warm and genial” relations with the Third Reich.
At no time did the leaders of the Soviet Union declare that the Hitler-Stalin pact was the result of dire necessity in the interest of gaining time and preparing for the future. If it is countered that the regime could not very well say such a thing, we reply, first of all, that such was not Lenin’s way in these matters, for he was concerned, in the last analysis, with the effect his actions would have upon the world proletariat and international socialism. Secondly, if diplomatic considerations prevented telling the whole truth about the pact, then neither was it incumbent upon the Soviet Union to misrepresent its true nature to the world.
That the New Leader was shocked by the turn of events is not to be wondered at, since these sterling observers of current events through reactionary and counter-revolutionary glasses believed that the Stalin-Hitler pact was a product of Stalin’s world revolutionary aims. They believed that “Stalin himself helped Hitler to power in the hope that with the hands of the Berlin dictator he would make the Communist ‘world revolution.’ “ But the very fact that they believe that Stalin, the hangman of the international revolutionary movement, aimed or is now aiming for a Communist world revolution, disqualifies them from serious consideration as analysts of world political problems. Their hatred of Stalin stems not from their abhorrence of his counter-revolutionary course, but from the false belief that he truly represents the movement for international socialism. Finally, their analysis concludes that Hitler is an untruthful and unreliable monster, never to be trusted. His attack on Russia is proof positive that he desires to rule the world. Anyway, Stalin got what was coming to him.
We have already referred to bourgeois opinion. Their analysis was always superficial, based upon secondary factors. But since the greater part of that group herald the war as a boon to the Anglo-American war camp, they are satisfied to let well enough alone. It is in the ranks of the labor and political movement of the workers, however, that enormous reverberations occur.
 
In Partial Summary
Let us recapitulate the role of the Soviet Union in this war up to the moment when its partner turned. The pact gave the signal to Germany to open hostilities. The Red Army marched with Hitler on the basis of a prior agreement to divide Poland. While the war raged in the west Stalin seized the Baltic states and opened war on Finland. In each of these concrete instances, Russia’s r61e in the war was indistinguishable from that of Germany. By her material aid to Germany she made possible, if only in part, the latter’s prosecution of the war. Propagandistically, all her attacks were upon England and America as warmongers. Germany was absolved of blame. In general, Russia’s rô1e in the war was anti-proletarian, anti-socialist and pro-Axis. The bulk of the conscious proletariat throughout the world became alienated from the Soviet Union and were made easy victims of the demagogic propaganda of the democratic imperialists. Everyone understand that in England and the United States, for example, the campaign against war and for peace was a policy operating in the interests of the fascist Axis. These facts are ineradicable proof of the fact that the Russo-German pact converted the Soviet Union into a junior partner of Adolph Hitler. The dénouément is here, but at what a cost! The Soviet Union, forcibly ejected from one of the warring camps, now slides ungracefully into another camp, the camp of its former opponent, if not enemy.

Has the Character of the War Changed?
The attack upon the Soviet Union has, naturally, again raised the question of Russia’s rôle in the war. Has the German assault really changed the character of the war? Is the war any less imperialist now than prior to the attack? Does the new cooperation between Russia and the Anglo-American camp change the latter’s position in the war? Is Stalin’s defense aimed at safeguarding the “socialist” achievements of the October Revolution? These are some of the questions which require answers. Our answers are in part already indicated. They are based upon fundamental considerations relating to the character of the Russian state and the concrete position that the Soviet Union bears to the other powers.
The Communist Party and the unions and organizations which it controls, its press, the Cannon group, the Oehler group, The Nation and The New Republic and a variety of other individuals have hastened into print, all with the general acclaim: the character of the war has changed! With Hitler’s attack upon Russia, it is necessary to rise to the defense of Stalin’s state. The Stalinists proclaim that the Red Army is engaged in a crusade to defend “socialist” Russia against fascism. The liberals have rediscovered the impelling necessity to defend “democratic” Russia from totalitarian attack and in this manner realize the best defense of England and world civilization. The Cannon group and the Oehler group hasten to characterize Russia’s position in war as that of a degenerated workers’ state with nationalized property lighting reaction, and call for support to the “revolutionary war of defense” of the Red Army.
All follow the specious argumentation developed by William Z. Foster in his speech before the National Committee of the Communist Party, where he said:
“Hitler’s attack upon the Soviet Union changes the character of the World War, and thereby makes necessary changes in our party’s attitude toward that war. Previously the war had been a struggle between the rival imperialist power groupings ... With Hitler’s war against the Soviet Union the whole situation is basically altered.”
This new line of Stalinism, which has great practical political significance, as we shall soon establish, is repeated in the manifesto of the American Communist Party which began: “The people of our country face a new world situation.”
The only new situation in the present war is that Hitler turned upon an erstwhile ally. But this important political and military fact does not and can not alter the basic character of the war, despite the involvement of the Soviet Union. To say with the Stalinists that the attack of Hitler is an attack upon socialism, or a workers’ state, however degenerated, or upon nationalized property per se, is merely repeating in reverse the clamor of Hitler and his wild cohorts that his war is a crusade against Bolshevism. Neither is the case.
A defense of Stalin can be justified only upon the following grounds: that the base of world socialism is threatened; that it is socialism in the Soviet Union which is being attacked and that a workers’ state, however degenerated, is imperiled. None of these conditions obtain in the present situation.
Stalin’s defense is purely nationalistic, having not the slightest relationship to socialism. The “genial” leader has already placed his country in the camp of the “democratic” nations fighting aggression! He has been warmly and enthusiastically received by Churchill and Eden. The transformation of the policies of the Communist Parties is in response to the nationalist requirements of the Stalinist regime. In the final analysis, Stalin is fighting solely for the preservation of his bureaucratic regime which ruthlessly exploits the Russian proletariat.
In what way, for example, has the attack upon the Soviet Union altered overnight “the struggle between the rival imperialist power groupings”? Is England’s defense of her imperialist empire made more palatable now that Stalin is attacked and forms an alliance with her? Are American imperialist aims similarly altered? This is hardly so. The war remains fundamentally unchanged. The attack upon the Soviet Union is merely a tangent of the main current of the war: the struggle between German imperialism and Anglo-American imperialism. The war against Russia is subordinated to that main aim, for victory on that front may enable Hitler to continue his war in the west! Hitler is still fighting for world domination, for permanent control over Europe, for a colonial empire. At best, a victory over Russia can only serve as a means of achieving his desired goal. Contrariwise, England and America are fighting to preserve their present holdings and to destroy once and for all a most desperate and dangerous rival. Has the war, then, changed on this sector?
The Russian state, moreover, is a bureaucratic state. The bureaucracy represents a new class in the Soviet Union, resting upon the state ownership of the means of production (nationalized property) and the brutal exploitation of the Russian masses. There is not a scintilla of socialism in Stalin’s domain, and a defense of the Soviet Union as such has nothing in common with a defense of the basic interest of the Russian or the international proletariat. Stalin’s defense is in the tradition of nationalist defense, in this case waged in behalf of a dominant economic group, the bureaucracy.
 
What Is Bureaucracy Fighting For?
The attempt to describe the outbreak of Russo-German hostilities as a struggle between bourgeois imperialist economy and nationalized property is a pure invention having no basis in fact. It was not the character of Russian economy which drove Hitler to attack (if this was his aim, he could have done it more effectively at the time the Munich pact was signed); had he been able to obtain full concessions to his demands there would have been no war, the character of Russian economy notwithstanding. Precisely the character of the international situation and the nature of the World War excludes the idea that Russia’s particular struggle is against imperialist economy. Those who stand upon a position of defensism on this ground are merely inventing a situation to sustain a viewpoint based, not on the realities of the war, but upon sentiment and outlived considerations.
It is contended that an alliance between Russia and the democratic powers would not automatically lend a reactionary semi-imperialist stamp to Russia’s struggle. This would be automatically true if the Soviet Union were a workers’ state or represented in this war the prerequisites for the advance of the international socialist interests of the world proletariat. In the absence of these conditions, what is Stalin fighting for?
There is general agreement in our party that the Soviet Union is not a workers’ state and that the Stalin bureaucracy is a new social class emerging from the peculiarly mixed character of Soviet economy. The answer to the question, what is Stalin fighting for, is to be sought in the nature of the bureaucracy as a new class. Stalin is fighting for the retention of the economic, political and social power of that class. Given these conditions, given the relationship of the Soviet Union to the imperialist powers in this war, Stalin’s struggle is not one waged in behalf of nationalized property as an economic form, but for the preservation of the bureaucratic regime which exists on the basis of nationalized property.
Nationalized property in the Soviet Union, therefore, can not, merely by its existence, have a fundamentally decisive effect upon the character of the war. Nationalized property, for example, did not make progressive Stalin’s attack upon Finland. The essential task of the proletariat in Russia is the same as the task of the proletariat elsewhere in the bourgeois world. This is not, however, tantamount to saying that Russian economy and capitalist economy are identical. They are different. But, as one sector of the imperialist world finds it necessary to attack Russia in consonance with its particular war needs, another sector, for exactly identical reasons, makes an alliance with it. Nationalized property, therefore, is not the determinant for characterizing this war. To proceed from that point of departure is to go astray of the true situation. In the instant case, Hitler wants from Russia what he wants from other nations, no matter what the character of their economies.
Given these fundamental considerations, it is not necessary for Stalin to surrender the Soviet Union over to Anglo-American imperialism to transform his rôle in the war into a reactionary one. Why should Stalin turn the Soviet Union over to Great Britain or the United States? What becomes of our analysis of the Stalin bureaucracy as a class? Precisely because this bureaucracy is a new class, with complete economic and political power, it fights to defend that power against anyone who would dethrone it. There is no basic reason why Stalin should turn internal power over to any other country; on the contrary, there is every good reason why he does not and why he fights so determinedly to maintain his rule, not only against other imperialist nations, but, above all, against the Russian proletariat. In saying this, we do not imply that Stalin will fail to travel the high road of collaboration with England and the United States in order to maintain his reign. The presently announced pact between Great Britain and the Soviet Union, barring either party from making a separate peace, only draws closer and subordinates the Soviet Union to its more powerful ally.
It is true, if a workers’ state existed in the Soviet Union, if it represented the world base for socialism, an alliance with England and America would not, in and of itself, make Russia’s rôle reactionary in this war. But this does not obtain in the Soviet Union. It is, we repeat, precisely the class position of Stalin’s bureaucracy in the Soviet Union, and the relation of that bureaucracy to world imperialism in this war which makes it reactionary.

Stalin’s Speech and the ‘New’ Party Line
No better proof of the foregoing is offered than the speeches of Churchill, Eden, Roosevelt and Stalin. Their unanimity is indeed touching. Outstanding in their common attitude to the new turn in the war is the manner in which they brush aside secondary and superficial considerations for the real questions involved.
Churchill and Eden, in the name of the British Empire, and Roosevelt, in behalf of American imperialism, declared their continued hatred for communism and, consequently, the Russian Revolution. But they are unanimously determined not to permit these “secondary” questions to obliterate their main aim in the war: destruction of Hitler and German imperialism There is nothing in the character of Stalin’s prosecution of the war or in the conduct of Stalin’s agents in their countries to cause them anxiety. They are certain that Stalin’s nationalism makes him a safe gamble and they are even more certain that they shall not be confronted with the discomfiture of “defeatist” socialist propaganda by the Comintern behind the lines. The Stalinist holiday is over.
Stalin’s speech is the barometer for judging Russia’s part in the war and the manner in which it intends to prosecute it. It is a commonplace to say of a speech by Stalin that it contains the commonest of platitudes, that it is dry and stale or that it lacks relationship to the socialist ideal or practice. In this case it stands out more boldly because, unfortunately, it is not a Soviet Congress with which we are concerned. Those who had hoped that now, under the conditions of an invasion of the Soviet Union, Stalin would be compelled to revert to his Bolshevik past, are disappointed. Aside from its brazen justification for the pact with Hitler, the speech is in the tradition of past Russian rulers.
 
The Aim of the War
Firstly, Stalin identifies the Soviet Union as a “democratic power” fighting together with England and the United States. Fascism, which was only yesterday a matter of “personal taste,” has now become abhorrent and “savage.” The Russo-German pact, which was “sealed by the blood of both countries,” is dishonestly described in post factum manner as follows:
“I think that not a single peace-loving state could decline a peace treaty with a neighboring state even though the latter was headed by such fiends and cannibals as Hitler and Ribbentrop ... The peoples of the Soviet Union now see that there is no taming (it could not see it before – A.G.) of German fascism in its savage fury and hatred of our country, which has insured all working people labor in freedom and prosperity.”
In the tradition of the bourgeois stateman, with the same specious reasoning, Stalin defines the war as a war of the “entire Soviet people against the German fascist forces.” He is even less the internationalist than Churchill or Roosevelt when he declares:
“The aim of this national war in defense of our country against the fascist oppressors is not only elimination of the danger hanging over our country, but also aid to all European peoples groaning under the yoke of German fascism.”
 
Stalin’s Bourgeois War
Yes, for Stalin this is a national war in defense of his country. In this war he has “loyal allies in the peoples of Europe and America.” His war will merge with the struggles of these people “for democratic liberties.” While the cruel despot of the Kremlin thus speaks of the “peoples” and “democratic liberties,” he fails to say anything about socialism and omits even the slightest word about the oppressed proletariat of the world, of the hundreds of millions of enslaved colonial peoples under the heel of world imperialism (England, America, France, etc.). There is nothing of the ringing cry of Bolshevism calling for the exploited of the world to overthrow their exploiters and establish true freedom and true democracy in the new order of socialism. National despot that he is, he can not wage a revolutionary war against Hitler; he can not even carry on a defeatist propaganda against the bloody fascist régime in Germany. Like the war of Britain and America against Hitler, it is being fought by purely military means. For just as Churchill and Roosevelt, molded and influenced by their class positions, dare not employ revolutionary methods in the midst of the war, methods which might realize the overthrow of Hitler, so Stalin (personification of the bureaucracy) , circumscribed by his class position, can not and dare not resort to revolutionary means of prosecuting the war.
Stalin, to be sure, finds place in his speech to praise “the historic utterance of British Prime Minister Churchill,” for his declaration of support to Russia in the war against Germany. He calls upon the Russian masses to support and “rally around the party of Lenin-Stalin” (!), for the totalitarian despot, no matter under what circumstances, must constantly carry along his totalitarian ideological baggage and force its imprint upon the minds of the people. Every word expressed by Stalin is opposed to the genuine internationalist and socialist spirit. He fears revolution no less than his new found democratic bourgeois allies. In the present period, one spark can serve to ignite a flame that might travel around the earth, to swamp all the bloody tyrants who rule over oppressed humanity. Stalin’s regime would be among the first to fall.
The democratic bourgeois world accepted Stalin’s speech with great enthusiasm. If there are revolutionaries and socialists who do not yet understand that the speech was the expression of a program and a policy, the New York Times does not make this mistake. In an editorial of July 4 entitled Back to the Russian Earth, the Times writes:
“Stalin’s broadcast yesterday was not the appeal of the Communist leader tb the embattled proletariat ... It is no class war now to which the Supreme Commissar summons all of the forces of the state. It is a ‘national war in defense of our country.’ Over and over again he appeals to the oldest fighting instincts. He repeats the slogans of patriotism, calling up on the people to save Russia, to defend the freedom of the homeland, their national independence, even their ‘democratic liberties.’”
Is it any wonder that the White Guardist Russians have sprung to life, that the Orthodox Church wasted not a moment in announcing its support to Stalin, that Kerensky has come out in print calling for support to Stalin’s war? All of these gentry recognize the stuff of which they are made: simple and undiluted nationalism. This is the spirit to which Stalin appealed.
 
Nothing in Common with Socialism
But there is an additional and even more important reason why Stalin can not employ revolutionary socialist methods in his war against Hitler. There is no socialism in Russia. The proletariat and peasantry live under a gruesome dictatorship which exploits them in the most cynical fashion. Every revolutionary worker and peasant in the Soviet Union, despite official pronunciamentos, knows this. There is an intense hatred for the bureaucracy stored up in the hearts of the great mass of people. The employment of revolutionary socialist methods in this war would light a flame in Russia that would burn away the rotten, exploiting regime.
We have said that Stalin is a nationalist. In the present epoch of international economics and international politics, Stalin does, it is true, play the game of international politics, governed not by socialist, but by purely nationalist considerations. The Comintern is one of his world agents. It is not necessary to repeat in detail what we have said so many times about the conduct of the Communist Parties throughout the world. Agents of the Kremlin, they carry out Stalin’s policies in the bourgeois world.
They have responded instantly in the present situation, again with policies developed for them in Moscow. Coinciding with the non-socialist defense of the Soviet Union organized by the bureaucracy, it has again hauled out of its arsenal of betrayal the policy of the People’s Front. It has taken a war of frightening proportions to bring about a return to the disgrace of popular frontism and class collaboration. But no other result was possible on the basis of Stalinism. Observe the manner in which William Z. Foster, Kremlin potentate of the American Stalinist Party, announces the return to the old policy. In his report to the National Committee of the Communist Party, he said:
“One thing our party must be especially conscious of is the need to translate its political line into life as speedily and thoroughly as possible. If we are to help build up a great People’s Front, to mobolize the American nation for militant struggle against Hitler, we must bring our party into action more quickly and thoroughly ... Now we must proceed boldly to develop the broadest united front and People’s Front activities.”
It is in this manner that the defense of the Soviet Union is organized by those who have destroyed the October Revolution. Back to the musicians, artists, ministers, professional defenders of Soviet Russia; back to the mire of bourgeois democracy after wallowing in the mire of the fascist Axis!

How Shall the Soviet Union Be Defended?
This is the crucial question. But it is precisely on this question that so many fail. The conduct of the Cannon group gives ample evidence of how adherence to an outlived, non-applicable policy can result in a complete disorientation of a movement. For more than a year now the Socialist Workers Party, embarrassed and with tongue in cheek, have attempted to explain away Stalin’s relation to the Axis. Their position of defense of the Soviet Union, confused as it was, arose unavoidably because that organization clung to the theory that Stalin’s regime was a “degenerated workers’ state” and that the existence of nationalized property, progressive in relation to capitalist property relations, requires defense under any and all conceivable circumstances, whether or not it is the nationalized property which is involved in any war, and no matter what the nature of the war is.
In contrast to their veritable silence on the question of defense during the Stalin-Hitler honeymoon, the Cannon group is now shouting loudly. Lacking a solid Marxist theory in their approach to the current problem, they have completely lost their bearing. In their zealousness to apply their particular concept of the defense of the Soviet Union, they have developed a campaign which is reminiscent of a period passed ten years ago when the international left opposition regarded itself as a faction of the Communist International.
Thus, after the complete degeneration of Stalinism, after the conclusive counter-revolutionary victory of the bureaucracy and the physical annihilation of the Old Bolsheviks in the Soviet Union, the Cannon group discovers a fundamental cleavage between the “revolutionary war” of the Red Army and the activities of the Communist Party in the United States. It pleads with the American Stalinists to avoid the pitfalls of popular frontism.
 
Pleading a Case
In its appeal to the Communist Party, published in the July 5 issue of The Militant, the Socialist Workers Party says:
“The Soviet Union is now compelled to enter into temporary alliances with capitalist powers ...” (!)
This statement overlooks the inherent character of Stalinism as anti-socialist. What is meant by the phrase, “is now compelled to enter into temporary alliances with capitalist powers”? What kind of an alliance did Stalin enter into with Hitler? And prior to Hitler? That there are strong compelling forces driving Stalin in one direction or another is obvious, but the paths which Stalin and his bureaucracy chose are as much determined by their general anti-Bolshevik political theory and practice. When the SWP writes in the above manner, it is, consciously or unconsciously – it makes no difference which – seeking to justify the present course of Stalinism.
Proceeding from a false fundamental position, the Cannon group necessarily subordinates the struggle against Stalinism to their version of what constitutes the defense of the Soviet Union. In the closing paragraph of the aforementioned appeal, they state:
“Comrades of the Communist Party – only by deepening the revolutionary struggle, fighting ceaselessly against the imperialist war, capitalist terror, can you march side by side with the Red Army in its defense against Hitler. Not a People’s Front with the bosses, but a workers’ front of struggle! This is the only real defense of the Soviet Union. And in this defense we stand ready to join you in any action that will advance our common cause.”
Everything is telescoped and misrepresented in this appeal. It is false to attribute the slightest revolutionary possibilities to Stalinism. Yet the appeal desires to exact precisely the impossible from Stalinism. The Communist Party can not and will not carry on a revolutionary struggle in defense of the Soviet Union because it is alien to revolutionary ideas and practice, because such a struggle is against the basic interests of the Stalinist bureaucracy! Stalinism can not, therefore, organize a workers’ united front of struggle to defend the Soviet Union. What it will do now, with the turn in the war, is to fight against any movements of the workers to improve their class positions, whether it be strikes for wages, hours or conditions, or political struggles against the bourgeois state, on the ground that these struggles will impede the defense of Stalin. If the Cannon group stands ready to join with the Stalinists in a revolutionary defense of the Soviet Union, they are on safe ground, for this circumstance will not and can not come to pass.
 
The Struggle Against Stalin Is Eliminated
But the real criminal character of the position of the SWP, and all who believe as they do, is that they have completely obliterated now the program of the revolutionary overthrow of Stalin in the Soviet Union. It is no accident that the slogan for the independence of Soviet Ukraine has been omitted from the columns of the Cannonite press. It is no accidence that Cannon in his telegram to Stalin, sent through Ambassador Oumansky at Washington, demands only “the revival of Soviet democracy as the first step in strengthening the struggle against German Nazi imperialism and the capitalist world.” With the flourish of a pen, Cannon distorts the position of the Fourth International, which called for a political revolution against Stalinism, precisely because it is impossible to realize democratic demands and rights under that regime.
In this manner the SWP has thrown overboard the genuinely revolutionary content of the Fourth Internationalist struggle against Stalinism. That is why their defensism is shame-faced and politically dishonest.
The way to defend the Soviet Union, that is, to defend what remains of the historically progressive achievements of the October Revolution, is by ceaselessly waging the revolutionary struggle in the Soviet Union, especially under the conditions of war. Stalinism is incapable of defending these achievements in this war for the reason that it has alienated the overwhelming mass of workers and peasants in the Soviet Republics, and especially the international proletariat. What is needed in this war is the spirit of October. Such a spirit can awaken the great spirit of the Russian masses and the workers of the world. But to awaken that spirit it is necessary to ring out the revolutionary cry of freedom and that is impossible without continuing and deepening the struggle against Stalin and Stalinism now!
 
The Revolutionary Way Out
So long as Stalin and his bureaucracy remain, the struggle is doomed. The defense of the Soviet Union is genuine only if it carries with it the aim of destroying the bureaucracy, seeks to re-establish Soviets, the trade unions and the economic and political democracy of the workers and peasants. Any other defense is a defense of the “power, prestige and revenues” of the regime. Those who seek to couple a revolutionary defense of the Soviet Union jointly with Stalin against Hitler, or what they deem to call a struggle against capitalism, are in an insoluble contradiction and will never be able to extricate themselves from it.
The great lesson of the past two decades is that the economic and political freedom of the world’s oppressed, the realization of the socialist revolution, is only possible by the independent revolutionary struggle of the proletariat and it« allies everywhere, in the democratic capitalist world, in the fascist capitalist world and in the Soviet Union.
In our opinion the defense of the Soviet Union means the overthrow of Stalinism and the establishment of the genuine power of the workers state. Given such a condition, there is everything to defend.
 

The Struggle for Freedom" (December 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
“The Struggle for Freedom”
(December 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 11, December 1941, pp. 291–3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

THE TIME INTERVAL between the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the declarations of war which followed and the arrival of Prime Minister Winston Churchill in this country was exceedingly short. This is what his government had long awaited. The wily Briton wasted no time. He was on his way to work out with President Roosevelt the grand strategy of the Allied war camp. At last, American arms and manpower were to assist the bruised and battered Empire in its struggle for existence. The United States, too, was now fighting the same group of imperialist competitors.
In his haste to reach Washington, the British war leader epitomized Anglo-American relations. Washington has become the capital of the Allied powers and Roosevelt is its leader, a situation which was unthinkable in the last war. Thus are expressed, in an altogether unexpected way, the inherent antagonisms between the United States and Great Britain.
Admittedly, the present war is a peculiar way for these antagonisms to emerge. The world situation, however, altered so radically with the rise of Hitler, that the main characteristic of international capitalism, Anglo-American rivalry in the struggle for the domination of the world market and the world’s raw materials, never reached its final culmination in the characteristic bourgeois method of solving competitive economic struggle, war.
Moreover, the general world development of capitalism has been downward. There is not a single capitalist power which has not reached the zenith of its growth, nay, whose direction is not toward social disintegration. The very existence of fascism in Germany and Italy are descriptive of the utter inability of the bourgeois social order to exist by normal means. There (and in Japan, too) the bourgeoisie has resorted to economic, political and social barbarism to maintain its rule. Lacking the socially reinvigorating power of socialism, the other nations unmistakably traveled the historical road of the Axis. War between the two capitalist camps forestalled, at least temporarily, the rise of fascism in the democratic nations.
In what manner is the pre-war Anglo-American struggle now expressed? In the complete economic and military dependence of Great Britain upon the United States. Since 1939 this dependence was marked by the universally known fact that England could not prosecute the war without American assistance. And that assistance was forthcoming, first in the concretization of Roosevelt’s aim to make of the United States the “arsenal of democracy,” in the exchange of American destroyers for British naval bases, in the passage of the lease-lend bill and the decision of the President to convoy merchant marine to insure the steady stream of supplies to the Island Empire.
Britain’s secondary position in the Allied war camp is the result of economic inferiority. Conversely, the economic superiority of the United States, steadily increasing as a result of the war and the further subordination of British industry to American, asserts itself in a thousand and one ways. American export industries now dominate the South American markets. English protests were silenced by threat of diminution in the shipment of lease-lend materials. An attempt by British industrialists to utilize lease-lend materials to re-invade the South American markets was sharply rebuked. Their Yankee partners would stand for no nonsense in these matters. The two most important dominions in the Empire have moved closer to collaboration with the United States. They clearly understand that their safety lies with the leading nation of the New World and not with England.
It is not idle conjecture to speculate on the wild-eyed amazement of the Britishers (as of the rest of the world) on the aim of the Roosevelt Administration to produce in two years 185,000 airplanes, 120,000 tanks, 55,000 anti-aircraft guns and 18,000,000 deadweight tons of shipping. Here is your industrial colossus. It is upon this program that the entire Allied cause rests. Only this kind of production of war goods can supply the necessary weapons to the overwhelming manpower on its side and thus guarantee a military victory over the Axis.
 
The Nature of Allied Aims
There is, then, nothing strange about Churchill’s trip to Washington. Allied strategy is determined in the first place by the United States and Great Britain as the two senior partners of the firm. The strategy was thereafter discussed with the other powers in the order of their military strength and importance in the war. Even in this minor display, the over-weighing traditions of bourgeois social distinctions (wealth and power) is glaringly expressed. We shall observe in other parts of these notes how overpowering it is in the decisive aspects of Allied strategy.
Once the main line had been adopted by Roosevelt and Churchill, it was only a moment before the other partners indicated their support. The grand strategy for the prosecution of the war is simple enough. It is based on a single salient point: the Axis is far better prepared for war and extremely daring in the execution of their military policies. Therefore:

The Allied powers must be prepared to suffer new losses of territory and men for another period. It is impossible now to conduct a world offensive against the Axis. Such an offensive must await the production of a far greater supply of all types of military weapons and the construction of America’s mass and trained army of upwards of 7,000,000 men.
 
The core of the Axis strength is Germany. She remains the central Allied objective. It is recognized that a defeat of Germany would send the Axis crumbling to oblivion. The surprising military fact remains that the Soviet Union is the only nation effectively engaging the German war machine. Whatever the outcome of the battle on the Eastern Front, it is acknowledged that the depth of the struggle may so absorb the great shocks of Hitler’s military organization as to weaken it to a point where an Allied offensive on the Western Front, employing the British and American armies, could result in Germany’s decisive military defeat. In view of these facts, nothing must be done that will weaken the Soviet struggle. Thus, common agreement has been reached on the need of supplying material aid to the Red Armies to keep them in the field, while Stalin’s refusal to engage in any action against Japan on the Far Eastern Front is assented to.
 
Since Japan has the jump on the Allies in the Far East and the Western Pacific waters, the ABCD powers must fight defensive and delaying actions until such time as the European struggle takes a turn for the better and Allied men, ships and planes reach parity with the Japanese.
 
Northern Africa must be kept out of German hands. As an intimate part of this strategy great attention must be paid to any Germany attempt to march through Turkey as the most direct route to the Middle Eastern oil fields and the Suez Canal. Concurrently preparations must be stepped up on the Gibraltar end of the Mediterranean Sea to meet a German attack there.
 

What Does the Atlantic Charter Mean?
These, however, are purely military questions. They are only a share of the problems which confront the Allies and, since so many unknowables arrange themselves before the general staffs, they are only partly decisive.
Of even more importance than the purely military considerations involved in the above-described problems, are the political and therefore social issues of the war. The bourgeois regimes of America and England are not oblivious to these issues. Quite the contrary, they are completely aware of them, but they cannot solve a single one of them.
For propagandistic and military purposes, the Allied governments have described this imperialist war as a war against totalitarianism, against a world revolution or a world counterrevolution, in the interests of democracy, economic prosperity for the whole o£ mankind, the right of self-determination, etc. The “political” aims of the Allies, joined in the Atlantic Charter, were devised by Roosevelt and Churchill and subscribed to by all the partners, including the Union of “Socialist” Soviet Republics. The eight-point peace aims of the Atlantic Charter, drawn up last August, are:

No territorial or other aggrandizement by the United States or Britain.
 
Territorial changes only through self-determination.
 
“All Peoples” have a right to choose their own forms of government those forcibly deprived of the right should have it restored.
 
Free international trade.
 
World-wide cooperation to secure “improved labor standards, economic adjustments and social security.”
 
“After the final destruction of the Nazi tyranny,” assurances of a secure peace, of “freedom from fear and want.”
 
Freedom of the seas.
 
“Abandonment of the use of force,” disarming of aggressor nations, and lightening “for freedom loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments.”

A series of conferences between the military staffs of the United States and Great Britain followed the Roosevelt-Churchill conversations. These in turn were accompanied by discussions with the representatives of the Allied nations. As a culmination to these meetings, the announcement was made that twenty-six nations had subscribed to the Atlantic Charter and were prepared to stand with the two great powers to insure their realization. Among the aspirants for a world in the image of the Atlantic Charter are such notoriously democratic nations as Yugoslavia, Guatemala, China, Nicaragua, Honduras and Poland. In response to a State Department declaration that it will recognize movements seeking the national liberation of their conquered countries, that eminent democrat, King Carol, has asserted that he is ready to lead a “Free Roumania” committee. The composition of the other “free” committees discloses that they are composed of a motley combination of aristocrats, monarchists, semi-fascists, racialists and a whole variety of anti-democrats. Their sole aim is a return to power, to continue where they left off before Hitler turned them out.
The purpose of the emphasis given to the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms in the propagandistic aspect of the Allied struggle is to avoid a real discussion of their peace aims. In replying to demands made by members of the Labor Party and the Independent Labor Party to state his war aims, or peace program, Churchill has stated that the first and foremost aim is to win the war! While the prosecution of the war and the projection of peace aims are indissolubly connected, the British Prime Minister has studiously avoided the latter question. It is better to speak in generalities! But the generalities do not cloak the obvious “peace aims” of the Allies: total dismemberment of Germany, the re-establishment of pre-war Europe and its system of national states, enlarged by the division of Greater Germany. Thus, the recreation of conditions which brought about the Second World War.
Secretary of the Navy Knox asserted that the United States must be the leader of an international police force to maintain “the peace and security of the world.” This imperialist concept clashes fundamentally with the unachievable Four Freedoms and is tantamount to the maintenance of a global state of war. Such an international police force is the basis for the world counter-revolutionary army which would prevent the peoples of the world from truly asserting their genuine freedom.
 
The Peace Aims of Henry Wallace
The problem of post-war construction, however, is nightmarish to the real New Deal reformists who surround Roosevelt. Their unsuccessful efforts to lead the United States out of economic chaos on the principle of maintaining the bourgeois social order has only frightened them the more when they observe the gargantuan task of post-war reconstruction. They know that the weight of an international war economy absorbing the labor of all of mankind in the pursuit of economic and social destruction (war), cannot continue endlessly, somewhere along the road the chain must break. Naturally they are certain it will occur first in the Axis countries where the proletariat has been enslaved and the war economy has existed for a long time. The magnitude of war production is terrifying in the manner in which it has dislocated “normal” economy. No matter how adamant the war leaders remain in their refusal to concretely discuss “peace aims,” the social reformists cannot avoid projecting their views thereon.
In the January issue of The Atlantic magazine, Vice-President Wallace posed these questions through his article, Foundations of Peace. The program is a melange of reformist doctrine postulated in such a manner as to indicate that certain changes must take place in the economic and political life of bourgeois society upon the dose of the war and that these changes must be prepared now; otherwise the war effort will suffer. We shall have occasion to discuss these peace aims at another time, but a summary of the Vice-President’s views demonstrates the following key features of his post-war program:

The paramount post-war problem is the re-establishment of the “world’s trade and of extending economic activity so as to improve living standards everywhere.”
 
“The modern world must be recognized for what it is – an economic unit ... The foundations of democracy can be rendered safe only when people everywhere have an opportunity to work and buy and sell with reasonable assurance that they will be able to enjoy the fruits of their work.”
 
There must be freedom of speech, freedom from want and freedom from fear.
 
The United States must assume its rightful place as leader of the world, bring universal peace, happiness and security to it.
 
The western world must be prepared now to supply raw materials, food, clothing and shelter to the war-torn areas of the globe.
 
There must be established minimum standards for the physical well-being of all the peoples, through essentially New Deal methods.
 

Diplomatic Double-Talk
These propositions, vague as they are, indicate the trend of the New Deal ideology when thinking of the post-war stage. It is as general and vague as the Atlantic Charter. Moreover, none of the bourgeois leaders dare concretely discuss the vapid generalities that make up their program, for it is in their concretization that all the contradictions of capitalism become so clear as to establish the total unrealizability of the bourgeois democratic aims without a fundamental change in the social order.
The Atlantic Charter is not a charter for world freedom and economic security. It is a charter for the freedom and economic security of “white civilization,” that is to say, capitalism – a class freedom and a class economic security.
Churchill, as the British New Leader pointed out in its issue of December 6, was a pro-fascist, a great admirer of Hitler, Mussolini and Franco. He is, above all, an imperialist. In his mind, and in the collective mind of his class, the Atlantic Charter does not apply to India. It does not apply to any of the colonial possessions of the Allied powers. They are to remain colonies, subject peoples, exploited by their present overlords.
In the United States the Four Freedoms is applicable only to the white race. The American Negro has always been discriminated and disfranchised socially, economically and politically. This is especially true since war reached American shores. Conditions in the South, in the Army and Navy, and the numerous services connected with the war effort, are not a hair’s-breadth removed from Hitler’s racial theories and practices.
The assertion, “no territorial or other aggrandizement by the United States and Great Britain” means exactly what? The freedom of the present colonial possessions of these two powers? Freedom of the colonial possessions seized from the Axis? Or is it perhaps a covenant binding Great Britain and the United States from seizing, in the event of victory, each other’s colonies – to maintain the colonial status quo?
“Territorial changes,” says the Charter, “only through self-determination.” Who shall have their right? Will it belong to all the peoples of the world? And who shall decide when and where it is applicable? To answer these questions is to give the whole show away.
The above is merely a restatement in one form or another of the Wilsonian program in the last war. The same is true of the other provisions of the Charter relating to trade, economic security and the Four Freedoms. They are aims which are in large part realizable only under socialism. But against socialism the war leaders will struggle even more desperately than they do against their current military enemies, for socialism would strike at the very basis of the present social structure, the existing system of national states and imperialism, the profit system and class and racial exploitation.
Churchill is quite right, the war is not new. It is the continuation of the war of 1914–1918. As the war lengthens the propaganda about a struggle for freedom against barbaric fascism recedes. As the war develops and the national governments assume greater dictatorial character, they speak with greater frankness. National interests, colonial possessions, material aggrandizement, raw materials, trade routes and profits – this is what the war is about. The Four Freedoms and the Atlantic Charter return to their rightful place as shibboleths to inspire the masses. And it is the old ideological baggage, too – old vintage in new bottles.
 

nce Again, the German Economy (December 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Once Again, the German Economy
(December 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 11, December 1941, pp. 294–5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

A GREAT DEAL of nonsense is written these days on the nature of German society. The general state of confusion and alarm emanating from the decay of the bourgeois social order and the character of Imperialist World War II is recorded in high places and low, but nowhere so flagrantly as by the professional economists, sociologists and politicians, or the would-be theorists of “a new social order in Germany.” With some exceptions, the proponents of the “new society” in Germany merely erect blinders to conceal their social patriotic support of the war. But now and again, some professional economist publishes a paper which completely shatters the theories of the innovators.
An extremely interesting survey made of German society is the article by Dr. A.R.L. Gurland, entitled Technological Trends and Economic Structure under National Socialism, contained in the magazine, In Re: Germany, issued by the Research and Information Service of the American Friends of German Freedom. In Re: Germany is a monthly digest of the most important books, articles and reviews on the economic, political and social development of Nazi Germany. It has an important place as a purveyor of information where one may seek sources of study on this highly important topic. Following is the digest contained in the periodical. It bears directly upon discussions previously had in this magazine:
“This article analyzes the technological development and economic changes which have led to increasing state intervention in all industrial countries. The author first ascribes the capitalist economy under totalitarian control to the growing preponderance of chemical processes in modern technology. The huge investments required for experimentation and production, the increased risks due to the unproductiveness of plastic synthesis, lead to the establishment of giant combines and to increasing clamor for government protection.
“The author argues that the establishment of the Nationalist Socialist regime was the best solution for paramount problems of the giant combinations: it gave them low cost labor, expansionist policy, state guarantees for special investments and a practically unlimited government demand. This liberation from the handicaps hampering industry in the past led to a further accentuation of the trend and to a veritable technological revolution under National Socialism. In the author’s view the fact that this revolution occurred in the form of war preparation is somewhat incidental – ‘motorized lightning war ... is but one of the aspects of motorization as a whole.’
“In Dr. Gurland’s opinion the positions of the capitalist monopolies as against the political machinery are strengthened. The trend seems to be that more and more supervisory functions are entrusted to the organizational bodies of big business itself. The author argues that on the whole the characteristics of capitalist production are maintained and even accentuated to a much higher degree than is generally assumed. Regimentation had the effect of sharpening ‘the sting of the profit motive instead of neutralizing it.’ Government policy makes for maximum expansion of enterprise. Price fixing obeys the profit-bound expansionist economy. Internal financing makes big business largely independent of government intervention and investment control. The financial divisions within the framework of a big business economy have compromised between divergent economic group interests, negotiated by a bureaucracy with proper respect for established property rights. The separation of ownership and management is followed by ‘separation of the entirety of the capitalist’s function from the legal title to property,’ by growing ‘anonymization’ of capital and increasing control through banks or holders of a comparatively small proportion of shares, transforming the ‘old’ capitalists (shareholders) into consumers of fixed dividends – rentiers without any further rights. The ‘new’ capitalists are those in actual control – whether managers or owners – and their primary interest is increasing profit accumulation, i.e.: expansion; an interest thoroughly consistent with the party machine’s aim. Dr. Gurland concludes that ‘whereas the monopolists in controlling the means of production hold the key to economic life, the political masters are reduced to the rdle of mere organizers and superintendents of the social set-up.’
“This article is amply documented and probably the most instructive statement available in support of the theory of ‘National Socialism – the highest form of Monopoly Capitalism.’” (Emphasis mine – Ed.)
 

ermany and Soviet Property (December 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

A.G.
Notes of the Month
Germany and Soviet Property
(December 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 11, December 1941, pp. 293–4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

A RECENT BERLIN DISPATCH reports a highly significant discussion now taking place in the German financial press with relation to the disposition of Soviet property in those areas of the Soviet Union occupied by the German armies. It is recorded that “negotiations with German business groups concerning the sale of Soviet mines and factories were already in progress.”
The dispatch bears directly upon the numerous discussions held in The New International regarding the social character of the respective orders in Germany and Russia. There should have been no doubt as to Hitler’s intentions regarding Russia when he announced that it was his aim to “destroy every vestige of Bolshevism” in the areas conquered. Those who believed that the German conquest of the Soviet Union would leave untouched the fundamental gain of the October Revolution, expropriation of the bourgeoisie and nationalization of property must acknowledge their essential mistake which emanates from their identification of the two systems, the one monopoly capitalist, the other bureaucratic collectivism.
The fact that Hitler seeks to sell the Soviet industrial plant for the purpose of acquiring liquid funds and to reduce the Reich’s expenditures for war, is only incidental to the basic issue: nationalization and collectivization of property, through the expropriation of the capitalists, are incompatible with monopoly capitalism. The German rulers recognize the impossibility of reconciling Germany’s private property economy with Soviet economy, and they proceed in the characteristic manner of bourgeois conquerors. In the present case, instead of seeking some form of indemnity in the occupied territory (the war is not yet over!) they have seized all property as war booty because of the fact that “all Soviet industry is state owned and may be regarded technically and legally as booty,” and “greatly simplifies the matter of disposing of these assets in the interests of war financing ...”
The dispatch says further: “The German government is not interested in operating the plants, chiefly because after the systematic destruction by the retreating Soviet armies most of the plants require substantial investments of fresh funds.” There is a more fundamental reason than this, however, to explain why the German government does not take over the Russian industrial organization and operate it as a government institution. The German regime is not in the business of operating economy. It is a capitalist regime and performs the same general function of all bourgeois states. It discharges the functions of the national government in the interests of the dominant economic class in German society, albeit, under the existing world conditions and the specific place that German imperialism occupies in declining world capitalism, in the sharper and more aggravated manner expressed by its totalitarian character. It retains bourgeois property relations. Where such property relations are non-existent, it plans the restoration of the only property form it understands and recognizes. Its main goal is to adhere the conquered economies to the German and to establish a balance between the Reich and those areas.
As an aside, the report states that Germany has no intention to compensate Belgian, French and other capitalists who owned property in pre-revolutionary Russia. C’est la guerre!
But what stands out in this report is the principal difference in the way Hitler approaches the question of property in the Soviet Union and bourgeois France, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Austria, Czechoslovakia, etc. While the New York Times declares that the procedure in Russia and France is paralleled (the infiltration of capital in the respective industries), the real fact is that a fundamental divergence exists respecting policy in the two countries. It is true, in France, the method employed is penetration of French industries by employment of German capital in previously completely French owned property. This holds for occupied and unoccupied France. The Germans buy large numbers of stocks on the French Bourse with the occupation payments- made by Vichy. In this way a number of French industrial enterprises have come under German control. In the French textile industry, for example, German capital enabled a revival of economic activity, but the profits were divided between the French textile magnates and the German.
While Germany regards France, Belgium, Holland and the other occupied territories as vanquished enemies and forces enormous reparations payments, penetrates their industries, subjects their agriculture to the German war needs and in general pursues a policy of de-industrializing those countries, they do not violate the principle of capitalist private property. Contrariwise, in the Soviet Union, this problem of the maintenance of bourgeois property relations does not exist. But for that very reason, the Germans seek to re-establish bourgeois property relations.
It may be objected that the German bourgeoisie does not exhibit any great interest in Russian properties. The reason for this, however, is made explicit. The German capitalists are not certain what the outcome of the war will be. The lurking fear that Germany may not win the war makes them extremely hesitant to advance any capital to the regime. But whether or not they do buy these properties, they will be compelled, if the demands of the war require it, to comply with the needs of the regime and furnish the necessary capital and liquid funds to help defray the costs of the war.
In this instance we have another confirmation of the basic dissimilarity of the German and Soviet systems.
 



With the defeat of the Southern Slavocracy in the Civil War the industrialization of the United States was assured. The war itself created the need for the erection of new industries and the expansion of the old. Between 1870 and the Spanish American war. the world was to witness the most phenomenal capitalist development in the New World. Railroads led the boom. The material requirements of railroads set into motion many new industries. The industrial population grew swiftly, and toward the end of the century surpassed the agricultural. This was the period in which the “great American fortunes” were created, through the medium of a horrifying exploitation of labor and natural resources, and the bribing of government officials, no matter what their position or responsibility. The government existed for the sole purpose of serving the business interests. The Republican Party, which entered American politics as a progressive force, had, within a period of twenty-five years, become the party of big business and reaction.
At its convention of 1896, the Republican Party announced itself as the party of imperialism. “Manifest Destiny,” dressed up in the supposedly idealistic clothes of bringing civilization to the “inferior races,” was merely the slogan under which the Republican Party prepared its program of imperialist aggrandizement. It spoke of the historic necessity of the United States, the white race, to dominate and civilize this continent and whatever other lands or peoples it may come in contact with. We have already seen how this principle, unclear and uncertain in the early days of the Republic, was to become an integral part of the nation’s foreign policy.
 
Presidential Fight
The presidential campaign preceding the Spanish American war was one of the most bitter in the nation’s history. William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic Party’s presidential candidate, gathered around him the support of the dissatisfied South, exploited workers, impoverished farmers and a host of reformers, utopians and liberals. Big business, nowever, rode in the saddle They expended millions of dollars for the election of McKinley, a protegé of the infamous Mark Hanna.
The Republicans campaigned under the Slogan of a “full dinner pail.” Just before the voting took place, thousands upon thousands of workers received the following notice in their pay envelopes: “If Bryan is elected, do not come back to work. The plant will be closed.”
In New York, the Herald Tribune, then as now an organ of big business and imperialist expansion, after comparing Bryan with Benedict Arnold, Aaron Burr and Jefferson Davis, wrote of him that “He was the rival of them all in deliberate wickedness and treason to the Republic.”
Backed by vast riches, the support of the ever-corrupt press, always allied with big business, and other instruments of molding opinion the Republicans carried the election by a slim majority ot 600,000 popular votes. But that was more than enough. The election was interpreted as carte blanche to go full steam ahead.
 
A Dream Realized
American manufacturing and commercial interests had been casting about for many years at the islands in the Caribbean and the Pacific. The dream of an American Caribbean empire, of vast holdings in the Pacific and the Far East was an old one, and we shall soon see how the dream was soon realized through means far more gross than the stuff of which dreams are made.
Like the rule of all imperialisms over subject peoples, that of Spain in Cuba was no exception. It was ruthless and cruel; occupation of the country led to a most intense exploitation of its resources and its people. Revolutionary ferment long in existence, finally broke out into the open in 1895. The Spanish army of occupation could not subdue the revolt. The struggle levelled down to that of guerrilla warfare, a war of attrition. In answer to the insurgents, the Spanish authorities set up concentration camps, herded into them the families of the rebels, captured rebels and all those suspected of opposition to the rule of the Spanish king and queen. Like all concentration camps, the oppression was bestial. And here the story begins.
 
Propose Seizure
American business owned $50,000,000 worth of property in Cuba, invested in sugar, tobacco and iron mines. The stalemate in the revolutionary struggle led to a stagnation of the Island’s economy. More than that, the revolutionaries proceeded to destroy by fire and other means, the huge plantations owned by Spanish and American capitalists. By 1897 the situation became fairly chaotic.
At the beginning of the century southern plantation owners had already projected the plan of seizing Cuba and exploiting its sugar possibilities. But the nature of national development prevented the realization of that plan. Now, at the close of the century, the northern capitalists proposed the same plan.
Spanish-American relations were poor. The vested interests of the United States were for going into Cuba and taking the situation in hand. They wanted to drive Spain out of Cuba as the first step in the protection of American business interests. The Republican platform of 1897 had already declared that Spain was unable “to protect the property and lives of resident American citizens.” It cited American investments and losses as a result of the situation in Cuba and indicated what American policy would be if and when the Republicans won the election.
After two years of struggle in Cuba, the Spanish government was ready for compromise. It was especially solicitous of the attitude of the United States and upon the election of McKinley was fearful of American intervention. It knew, too, that the dominant group in the administration party was a pro-war group, calling for military intervention and seizure of the islands.
The Cuban business men and the intellectuals did not desire independence. They were quite content to settle the dispute by establishing Cuban autonomy and a parliament under Spain, similar to the dominion status of Canada. Quite likely this may have eventually resulted had not the intervention of the United States been consummated.
 
Storm Brewing
In the United States itself, a storm was brewing. The “Manifest Destiny” Republicans had launched their interventionist campaign which gained force with each passing day. President McKinley pursued a course of hesitation and indecision. On the one hand the important press was hell-bent on forcing the nation into an interventionist war. William Randolph Hearst was then making his mark in lurid journalism. The haloed Joseph Pulitzer “fishing for more profits, also fumed and stormed over the plight of the poor Cubans.” Hearst sent special feature writers to Cuba with instructions to go the limit. His papers were published with bright carmine headlines reciting atrocity tales of the Island. Other newspapers joined in the conspiracy of big business clamoring for war. The representative from the State of Maine very aptly said at the time, that “Every congressman has two or three newspapers in his district – most of them printed in red ink ... shouting for blood.” Appeals were made to the emotional feelings of the people to incite them to fight for the freedom of small defenseless peoples – the lie of imperialists:
But McKinley also faced the opposition of the Democrats and countless thousands who recognized the campaign for American intervention just for what it was. There was a great stir in Washington in the conflict between the interventionists and non-interventionists. The president stood in between this great storm.
In addition, too, McKinley found a pliant Spanish government in Madrid ready to deal with him and ready also, to acquiesce to most American demands; nay, ready to go beyond the demands of the Administration The American minister to Spain, General Woodford, cabled McKinley “That if congress would agree to a settlement, the Madrid Government was willing to grant any autonomy which the insurgents would accept even complete independence for Cuba, or cession of the island to the United States.” If one man knew that war was wholly unnecessary President McKinley was that man. Spain was in such a plight that the United States could have had what it wanted in Cuba without resort to arms.
 
The Maine “Sinking”
In January, 1898, the battleship Maine went to Havana on a “good will mission”. The ship was actually sent to re-assure American interests of protection. The situation was not without its aspect of a comic opera. Spain in turn, accepted this expression of good will and sent a cruiser to New York harbor in a return visit of friendship!
In the early part of February, the Spanish minister to Washington, Senor Dupuy De Lome, wrote a personal letter to a friend in Cuba in which was contained some unflattering remarks about the president based upon his observations as a result of relations with him. He wrote that McKinley had no mind, that he was influenced daily first by one group then another. It was the kind of personal letter, which if made public could do no good in a charged situation. That’s precisely what happened. The letter was stolen from the mails in Cuba and sold, quite properly, to Hearst, who published the letter as a proof of the ignominy of the Spaniards. It kindled quite a flame for a period, but even this situation died down.
But on February 15, 1898, the battleship Maine was mysteriously blown up in Havana Harbor. The effect was electrifying. No real findings resulted in ascertaining the cause of the explosion which took the lives of a couple of hundred seamen. Nevertheless American naval officers concluded that the Maine was blown up by a submarine mine. The explosion may have happened in a dozen different ways, and more than forty years afterward there is still no real determination of its cause.
It might well be that American interests were responsible in seeking a way to force the United States into the war.
 
War Factions
The pro-war factions went to work n McKinley, who continued with his hesitating policy. He and the Spanish Government tried to settle the issues peacefully. McKinley’s failure to dispatch troops immediately led jingo Teddy Roosevelt, who was then embarked on a great advertising campaign to popularize himself as the great American hero, to declare that “McKinley has no more backbone than a chocolate eclair.”
The “good” senator Thurston of Nebraska stated: “War with Spain would increase the business and earnings of every American railroad (it is not difficult to see whose office boy the Senator was!), it would increase the output of every American factory, it would stimulate every branch of industry and domestic commerce.” Yet in March, McKinley urged Spain to establish an armistice with the revolutionists and abolish the concentration camps. In his note to Spain he spoke of maintaining peace and precluded any American desire of acquiring Cuba.
On April 9, 1898. the Spanish cabinet accepted the American proposals. In their zeal to avoid a conflict with American arms they went much further than McKinley had asked. They were prepared to arbitrate the Maine question, even though, aside from the war-mongering propaganda, there was no certainly of what caused its sinking and no reason for Spain to accept the blame. Spain prepared to call the Cuban parliament immediately and was ready to seek the “pacification of the Island with justice to all parties.”
 
War With Spain
The reply came too late. President McKinley had resolved to succumb to the pressure of the war hysteria and the jingoists in control of his party. He delivered his war message to congress one day after the receipt of the Spanish note of conciliation, but made no mention of the note of surrender. On April 19, war was declared.
The war was a short one. The real aims of “Manifest Destiny” were quickly apparent. Long before the war had broken out, decisions as to the deployment of naval forces had been decided upon. The Pacific fleet suddenly entered the picture and went for the Philippines. This is the first time the Philippines enters the scene at all. The Spanish navy was routed in Manila Harbor, although in the absence of land forces no seizure of the country was possible. Troops, arrived weeks later and the seizure of the Philippines was accomplished with the aid of native insurgent troops after the rout of the Spaniards in Cuba and after peace had been declared!
It was not a real war in proportion of men employed or casualties. The American army lost 5,462 men, of which 379 were lost in action and more than 5,000 were the victims of disease, inadequate military preparation, unsanitary conditions, and downright rotten food, the scandalous “embalmed beef,” which brought great profits to American merchants. The navy lost less than 20 men.
It was in this war that Teddy Roosevelt, the House of Morgan major-domo, made his war record. Actually his war record was no better or worse than hundreds of others in a war of small dimensions. Yet the press stories of his valor, more often than not inspired by himself, led the country to think that he was a veritable combination of battle cruiser and pom-pom guns. So ludicrous did the campaign to glorify Roosevelt appear to discerning minds, that the venerable Finley Peter Dunne was led to say that Roosevelt ought to write an account of the war entitled: Alone in Cuba.
 
Terms of Peace
The revolution in Hawaii had been raging for some years (See my articles in Labor Action, December 30 and 23). The ostensible purpose for entering the war was to free Cuba and drive a world power out of the new world. Yet, when the commission met to prepare the peace. American demands included the acquisition of Puerto Rico, the Island of Ladrones, and the Philippines. The argument that the United States had not yet conquered the Philippines was unavailing. Nor was the argument that the United States had not once mentioned the Philippines in the pre-war exchanges, considered a valid objection by the victorious commissioners.
McKinley was a new man since he had finally decided on his course. He was not going to permit anything to slip out of the hands of the United States especially since the war was won. The imperialist surge was rampant in the States and it was apparent that the United States meant to grab as much as possible.
There was much interest in the way the President, so hesitant and undecided previously, resolved his “intellectual and moral methods.” But McKinley did explain himself in an address to his Methodist brethren. It is an interesting declaration, for he said:
“I walked the floor of the White House night after night, and I am not ashamed to tell you, gentlemen, that I went down on my knees and prayed Almighty God for light and guidance more than one night. And one night late it came to me this way – I don’t know how it was, but it came ... There was nothing left for us to do but to take them all. and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them, and by God’s grace do the very best we could by them as our fellow-men for whom Christ also died. And then I went to bed. and went to sleep and slept soundly.”
It was plenty easy for McKinley to resolve things once he had but put on the mantle of Christ and decided that he was sacrificing all for the purpose of civilizing the Filipinos! Shortly thereafter, the American troops proceeded to Christianize the insurgent natives with mass water-cures performed on those who seriously believed the American pronunciamentos that they were there to liberate them from the yoke of Spain so that they may be a free and independent people.
Under the impetus of the war, the annexation of Hawaii, so long adjourned because of nation-wide opposition, was quickly accomplished. At the close of the war, the United States had acquired the Philippine Islands, Puerto Rico, Ladrones and control over Cuba. To salve the feelings of the Spaniards, they graciously paid Spain £20,000,000 for and on account of the Philippine Islands. Ever thus, the noble gesture!
 
A Power
The war established the American Empire, made her a power to be reckoned with in Europe. Heretofore the United States had been scorned by the powers in the Old World, but the imperialist rivalries on the Continent had led to a sharp division of interest. The English, already fearful of the power of post-1870 Germany, was wholehearted in its support of the United States. It challenged Germany at each step where Germany sought to soften American demands, or insisted upon a share for herself. England would then rather have a stronger United States than a stronger Germany, and the American seizures automatically forced Germany to curb her aims in the Pacific and the Caribbean.
In addition, the American policy served, whether it was needed or not, to bolster the imperialism of the Old World, since they could point in justification for their own imperialist policy, to the United States, which still had the reputation of a free and democratic nation. Elie Halevy in his History of the English People. Book I, Imperialism, graphically portrays the effect of the Spanish-American war on Europe and the inter-imperialist struggle in that part of the world, pointing out how positively it affected the British imperialists, as an example.
Thus a new chapter was written in the very upward march of the youngest and potentially most powerful nation in the capitalist world.
 

Gates: Modern War and Economy (November 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Modern War and Economy
(November 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 10, November 1941, pp. 274–8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

THE CHARACTER of the current World War was already foreseen in 1918. The stalemate of machine-gun warfare was suddenly overcome by the introduction of the steel tank and the improvement of the offensive power of the airplane. They were an omen of the future. The growth of modern science, particularly in the fields of chemistry and physics, prepared the ground for an unprecedented development of enormous and variegated instruments of destruction, which, in their mass, was destined to make unparalleled demands upon the industrial capacities of all nations. How shall a nation prepare itself for war? What are the industrial requirements of modern armies and how do these requirements affect normal peacetime economy? What principal changes occur in the productive character of industry, what economic laws are violated? This is the subject of a new study by the eminent Czechoslovak economist, the former director of Research of the Czechoslovak National Bank and representative at Geneva conferences, Dr. Antonin Basch. [1]
A great deal of political and economic theorizing is woven through the book, much of it undiluted nonsense, but the author has really contributed something positive to the question of how capitalist nations reorganize their economies to fit the needs of modern imperialist war. In establishing his main thesis, Dr. Basch directs attention to three obviously important facts:

Modern war represents a harmonious balance between the home industrial front and the battlefield.
 
The industrial requirements of the war machine make unavoidable a complete reorganization of the national economy.
 
The economic struggle between nations is not suspended in the course of the war, but is, on the contrary, intensified because the industrial requirements of the Army and Navy one-sidedly accentuate the problems of an all-embracing peacetime economy.

The salient point to be remembered in this sphere is that the national economic plant must be entirely subordinated to the needs of war. No half-way measures are permissible, lest the war effort suffer from lack of its basic material requirements. Munitions and food, once the primary need of an army, no longer suffice. Mechanized and motorized warfare, the organization of armored and semi-armored divisions, the employment of vast armadas of gigantic planes, heavily equipped for fire power, massed artillery boasting an infinite variety of guns, and augmented sea weapons, place a terrifying load upon the home economic front.
 
Prerequisites for Arming a Nation
In their Handbook of the War, John C. DeWilde, David H. Popper and Eunice Clark write:
Some notion of the burden of supplying an attritional war can be gathered from the fact that the United States Army spent four billion dollars for ordnance alone in the last war. One hundred and fifty thousand soldiers can fire away two or three million dollars’ worth of ammunition in one day’s battle ... even guns must be replaced at rate of five to twenty-five per cent a month. A sixteen-inch gun is good for only one hundred accurate shots. No one can predict how much material will be consumed in a long war. During the last war the United States used up more men and material in one month than it had in ten years for the construction of the Panama Canal.
These are facts gleaned from the experiences of the last war. They no longer serve as a measuring-rod for war production and expenditure of materials in the present. Manpower, urgently required, is, nevertheless, in the terms of present-day needs, a secondary quantity in the assessment of a nation’s strength (England). The authors of the Handbook of the War, are correct in all respects when they say:
What constitutes the economic strength of a country? First, industrial capacity. No belligerent can survive long unless it possesses heavy industries capable of turning out large quantities of iron and steel. Well developed engineering, automotive and chemical industries are essential for the production of arms and ammunition ... Industry cannot live without a continuous supply of raw materials. Man cannot live without food. These are the real sinews of war.
Several important problems are indicated in these quotations and they will be dealt with in connection with Dr. Basch’s book.
Dr. Basch’s thesis is a simple one: the requirements of modern war urge deep-going economic changes in the national industrial organization in order to fuse the home and war fronts. Without this reorganization, the prosecution of a modern war is impossible. He writes:
The economic impact of total war between the great nations with a developed national economy is of such proportions and intensity as to interfere with all items of economic life.
This holds true for all the warring countries. In his elaboration of the methods employed by belligerents to realize this projected reorganization of their economies, he proves that they are similar, proceeding from an identical point of departure. “The essential structure of war economy is the same in totalitarian and in democratic countries, and inherent in all are certain common principles of function.”
 
Conflict between Production and Consumption
The following visible changes are inherent in the transformation of the economy of a nation from peacetime production to war economy:

Augmented production of heavy goods of war.
 
Reduction of consumer goods and the consequent reduction of the national consumption.
 
Reduction in the investment of new capital.
 
Depletion of the existing capital.

In the conflict between war production and mass consumption, one or the other must give way. The struggle between these two aspects of capitalist production can be and is resolved only by a severe decline in the production of consumer goods. This decline in the production of articles of consumption, food, clothing, shelter, luxuries, etc., cannot be long postponed. In the warring countries it began instantly with the outbreak of hostilities – even long before the war. The problem is being resolved already in the United States, even though it is not a belligerent in the old sense of the term. In each country the process undergoes different forms, all dependent upon a variety of national factors, but the basic orientation is the same. In describing this primary step essential for all countries, Dr. Basch explains:
The demands of total war are of such dimensions that, in my opinion, they cannot be satisfied for a longer period of tune from increased production alone. This means that the other items in the economic balance must be altered and adjusted and that consumption in the largest sense must be reduced.
There is current a belief that this unavoidable development in national economy holds true only for a country with limited resources, limited industrial capacity, and narrow participation in the field of world trade. It is this belief which permits of a degree of complacency – the hope that the United States will develop a complete war economy without necessarily reducing the ratio of consumption to the total production and without appreciably depressing the standard of living of the masses which inescapably accompanies augmented production of war goods (a complete absorption of the producing powers of all heavy industries guaranteed by the manner in which priorities in raw materials renders helpless the efforts of such consumer industries to remain in business).
Dr. Basch writes:
The opinion has been expressed that it may be possible to satisfy war demands by increased production without curtailing existing consumption. Quite apart from technical difficulties I find this view unacceptable. War requirements are too urgent and too vast to be thus satisfied, even in an economy with large resources.
Thus the initial step in the transition to a complete war economy strikes first and foremost against the masses. It means less of everything required to maintain the pre-war average standard of living. What does this imply for them? The author frankly points out that:
They involve a profound adjustment of the civilian population. In other words, a great total war tends inherently to depress the level of living of the fighting nations ... The standard of living can be raised only at the expense of armament production; it is impossible to have both more guns and more butter. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Consequently, bourgeois society must seek the ultimate depth to which civilian consumption can be reduced without a physical and moral deterioration of the population. No one country has established such a gauge, for it is clear that “the point at which exhaustion (of the masses) begins and makes itself felt differs according to national customs and endurance (tradition, standard of living over a period of years, revolutionary capacity of the proletariat, etc.).”
 
The Rôle of the State in the War Economy
The rôle of the state as the instrument of bourgeois social rule is nowhere so extravagantly evident as in a war period or in the preparatory stage immediately preceding it. The goal of production has been altered. The market no longer plays a dominant rôle because the all-consuming national and international market is the state, which now directs the entire economic activity. How can it be otherwise when production occurs solely for the benefit of the war machine? All industrial efforts, therefore, become extraordinary.
In addition to directing production toward this one goal, the state is confronted with manifold economic problems. Since it is the sole overseer of production, it must solve the acute dislocations which result from war economy. Among these problems are the maintenance of an adequate labor supply for war industries; the prevention of inflation arising from the contradiction in the rise of war production and the decline in consumption, accompanied by increasing employment and a larger total wage bill; bearing down upon the increasing class tension produced by the new economy; controlling, but not altering, the profit character of production; directing the flow of capital; deciding the character of priorities and maintaining, if possible, a favorable balance of foreign trade. In confirmation of this, Dr. Basch writes:
The main task of any war economy consists in organizing production and labor to provide the maximum supply of goods and services and in adjusting civilian consumption to war necessities and priorities on a large scale. But at the same time attempts have been made to avoid some of the mistakes and failures of the last war: inflation, war profiteering and great social changes.
It is not difficult to see what all this means for the great mass of the people. Where the initial war effort depends upon the reduction of the standard of living, government measures for alleviating national distress merely signifies the fear of the government that the profound dislocations created by the war will induce a serious conflict between the classes and render the new economy helpless. Thus, measures of “alleviation” are sought primarily for the purpose of blunting the extremes of war economy, to force the adoption of “class peace” for the duration – class peace as the only method by which the war program can be realized.
But at this point the state can finally resolve its problems in only one way: take the road of totalitarian political and economic rule. The “democratic” road is employable only for an historically brief period. Where totalitarianism was already in existence before the outbreak of the war, as in Germany, the swift transformation demanded of the democracies is not required. Since 1933 Germany has lived under a war economy. Then, what appears to be a fundamental divergence of methods between the fascist and democratic states is merely the difference between an already existent totalitarian state and one that is marching inexorably in that direction – it becomes quantitative.
Dr. Basch’s book is an important contribution to this phase of capitalist economy, for he illustrates concretely how every sector of the war economy is organized on the basis of an intensification of the exploitation of the proletariat.
 
The First Steps of the Belligerent States
Each of the warring states, and the United States, proceeded fundamentally in the same way to organize their economies for war. It is extremely illusory to attribute to totalitarian Germany an inherent economic superiority over the democratic nations because its preparations for war were further advanced than that of any other country. The explanation for this illusion lies in another field and does not concern the subject of this review. What is important for us to understand, however, is that all the belligerents, totalitarian and democratic, employ the same principle methods. One would err to say that the United States, for example, need not duplicate the German methods, nor that it will not be necessary for the American people to experience the same problems as the European peoples. As indicated above, such thoughts confuse the degree and intensity of an act with the act itself.
The central thesis of Dr. Basch’s book is to prove precisely the similarity in basic methods employed by all the governments, with this one difference – Germany began at least five years earlier than anyone else to prepare for the war which broke out in 1939 and had, with the triumph of Hitler, solved the “class” problem through the destruction of the proletarian organizations.
In Germany, Wehrwirtschaft (national defense economy) began officially with the consolidation of the fascist victory. The preparation of industry, the problems of labor, the organization of war production, and the development of new materials of warfare arising from the necessity caused by the peculiar position which Germany occupied in world economy (isolation from the world market and the international sources of raw materials), were supervised by the state. The state controlled the whole life of the nation.
From the very birth of the Third Reich, Germany set itself one goal: complete destruction of the Versailles Treaty and a complete imperialist redivision of the earth. The failures of the democratic nations to keep pace with Germany were, in the last analysis, political. They had hoped to utilize German rearmament (which they alone made possible) for their own interests. To explain in detail the origins of the democratic policies and their significance would take us far afield. It is necessary, however, to add a word here. If the democracies had so desired, the German military “renaissance” would never have taken place.
Unimpeded by the other powers, Germany proceeded to complete a total war economy. Wehrwirtschaft was completely in the hands of the state. The Four-Year Plan was initiated solely as a war measure. So thorough were these preparations that the German Reichsbank reported in 1939:
“The transition to wartime activity, thanks to the work of organization accomplished in the preceding years, has been rapidly and smoothly completed, enabling the economy to achieve the expansion of its productive capacity necessary to meet the wartime needs.” (Quoted by Basch.)
The German leaders understood exactly what they wanted and how they were to achieve it. Thus State Secretary Koerner had declared that:
“We are far ahead of our enemies, whose economic organization remains still extremely hesitant and incomplete.” (Quoted by Basch for the article by H.W. Singer, The German War Effort in the Light of Economic Periodicals)
What is it that the German state did? Basch again reiterates that it is identical with the activities of the other countries. He writes:
The purpose in actual war is the same as that of any other country – to increase production for war as much as possible and to mobilize all economic resources even more completely than under the defense economy (prior to the outbreak of actual war – A.G.). The general methods were: complete conscription of labor, extending rationing of civilian consumption and curtailing of non-defense production, centralized commandeering and gear of production by allocation of raw materials and labor, stabilization of the general price and wage level, and control of foreign trade and foreign exchange. Consumption was curtailed as far as possible in order to make any recourse to inflationary methods unnecessary. In other words, the state sought through a wholesale economic regimentation to achieve the maximum efficiency indispensable to the conduct of the war. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
 
Lethargic Britain Finally Adopts A Full War Economy
After a belated start, the result of her political aims prior to the war, Great Britain has moved fast in the direction of Germany’s war economy. The Emergency Powers Act, passed on August 24, 1939, “authorized the government to take over or control any property or enterprise, but directly forbade industrial conscription.” Great Britain still attempted, in the beginning, to reconcile “business as usual” with the organization of its war production. But she has moved steadily away from that position since 1939. The Ministry of Food (a state institution) assumed complete control over food. The Ministry of Supply (a state institution) “became the sole importer and buyer of aluminum, copper, lead, zinc, sulphur, wolfram, pyrites, flax, wool, timber, molasses and other important materials.” The state assumed complete control of foreign exchange, foreign investments, and all finance.
What is it that held Great Britain back from pushing this “transition from peace to a war economy”? This subject of the relation of the “rich” democratic nations to the fascist has been repeatedly discussed in the columns of this magazine. Dr. Basch fortifies our thesis when he says:
Great Britain’s wealth in resources has tended to make her underestimate the magnitude of the economic effort involved in total war.
But with the fall of France, a marked change took place in British policy. In May 1940, a new emergency bill granted immense authority to the state to control the person and property of the entire population. Dr. Basch points out that:
... it was intended to empower the government to direct any person to perform any service required, to fix wage rates, hours and conditions of employment, and to inspect the premises and employers’ records. Munitions production was put directly under government control. Superfluous concerns might be ordered to shut down, subject to reasonable compensation. A special department to stimulate aircraft production was created. The government was thus granted power to institute a totally administered economy for the duration of the emergency and, especially, also to regulate production, distribution or consumption of any commodity and to control prices.
The manner in which the British state employs its powers is entirely dependent upon the course of the war and the state of its material resources. The course of the war up to the present moment has demonstrated that Great Britain approaches not a diminution of the war effort but, on the contrary, its intensification. The longer the war continues, the greater will be the similarity of its war economy to that of Germany.
 
The United States Has Also Joined the Pack
With increasing speed, American economy is traveling away from peacetime functions. Ruled by an interventionist government, it proceeded to march in the direction of a war economy with the onset of the European conflict. The adoption of the policy to make of America “the arsenal of democracy” and the passage of the Lease-Lend Bill presaged the new turn in the national industrial organization. The Battle of the Atlantic and acute developments in American-Japanese relations have hastened the process of economic reorganization.
The United States is the richest country in the world. The significance of this richness is brought home especially in this war. Possessing the greatest industrial plant in the world, buttressed with an enormous reservoir of native raw materials and geographically situated to obtain other indispensable raw materials, she is potentially the military giant of the world. Despite these favorable circumstances, the transition to a war economy in this country has been extremely halting because the Administration endeavored to accomplish the turn on the basis of peacetime methods. Roosevelt has hesitated to use his governmental powers in the same way that the British and the Germans employ theirs. But this situation cannot and is not being prolonged. In the United States, too, the government is rapidly assuming greater and greater control over the economic life of the nation. Entry into war would witness the complete passage to an overall war economy.
But it is interesting to observe, nevertheless, that for all of America’s richness, it must tread the path of the other bourgeois states. The installation of the Office of Production Management, with presumed powers of economic control, the efforts to pass measures of price control, the bills to control labor, the setting up of a priorities division, the increase of the national debt and the expenditure of an increasingly larger share of the national income for military purposes, all spell out the conscious movement along the European pattern. As a matter of fact, plans for economic reorganization on a war basis was originally further advanced in the United States than in any other country. It is conceded that the “German plan” found its main inspiration in post-World War American preparations for a future war.
 
A Comparison in Effort
Dr. Basch summarizes the paths of development in the two main belligerent powers, England and Germany, in the following pertinent manner:
If we compare the German and the British war economy, we find indeed a great similarity, despite a different degree of regimentation and commandeering; in both countries there is the policy of financing the war without inflationary effects, with taxation absorbing a great portion of national income; in Germany, a general freezing of prices and wages, in Great Britain a steadily expanding control of prices supported by various indirect devices. In both countries we see reduction of non-defense production in order to release labor for war production, lack of skilled labor and also conscription-registration of workers (which, of course, was initiated in Germany long ago). Further, there is rationing of consumption in both countries; in Germany this is comprehensive, in Great Britain more elastic and also working by indirect controls; in both there is great liquidity on the money and capital markets.
The United States follows closely upon the heels of the other two powers. The immensity of the war, the material requirements of the powers is so great, that the war economy dominates the whole of world economy. Thus, we observe a pyramid, the point of which is presently occupied by the United States, Great Britain, Germany and the Soviet Union. This sector rests upon the broader base of the British Empire, the Axis, Germany’s European conquests and the colonial possessions of all countries. Economic activity occurs for the sole purpose of providing the material prerequisites for continuing the war.
We have omitted a discussion of the Soviet Union in this review for several reasons. Dr. Basch, except for a brief statement declaring the identity of German and Russian economy, a theory which he forthwith ignores and disproves, does not deal with Stalin’s state. More important than that, however, is the fact that the Soviet Union stands outside the orbit of capitalist economy. Property relations are different, class relations are different. Consequently, its methods are at great variance with those employed in the capitalist states. As an important aside, however, it is necessary to state that little or no information is available on the economic war problems of the Soviet Union. Stalin has surrounded the country with an impenetrable veil of secrecy.
 
In Partial Summary
The victim of bourgeois war economy is the proletariat. Control of labor, i.e., wage ceilings, longer working hours, inability to change jobs, loss of democratic rights, suspension of its basic interests, are followed up by a reduction in the consumer goods. The transfer of the economic life of a nation to a war economy affects the proletariat in the first place. The bourgeoisie, by virtue of its wealth and the specific place it occupies in society, may also suffer inconveniences as a result of the new order of things, but their inconveniences are as nothing compared to the great masses. The standard of living of the two classes is incomparable, for a reduction in the standard of the bourgeoisie is, for all practical purposes, indiscernible, while a reduction of the already low living standards of the proletariat subjects it to increasing misery and physical strain.
The proletariat is not alone in this new milieu. War economy destroys the economic base of the petty bourgeoisie. Priorities make impossible their continuation in business. The development of a one-sided war economy, the reduction of consumer goods to the lowest possible level, eliminates their economic basis of existence. War production is impossible without complete subordination of the national economy to the power of monopoly capitalism, the big combines, the enormous mass production industries. No matter what efforts are attempted to “save the small business man,” they are doomed in advance. The bankruptcy of social reformists and the champions of the petty bourgeoisie is nowhere so evident as in their efforts to reconcile what is irreconcilable, especially in a period of war: monopoly capitalism and free enterprise.
* * *
The material discussed in this review is the most significant portion of The New Economic Warfare. There are other chapters in this simply written study which contain many figures illustrating and proving the fundamental theories involved. For those who wish to implement their economic studies of the present period of bourgeois economy, Dr. Basch’s work is an excellent source book.
But we have only scratched the surface of the problem. We hope to continue where we left off in this review, in forthcoming issues of The New International.

Footnote
1. The New Economic Warfare, by Dr. Antonin Basch. Columbia University Press, 190 pp., $1.75.
 

Gates: A Telescopic History (November 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
A Telescopic History
(November 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 10, November 1941, pp. 285–6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

A Generation of Materialism, 1871–1900
by Carlton J.H. Hayes
390 pp., Harper & Brothers, $3.75
HARPER & BROTHERS is now sponsoring a historical series entitled, The Rise of Modern Europe, which is being edited by Professor William L. Langer, of Harvard University. When completed, the series will consist of about 20 volumes recording the history of Europe from 1250 A.D. to and including the present epoch. It is the intention of the publishing company merely to “set forth in broad lines the leading currents in the political, social, economic, military, religious, intellectual, scientific and artistic history of Europe”! In such an event, the books may become, if the present volume is followed, summarizations of the various historical periods to be treated.
The instant volume by Professor Hayes, an experienced and authoritative writer in European history, is such a summarization of the latter period of the 19th century. The author of The Political and Social History of Modern Europe and The Political and Cultural History of Modern Europe has sought, within the covers of a volume consisting of 390 pages, to describe the dawn of modern imperialism emerging from the rise in the European industrial curve, the effect of Darwinism upon the philosophical, political and economic questions of the day, the significance of liberalism in a consolidating bourgeois order, mechanization and trustification in industry and the natural consequences of this development, the process of urbanization, the triumph of science, the struggle for universal education, the appearance of the labor and socialist (Marxian) movements, and, finally, the crowning of “nationalist” imperialism, the national state in the “Victorian Age,” and the seeds of modern totalitarianism!
Having described the main content of the volume, one will no doubt wonder about its title. A Generation of Materialism is obviously a misleading cognomen, since the book has nothing essentially to do with the philosophical disputes of the 19th century. Professor Hayes makes his meaning partially clear when he says: “I seldom use it in the strict philosophical sense. Generally I use it in what I conceive to be the popular, common-sense way, as denoting a marked interest in, and devotion to, material concerns and material things.” The great material development of a rising capitalism is the main theme of the book.
 
The “Victorian Age”
The author begins his volume with the Franco-Prussian war of 1870 and its aftermath, the defeat of the Paris Commune. There follows a graphic description of the diplomatic intrigue and struggle accompanying the imperialist urge which dominated the leading European nations. Stated briefly and succinctly, the reader cannot help but grasp the future explosions inherent in the contending alliances which were passing through their preliminary stages: Germany, Russia and Austria; Germany, Austria and Rumania; Germany, Austria and Italy; France and Russia; and always the crafty British hovering around, pitting one nation against the other, bearing always in mind her main objective – maintaining a balance of power upon the continent. All the alliances were secret! This did not prevent, however, their being the common property of all the rival powers.
What is striking in Hayes’ review of this particular aspect of European history is its similarity to the diplomatic struggle attendant upon World War I and World War II. The problem, except that is has grown in magnitude, is the same: how to overcome the contradictions of capitalist production in a world divided by national boundaries. Just as now, war was the inescapable measure of “relief” adopted by all the countries. With few exceptions, universal compulsory military training and the permanent army became the vogue. For “arms in preparation” was the means of maintaining bourgeois state relations. The author is at his best in this section of the book, for he describes the permanently perilous conditions under which capitalism exists.
Hayes errs in attributing to Marxism a narrow, economic determinist, analysis of modern imperialism. His failure to properly assess the nature of the Marxist movement and its theories becomes at once obvious by the fact that he does not understand the place of historical materialism in Marxist doctrine. Marxists are not economic determinists, nor does the true Marxian movement approach social, economic and political problems from the point of view of the “self-interest” of the classes. What the Marxists do say about imperialism is that it results from the economic character of modern capitalism; that imperialism is not merely the seizure of territories, i.e., a policy of conquest, but, above all, economic, political and military measures by which one nation dominates another. Modern imperialism is a specific type of imperialism. It is marked by the export of capital (something quite impossible in pre-capitalist or industrial capitalist society), distinct and apart from the export of commodities; it is marked by a struggle for raw materials, for cheap labor, for control of the world markets, and finally, for divisions and redivisions of the world among the great powers. This struggle grows more fierce with the decay of the social order. But to do as the professor does, deny the Marxist concept simply because imperialism existed before the era of finance capital, is to prevent a fundamental understanding of this stage of capitalism.
 
Too Much and Yet Too Little
The other sections of the book, as outlined above, are treated in such a manner that the problem of mechanization, trustification and cartelization in modern industry, receive the same attention as the place of religion in modern society, and the role of the arts. Yet, the specific gravity of the structural changes which occurred in bourgeois society is so overwhelmingly preponderant in influencing the course of the twentieth century that they are in truth not to be discussed simultaneously. As is clear in this book, it leads neither to clarity in understanding capitalism, nor allows for a correct understanding of superstructural phenomenon.
The book is especially weak in its analysis of the trade unions and socialist movements. Through implication, at least, Hayes records the progressive character of the Marxist movement and Marxist theory as the inspirer of that movement, but his treatment of the place which this movement occupies in society is extremely superficial and indicates not merely a lack of intrinsic knowledge as to its real history, but an unmistakable prejudice which disallows him to make an objective appraisal of its true role and strength. He dismisses the Marxist movement as never really having any strength; that its reputation was primarily the result of claims made for it by Marx and Engels and the great, but natural, fear of the bourgeoisie in observing the character of the socialist aim. Thus, the rise of the socialist movement is explained by the fact that it was “timely,” coinciding with the rise of liberalism and occupying an extremist position in the general liberal movement. The key to the author’s understanding of the most significant world movement under capitalism, is his declaration that “self-interest (is the) ... essence ... of Marxism.”
Finally, the professor poses the thesis that “national imperialism” is the forerunner to totalitarianism. Unquestionably the current world situation greatly influenced him in the development of what is by and large an obvious thesis. Capitalism is, despite its economic interdependence and world character, composed of national states; the states are in sharp conflict with each other; such a condition in the midst of recurrent crises gives rise to blatant nationalism and war. These, in turn, give rise to dictators, a more rabid nationalism, anti-Semitism, racialism, and totalitarianism. But we need not have awaited Hayes’s simple thesis. The Marxists described the real process of imperialist capitalism many years ago and forecast the development of totalitarianism and fascist rule.
The value of this book lies in its aid to a study of European history. In many parts there is brilliant writing. But the author attempted too much with the result that important phases of social development have been sketchily presented, and in a manner which prevents genuine historical clarification.
 


Proofread by Einde O’Callaghan (December 2012).

IT IS THEORETICALLY POSSIBLE that the future course of society may take a direction unforeseen by revolutionary Marxists at present, but the attempt of Dwight Macdonald [1] to portray the German fascist state as representative of a new social order is a grievous violation of serious and scholarly investigation. His study is based upon journalistic interpretations of secondary and indecisive phenomena of present-day German society. Despite devoted efforts to understand German economy under Hitler, he has been unable to generalize correctly the studied facts, nor to place them in their proper context and importance.
Macdonald’s reference to Trotsky’s remarks anent Hitler’s role of a super-Wrangel and the latter’s attack on the Soviet Union, is entirely misplaced and without importance. Trotsky erred in the field of prophesy where conjunctural turns frequently occur, especially when forecast is made some eight years before an event occurs. But this fact proves nothing in reality. And, so far as the war is concerned, the end is not in sight.
The matter of the Blitzkrieg is quite something else. For here is a key to Macdonald’s position. It was the Blitzkrieg, quite understanding on economic and military grounds, which so shockedMacdonald that it drove him to what he calls a study of German economy. He searched for the source of Germany’s swift victory over France in his own preconceived “new social order.” Of Germany’s military triumphs, he therefore writes:
Germany’s crushing superiority in war machines (planes, tanks, guns) over the richer “democracies,” the new military tactics her army displayed, and the new non-capitalist ways in which she is now exploiting her victory – all of these phenomena can be explained only on the basis of a radical difference in economic and social systems between Germany and France-England. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
What these “non-capitalist methods” are remains a secret. In any case we shall show that the whole theory is false and groundless in fact. By his writing, Macdonald does reveal that he knows little of German or European military history, and certainly little of European (especially German) economy.
While this is not the occasion for a review of German military and economic history, it is necessary to point out:
1) Germany has long been a powerful military nation with an enormous military tradition;
2) In 1870–1871 German arms vanquished France in a few weeks (for that period, also a Blitzkrieg);
3) Germany was on the verge of victory against the Allies several times during the 1st World War, without a fascist state;
4) In any gigantic military struggle, new tactics, new strategies, new machinery, new methods of offense and defense arise;
5) The “non-capitalist” means Germany supposedly has and is employing are traditionally imperialist-capitalist;
6) The economic systems of Germany and the Allies are fundamentally identical “war economies”;
7) The war is not over and as it continues in the latter half of its second year promises to spread over the entire globe and to continue for many years;
8) The war cannot be won by a Blitzkrieg; it has already lasted too long, when the Blitzkrieg, as conceived by the General Staffs, especially the German, was a war lasting from three weeks to three months;
9) The German economic organization has been and is today the mightiest in Europe – although that, of and by itself, as we shall soon establish, is only half the answer.
But, queries Macdonald, if the Allies knew all this, why did they not prepare to meet Hitler in advance? The answer to that is, in my opinion, obviously answered. Modern war is an extremely dangerous and expensive undertaking with little or no guarantees involved. The Allies had hoped to turn German attentions toward the east (Russia) and thus avoid war, if not altogether, then at least for some time. England-France were confronted with a fait accompli in Germany’s military resurgence, which, on the basis of their industrial potential and specific class relations (bourgeois-proletarian) they could not hope to match. In two years they could not do what it took Germany with an “enslaved proletariat” more than five. Yet despite this, Germany has not achieved its victory. On the basis of Macdonald’s views this should have occurred shortly after the fall of France in early 1940.
Germany’s conduct in world affairs prior to the outbreak of the present war, was highly reckless because she had nothing to lose. In contradistinction, England and France had nothing to gain from a war with a vanquished foe and everything to lose. Armed Germany, ready to stake all in the hope of victory, was truculent, abusive and aggressive. England and France, playing for time, hoping for diversions to prevent the immediate outbreak of war, playing the game of diplomacy for all it was worth, worked belatedly and feverishly to prepare because neither would give up a single imperialist possession of their own to appease Germany.
But the Blitzkrieg, Macdonald notwithstanding, while illuminating as a topical military subject, has no fundamental significance beyond that, and certainly no fundamental social significance. And yet, it is upon such a basis that the discoverer of new social orders builds his tenuous structure.
 
On the Study of Marx
It is not only necessary to “reread” Marx’s Capital, but also to READ it, to STUDY it and to avoid the researcher’s method of seeking quotations to fit a preconceived pattern, using them divorced from their context and meaning, especially where they have nothing to do with the subject.
How is Macdonald “illuminated” by rereading Marx’s Capital? He has discovered what comprises simple capitalism. The “mysterious” commodity is stripped of its mystery and there it stands in all its nakedness, long decades after Marx engaged in his economic writings! Yes, it is true that capitalism means commodity production, production for a market, that a product entering the process of exchange becomes a commodity, that the worker sells his labor power to the capitalist in the open market. All of this is true, just as it is true that capitalism means competition, production for profit, and private ownership of the means of production. So much time and space wasted. It would have done Macdonald far more good to have spent his energies in a study of the economics of monopolist capitalism, for it would have taught him many things which he does not seem to know, and the lack of knowledge of which disqualifies him from effectively discussing the issue in dispute.
 
What Is Modern Capitalism?
Capitalism has become monopolist. Simple factory production, industrial capitalism, has given way to mass production, the victory of industry over agriculture, of heavy metallurgical industry over light, textile, and the triumph of finance capital. Under these conditions, there is a relative end to the competitive struggle in the domestic market, subject to controls by monopoly capitalism, which controls the market, competition, production and prices. It is also characteristic of the present epoch of monopoly capitalism that the domestic market is no longer decisive and dominant. The world market, world prices and world trade, the endless search and competition for raw materials, prevail. We live under a system of world economy.
Macdonald, with a stroke of his pen, dissolves the domestic market in Germany, but he fails to understand that in the present epoch the national market is completely subsidiary and subordinated to the world market, and the national division of labor subject to and integrated with the world division of labor.
The tendency and the reality of monopoly capitalism is to elevate the world market at the expense of the home market. Bukharin described in detail the new capitalism in his book, Imperialism and World Economy, when he wrote:
There is a regular market connection, through the processes of exchange between numberless individual (national) economies scattered over the most diverse geographical areas. This world division of labor and international exchange presupposes the existence of a world market and world prices. (p. 23)
And further:
International exchange of commodities is based on the international division of labor . . . international exchange has its basis not in division of labor, which presupposes the production of different use-values, but solely in different levels of production costs, in values having various scales in various countries, but reduced through international exchange to socially indispensable labor on a world scale. (Ibid., pp. 24f.)
This holds true especially for Germany, where economy has been for many decades indissolubly intertwined with world economy. The post-war crisis in Germany resulted not from what Macdonald talks about, but entirely from its relation to world economy, its severance from the world markets, from the sources of raw materials and colonies with its rich supply of cheap labor. Germany’s present war effort can be explained solely by its desire to redivide the world, establish its own dominant colonial empire and occupy the place of America and England. Macdonald does not understand this because he does not understand monopoly capitalism as a system of world economy. That is why, too, he is led to such a sophomoric absurdity as to declare that Germany has dissolved the world market.
The causes of the last World War are now universally known. We suspect, although we are not certain, that Macdonald knows them too, but since it does not fit his preconceived pattern of present day German economy, he forgets everything. World War I was a struggle for a redivision of the earth. Germany’s integration in world economy as long ago as 1914 and earlier was expressed in her foreign investments, which totalled more than 35 billion marks. In addition, the Kaiser’s Germany was in possession of a growing colonial empire. The measure of her stature is apparent by Germany’s intervention in every important international imperialist problem of that period.
The central aim of the Versailles treaty was the destruction of Germany’s colonial empire and military power. The mistake of the Allies was that, in dismembering Germany’s borders, in imposing astronomical reparations and seizing her colonial empire, they failed to destroy the immense German industrial plant which enabled Germany’s military and economic resurgence.
Under the conditions of mass production, the volume of commodities seeking a market has increased, especially in capital goods. This situation occurs with a declining home market, resulting from the disproportionate relationship in the rise of productivity of labor and relative decline of the national consuming power. How explain the contradiction of rising productivity, the mass production of capital and consumers goods and the relative decline of consumption? The contradiction is only explainable by the composition of capital, the polarization of wealth. The falling rate of profit is a tremendous factor driving the bourgeois power beyond the borders of the country and this is especially true for highly industrialized countries like England, Germany and the United States.
Marx graphically described this process when he wrote:
Overproduction of capital never signifies anything else but overproduction of the means of production – means of production and necessities of life – which may serve as capital, that is, serve for the exploitation of labor at a given degree of exploitation ... Capital consists of commodities and therefore the overproduction of capital implies an overproduction of commodities. (Capital, Vol. III, p. 300)
There is an immense export of commodities in general, in which, however, the export of capital is distinguished from the export of commodities of consumption. The motivating force for the export of capital is not that it cannot be employed at home, but that it can be more profitably employed in foreign, colonial and agricultural countries. Of this Marx wrote, with prophetic wisdom, long before the era of monopoly capitalism had arrived:
If capital is sent to foreign countries, it is not alone because there is | absolutely no employment to be had for it at home. It is done because it lean be employed at a higher rate of profit in a foreign country. (Ibid., p. 1279)
Or again:
... capitals invested in colonies, etc., may yield a higher rate of profit for the single reason that the rate of profit is higher thereon account of backward development and for the added reason that slaves, coolies, etc., permit a better exploitation of labor. (Ibid. My emphasis – A.G.)
Macdonald has to prove that none of the aforecited references have application to Germany, and we are certain that he cannot do so. We have already mentioned the disproportionate relationship between production and consumption. Consumption is restricted under capitalism because its prevailing tendency is toward capital accumulation and expansion, and “a production of surplus value on an enlarged scale.” Therein lies the explanation for the present war and Germany’s desperate conflict. In relation thereto Marx wrote:
This is a law of capitalist production imposed by the incessant revolutions in the methods of production themselves, the resulting depreciation of existing capital, the general competitive struggle and the necessity of improving the product and expanding its scale of production, for the sake of self-preservation and on the penalty of failure. The market must, therefore, be continuously extended. (Ibid., p. 287. My emphasis – A.G.)
Modern imperialist capitalism is accompanied by an intensification of the world struggle between nations because (1) there is an increased world competition in the sales market, (2) there is an increased competition in the markets of raw materials, and (3) there is an increased competition in the spheres of capital investment. It is the contradiction between the growth of productive forces, on the one hand, and the national limits of production on the other, that sends capital out to all corners of the earth begetting this terrifying competition between national capitals.
Again, the modern capitalist contradiction occurs because:
... there is a growing discord between the basic social economy which has become worldwide and the peculiar class structure of society, a structure where the ruling class (the bourgeoisie) itself is split in “national” groups with contradictory economic interests, groups which, being opposed to the world proletariat, are competing among themselves for the division of the surplus value created on a world scale ... the development of productive forces move within the narrow limits of state boundaries while it has already outgrown those limits. (Bukharin, op. cit., p. 106. My emphasis – A.G.)
And yet Macdonald can write that: Germany has destroyed the world market!
Monopolist capitalism has marked the end of simple capitalism, laissez-faire capitalism. Under these structural changes, the role of the state to the classes has undergone changes, although its basic role remains identical: the instrument of bourgeois society. Macdonald speaks of the democratic bourgeois state as bourgeois apologists describe it, but as it actually never was, and certainly could not be under monopoly capitalism.
The state fuses with monopoly capitalism and has a more direct and intimate interest in the economic well-being of the “nation.” In declining capitalism, the duties of the state are magnified, since the increased conflict of “national capitals” marks the struggle between states.
Engels, despite an essential exaggeration of the development of the state as the sole capitalist, foresaw the main development of the state as far back as 1883. His theoretical writings served as the basis for the works of the post-war Marxists, who, in their studies of imperialism, showed the new role of the bourgeois state. Engels wrote:
In any case, with trusts or without, the official representative of capitalist society – the state – will ultimately have to undertake the direction of production. This necessity for conversion into state-property is felt first in the great institutions for intercourse and communication – the post office, the telegraphs, the railways ... If the crises demonstrate the incapacity of the bourgeoisie for managing any longer modern productive forces, the transformation of the great establishments for production and distribution into joint-stock companies, trusts and state property, show how unnecessary the bourgeoisie are for that purpose ... But the transformation, either into joint-stock companies and trusts or state-ownership does not do away with the capitalist nature of the productive forces. In the joint-stock companies and trusts this is obvious. And the modern state, again, is only the organization that bourgeois society takes on in order to support the external conditions of the capitalist mode of production against the encroachments as well of the workers as of the individual capitalist. The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personfication of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage-workers – proletarians. The capital relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head. (Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, pp. 121ff. My emphasis – A.G.)
The measure of state control and ownership has not proceeded as far as Engels believed, even in fascist Germany, although the resultant class relations described are entirely accurate, as evidenced by post-war Europe and America.
Without understanding this capitalism, it is impossible to understand the Third Reich and we propose to show how Germany fits precisely into this pattern of monopoly capitalism as a system of world economy.
 
MacDonald’s Germany Through a Looking Glass
Germany is a new society, says Macdonald, not capitalist. To be sure, he adds, uncertain of himself, capitalists do in fact exist, but only in form. Private ownership in the means of production prevails – but only in form. Profits are made – but the profit system exists only in form. Wage labor is present – but only in form; the free labor market no longer exists. The market exists – but only in form. There is a stock exchange and “the speculator buys and sells stocks and bonds” – but this is only a form. “The old capitalist forms exist,” he says, “but they express an entirely different content” (emphasis in original – A.G.). What, then, is new? The state controls! There is no longer a profit system! There is only production for use, planned economy! “Germany has destroyed the world market.” What utter nonsense!
Since the Versailles treaty, the principal effort of German capitalism (once the failure of the proletarian revolution was certain) has been directed to breaking the chains imposed upon it by the victorious Allies, to escape the heavy war reparations, to acquire colonies, establish a place in the division of the world markets, and to realize an equal status in the markets of raw materials. How could the “enormous German plant” enjoy a normal existence under the Versailles restrictions? Obviously, it could not and Germany faced utter and complete collapse. The Weimar regime recognized this, but on the basis of inter-class relations and internal prostration, could do little about it, although its attempts were many. Hitler understood it even better than the Stresemanns and Briinings and he understood that it was necessary to solve internal class relations first and then to rearm to bring about a possibility of realizing German needs.
The democratic bourgeois regime of Germany tried by peaceful and persuasive means to obtain large concessions from the Allies and failed. The early attempts at a German-Austrian customs union were met with a direct order to desist or suffer the penalty of a renewed Allied military intervention. Under the conditions of post-war economy none of the other imperialist powers could grant Germany basic concessions without injuring their own profit economies. Anglo-French imperialism recognized that a German-Austrian customs union meant the creation of a German Middle European tariff alliance to establish a stronger monopoly (fusing German and Austrian capital under the former’s domination) to deal on a world scale with other gigantic monopolies.
The fascists came to power as the result of a combination of factors, not the least of which was the aim of finance capital to place in power a party of its own image, determined to bring about a rebirth of German imperialism, no matter what the effort or what clashes might be engendered.
What has the Hitler regime accomplished? First and foremost, the destruction of the organized working class, their power of resistance, the reduction of their living standards, and the intensification of their exploitation at the hands of monopoly capitalism. Second, the rearmament of the nation. Third, securing the power of the heavy metallurgical industries over all other capitalist groupings through the medium of war orders, a revival of German industry in general in preparation for war. And finally, reclamation of German territories in Europe and seizure of non-German areas. Germany, slowly but surely, has been breaking into the world market and reestablishing her pre-1914 threat to the other powers in a period of international decay and sharpened world competition.
German economy today is a war economy and contains all the abnormalities of a war economy in addition to other abnormalities under which German economy has operated for the past twenty years. In truth, the whole Hitler era is marked by the rise of a war economy. The war effort is directed by the state. In its present role it has only extended the characteristic tendency of monopoly capitalism.
These accomplishments were realized on basically capitalistic grounds, as even Macdonald admits, since he says that before 1936 Germany was capitalist. It is in that year that the social change supposedly took place. This is featured by state control, planned economy and production for use. What actually did occur in Germany? We shall have occasion to refer to Italy also, since it is, despite Macdonald’s failure to discuss that country, a fascist nation and the forerunner of Hitler’s Germany. Macdonald’s deliberate avoidance of a discussion of Italy is indicated for the reason that there a more simple capitalism operates and his theories are even more ludicrous in the light of developments.
 
The “New Social Order” in Practice
In their franker moments, when propaganda for mass consumption and the confusion of Macdonald is not required, the fascist spokesmen really characterize their system and the purpose of their “anti-capitalist revolution.” The fascist spokesman Luigi Villari in The Economics of Fascism writes:
Fascism ... is definitely a system of class collaboration. It rejects the idea of class and of contrast between classes, and aims at conciliating the aspirations of all the categories of the population in the nation as a whole.

Does it challenge capitalism? If by capitalism we mean simply the classical liberal economic theory of laissez faire, fascism does represent a new spirit [!], inasmuch as it provides a form of economic planning which in some quarters is regarded as tantamount to a kind of state socialism. But if by capitalism we mean individual enterprise and the possession of the means of production by private individuals, fascism by no means rejects it. In fascist economics the state steps in only to correct the defects and deficiencies of private enterprise and intervenes where private enterprise has failed, but the capitalist principle is accepted. (p. 111. My emphasis – A.G.)
Please note, Comrade Macdonald, how concise and categorical Germany and Italy have conformed to this pattern. The “interests” of the workers are now represented by the “impartial” state and the fascist labor organizations. The immediate aim of the fascist power was to make impossible strikes or any kind of struggle by the workers which might interfere with the constant functioning of the industrial machine. Have they succeeded? Even Macdonald recognizes it but does not place it in its proper context when discussing fascist economy because he does not realize its significance in bourgeois production. Here the state enacts the role depicted by Engels.
The prohibition of strikes and class struggles in Germany and Italy are obligatory for their economy. Strike prohibition is not primarily a political question, it is an economic one of the highest importance, for Italy because of its low level of development, for Germany because of its relation to world economy.
Referring to strikes, solidarizing class battles, Villari writes:
One of the chief benefits of the present [the fascist] regime is the complete elimination of these episodes of violence. (Ibid., p. 64)
And why? Because
... a poor country like Italy – whose economic life was only beginning to develop, whose production and working capital was still insufficient – could ill afford such disorders. (Ibid., p. 66)
Thus, the prohibition of the class struggle in Italy was incumbent in order that the capitalist class might develop its economy. Between 1920 and 1924, strikes were reduced from 2,070 to 260, and when Mussolini’s power was consolidated, strikes disappeared, while the level of existence of the proletariat was materially reduced. Villari writes:
Society’s interest [!] is that production should continue, and that its costs should not be so high as to prevent national industry from competing with that of other countries! (Ibid., p. 95. My emphasis – A.G.)
The quotations speak for themselves.
Germany even more than Italy requires class peace and “national unity” (at the point of the bayonet) to enable it to wage the struggle for world power. Its international position requires the ruthless exploitation of the proletariat for competitive economic purposes. And the efficiency of German industry today is in a large measure the result of the enslavement of the proletariat and the subordination of the entire industrial apparatus to war aims.
Capitalism is not only a system of class inequality, it is also a system of state inequality. Germany and Italy represent two bourgeois nations struggling for their existence in world economy.
 
In Whose Class Interests?
As a result of the first World War, and even prior thereto, the tendency toward nationalization in certain industrial branches existed in all bourgeois countries. Yet in the years following Mussolini’s seizing power, a process of denationalization occurred in the following industrial branches: match, telephone, insurance, municipal power plants, state railways and postal service. They were either turned into the hands of private capital or there occurred an increase of private power and private capital.
Moreover, the victory of fascism was followed with direct state handouts to private capital. In the pre-Hitler era, the Gelsenkirchen Company received from the government $125,000,000 for stock establishing government control. Hitler returned this stock to the company for $100,000,000 – a neat increase to the company.
As a result of bank crashes, the Weimar regime in 1931 established control over the following banks: Dresdner-Bank u. Danat, Commerz u. Privatbank and the Deutsche Bank u. Diskonte Gesellschaft. Government control ended in 1937, five years after the establishment of the Third Reich.
Shipbuilding, a state monopoly by virtue of stock ownership, ended in 1936. The government returned its stock to the Deutsche Schiff- u. Machinebau and Hamburg Süd-Amerika.
On December 13, 1935, the law of 1919 socializing power production was repealed and returned to private ownership and control.
Tax exemption, a very typical bourgeois method of subsidizing capital, was widespread in Italy and Germany with the advent of fascism. In Italy supplemental taxes on negotiable securities was abolished; tax exemptions were permitted large corporations which merged and the 10 per cent tax on capital invested in banking was abolished.
Throughout the years of Hitler’s rule the same process was experienced. A law was passed in 1933–1934 authorizing industrialists to deduct from their taxable income money expended on new equipment! The government reimbursed owners for expenses in repairing houses, factories and stores. Tax delinquents had their debts reduced by half. In July, 1933, legislation was passed providing tax exemptions to new business firms. In 1934, the government granted tax reductions in the amount of 500 million marks to facilitate resumption of business. Income taxes for 1934–1935 were reduced by half of what they were in 1931–1932. And in 1935 a reduction was granted on inheritance taxes. The state also prohibited new industries competing with the old. And non-conforming industries were forced into associations with big monopolies!
Beyond the Brenner Pass, in Italy, the fascist regime gave direct subsidies to industry. The Ansaldo Metal Trust was given 400 million lira. Banco di Roma, Banco di Napoli, Banco de Sicilia, Banco de Milano, Credito Italiano, Banco Commercialo, all insolvent, were made solvent by the state! The state, the good old impartial state, set up the Society to Finance Italian Industry with a capital of a half billion lira.
To be sure, all of this was done to stimulate industry. But note carefully, that there were not and are not to this day, expropriations of the capitalist class, and no nationalization. Quite the contrary, a revival of industry and the acquisition of profits was realized with state assistance. This was accompanied by reprivatization of nationalized sectors of economy.
Let us return to Germany. In 1932, industrial production stood at 57.2 as compared with 103.0 in 1929. A revival was experienced six months prior to Hitler’s triumph. In 4.5 years of Nazi rule the 1929 level was reached. How marvelous, swoons Macdonald. How superior to democratic capitalism. And he writes:
In my opinion the superiority of fascist to capitalist economy is due less to its undoubtedly more intense exploitation of human labor than to its superior ability to plan and control national production without hindrance from the archaic market system. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
I have already shown that Germany’s economic situation stems directly from its relation to the world market, to which its economy is subjected. Macdonald’s remarks anent the market is stuff and nonsense, for he overlooks the essential fact that in the war, the government has become the chief home market, in (he absence of widespread exports and participation in world economy.
German economy has developed in a completely one-sided manner: an increase of capital goods production, decline in consumers’ goods despite increases in population and demand. In the absence of a strong position in world economy, rearmament has served as the basis for economic revival. Control and restrictions in production grew out of rearmament needs. Thus, in 1932 one billion marks were spent on rearmament, while in 1937, fifteen billions were so absorbed. With the outbreak of the war, this has risen to thirty billion marks yearly. In 1932, only 2 per cent of the national income was diverted into rearmament, while in 1937, 22 per cent was so spent and in the war, from 55 to 65 per cent of the national income has been siphoned off. In these figures is to be found the explanation for the economic revival of German industry and the great abnormalities in economic life.
The internal debt has reached a fantastic level which threatens an inflationary stage. But this obvious fact is lost on Macdonald, who declares that under Germany’s “controlled” economy no inflation is possible; the government controls currency. It would have been better had Macdonald left this question alone entirely. German finances, it is true, are controlled by the government, but it is a financial system that is based upon the bayonet, the looting of subject countries, heavy taxes, securing immediate reparation payments from defeated countries and the most primitive methods of capitalist accumulation.
Hitler’s measures to prevent inflation are typically capitalist and are only possible because of the presence of the war. The losses are socialized, that is, they are placed on the backs of the proletariat and poor peasants, while at the other pole, there is a steady profit accruing to the financial and industrial ruling class. Heavy taxation is levied to finance the war. The proletariat is tied to the industrial machine. In the light of German methods, John T. Flynn, in the N.Y. World-Telegram of March 13, 1941, wrote (attention, Comrade Macdonald):
Financial observers are becoming increasingly interested in what is going on in business inside of Germany. It has become the fashion here to talk about the great economic vigor of Germany and her fascist economy when the war will end ... Better informed observers do not admire Germany’s system and its alleged vigor as much as these journalists and military men. As a matter of fact, the process of inflation inside Germany must be moving at a pretty rapid rate. Of course, Germany does not tell us too much about such things ... this “great” and “efficient” German economic system, which is going to knock us [the United States] out of the world’s markets after the war, is lumbering along on no new or novel devices but on the same well-worn scheme of the capitalist system which has gravely weakened or ruined every capitalist nation ... and will, of course, do the same thing in Germany ... Germany, in spite of Mr. Hitler’s mouthings about the end of capitalism in a capitalist country ... It has resorted to taxation until that power is exhausted. This is the good old way under all systems. Then it has resorted to the equally good old way of borrowing at the banks ... It is possible to keep this up quite a long time – as long as there is a war and a dictator ...
Flynn, of course, is a dubious-liberal critic of capitalist economy. On such concrete questions, he knows what he is talking about.


German Society and Capitalism – II
(May 1941)

From New International, Vol. VII No. 4 (Whole No. 53), May 1941, pp. 86–89.
Transcribed & marked up by Damon Maxwell for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL).
Proofread by Einde O’Callaghan (December 2012)

IN PURSUANCE OF THE PRINCIPLES outlined in the April installment of this article, I propose to show now how the “new” society really functions at home.
What is it that stands out so clearly in Macdonald’s exposition of his thesis? Eclecticism! He has no fundamental point of departure and therefore is reduced to examining isolated and unrelated phenomenon which are strange really to him, but nevertheless dovetail with the Marxist analysis of monopoly capitalism as a stage of world economy. However, without this Marxist foundation Macdonald fails to understand the true nature of German economy. A correct summation of his position is to say that it is devoid of a class viewpoint. Hence, the real position of the German proletariat has little place in his writings. Yet the role of the proletariat in the fascist nation is the key to the character of fascism. Nothing has happened in the experience of our lifetime to cause us to forsake the analysis that fascism signifies the triumph of the financial capitalist class within the nation over the proletariat and, consequently, the latter’s violent enslavement. Therein is the key to the revival of the fascist economies and when Macdonald dismisses or alludes not at all to this fact in favor of some mystical “superiority of fascist to capitalist economy” he necessarily commits an ineradicable error.
We repeat, the revival of German industry would have been impossible without the aforementioned enslavement of the proletariat. Labor was regimented, while all the social gains of the post-war period were abolished. Restrictions on the working day were eliminated. The eight-hour day no longer exists. In 1939, prohibitions were levied against the free movement of workers inside the country. The law prohibiting night work for women was abolished, as were all restrictions on the employment of boys and girls under 18 years of age. Discontent and mass fatigue brought about some amelioration, but no genuine improvement of working conditions.
In December 1939, the work day was limited to ten hours and by special permission to twelve! Night work for women and youth was prohibited and the work week RESTRICTED TO 56 HOURS, and longer by special permission.
The War Economy Decree of September 1939 (please note, Macdonald) abolished paid vacations and forbade extra pay for overtime and night work or for Sundays and holidays. These measures naturally occasioned widespread dissatisfaction and “had to be partially repealed.” A decree of November 1939 restored paid vacations beginning with 1940 and permitted payment of overtime wages, “but only for work beyond ten hours a day on week days and at a rate not exceeding the normal compensation by more than 25 per cent.”
What does all this mean? Simply that the proletariat bears the burden for whatever revival has taken place in German economy – especially in the preparation for war. The present intense exploitation of the working class would have been impossible without the victory of fascism which resulted in the physical destruction of the proletarian organizations. Once having vanquished the proletariat as an organized class, it was possible for the new regime, serving the historical interests of the economically dominant ruling class, i.e., the interests of German imperialism, to prepare the struggle for a redivision of the earth. This is the singular achievement of fascism! Yet it is on this question that Macdonald commits the cardinal sin of deemphasis or omission.
 
The Nature of a War Economy
Macdonald rejects the idea that the war has anything to do with the conduct of German economy and the current situation in the Third Reich. He thereby betrays a light-minded attitude toward decisive economic problems.
Modern wars between great bourgeois states are not and cannot be, and as a matter of fact never were, private affairs between contending national economic groupings. The state wages the war in the interest of the dominant economic class. Because the bourgeoisie itself is not a completely homogeneous class its attitudes are not ever unanimous. The state intervenes as the final arbiter in the interest of the whole national economy, whether or not it suits individual or sectional desires. This is true of all states engaged in war.
A modern war is a gigantic industrial and financial endeavor, requiring state direction, management and control for the purpose of a complete and unified effort. An authority on the blitzkrieg should, we think, understand the need for this maximum industrial effort, class cohesion, national unity and planning.
War, above all, is an abnormal stage of economic activity, since the entire industrial machine of a country is concentrated on one thing alone: the production of war materials. Production for use? Of course, tor use in the war. Consumers goods and light industries? They operate only insofar as they are required for the general welfare of the nation at war. Planned economy? Yes, for the war machine! Is it not clear that this kind of a planned economy means to determine in advance: how much steel is required, how many guns, cannon, airplanes, tanks; how much coal, oil, copper, freight cars, ships, food, clothing, etc., is needed. And the state decides, among other things, how much butter and bread and meat and other articles of food shall be consumed. This principle holds true not only for Germany, but for all warring countries and even partially for the United States, which is fast approaching the supreme effort. It is also determined by the resources of the nation.
 
What About the Market?
What has happened to the internal market? It has ceased to exist in its pre-war form. It could not be otherwise under the aforementioned conditions. The state has now become the immense market through which the production of war material flows. Otherwise chaos would ensue and the war effort would be greatly encumbered, or, more properly, impossible. How else does Macdonald expect the war to be fought?
But for all of this. the stress and strain of the war, nothing fundamental has changed in Germany, nor, for that matter, in England. The profit system remains unimpaired, not only in form, but in fact.
Germany, in the absence of a colonial empire, divorced from the fields of raw materials, economically blockaded, is fighting for her very economic existence, as is England, and stakes all on the hope of a military victory. Such a victory will give her an empire and a dominant position in world economy. Imperialist Germany faced a dilemma: either to stake everything on war where a tangible possibility of victory existed, or else to perish by economic strangulation.
Hitler, who understands better than Macdonald Germany’s needs and why she is fighting, said before the war: “We export or we die.” [2] On January 30, 1939, he warned the world powers that any attempt on their part to exclude Germany from the world markets would find her prepared for a “desperate economic struggle.” The “desperate economic struggle” has now become a desperate military struggle.
When Macdonald says that Germany has destroyed the world market he cannot then explain what this war is all about and is compelled to develop the theory of the “social war,” which gives to fascism a universal or internationalist character. Such an analysis contains dangerous implications!
One of the first results of Germany’s initial victories was the reinvigoration of her colonial companies, which experienced an increase in their share sales at a time when no colonies had yet been won! Shares of the East Africa Company rose from 76 to 152 in 1940. The Otava Mining Company shares rose from 17.50 to 35.00 and the Kamerun R.R. Co. advanced from 71 to 187 in the same period. For more than ten years colonial companies paid no dividends, yet by 1938 seven large enterprises did, the African Fruit Company paying as high as 8 per cent (New York Times, September 15, 1940). Here is a not unimportant indication of what the war is about.
 
What Has Happened in Germany
The economist John C. deWilde prepared two interesting reviews of German economy for the Foreign Policy Association, which illustrated measures of state control and economic organization in preparation for the war. The studies proceed from the basis that German economy is capitalist, that the measures of control are not abnormally unique from the point of view of a state at war, that planning in Germany is solely for the purpose of war, and that these measures in their extreme result from Germany’s position in world economy. They involved: increasing industrial production, coordinating production in general, putting industry on a war footing, expanding the war industries (at the expense of other branches of production), raising food production, producing of synthetic raw materials in absence of natural raw materials (the driving force for the four-year plan) [3], increasing labor reserves, food rationing, improving the efficiency of transportation, maintaining foreign trade if possible, and financing the war. A truly gargantuan task for which state intervention, control and direction are obligatory. In each instance, as verified by deWilde, the methods employed were unusual and special, in marking a departure from conditions of normal, democratic processes, but were in no way incompatible with capitalism. The difference between present-day Germany and that prior to 1936 is quantitative rather than qualitative.
On March 1, 1939, in relation to the industrial revival then experienced by Germany, deWilde wrote:
“The maintenance of this boom in Germany is not as miraculous as it appears. It must be attributed, above all, to the enormous expenditures of public funds and the government’s power to MOBILIZE all the resources of LABOR and CAPITAL, industry and agriculture.” – John C. deWilde, Foreign Policy Reports, Germany’s Controlled Economy, page 290. (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
There is nothing extraordinary in this since the methods are identically employed in all imperialist nations in times of stress. All classes, presumably and in fact, are faced with equality of demands – yet in a society resting upon the inequality of classes the reality finds the proletariat the chief victim.
How did the boom come about? It should be clear by all the foregoing, but we record from deWilde:
“... they (the government) lavished large sums on the army, navy and air force, but under their direction billions of marks have been invested in plant and machinery to increase domestic output of such vital raw materials as mineral oil, rubber, metals, and textile fibres.” – John C. deWilde, Foreign Policy Reports, Germany’s Controlled Economy, page 290.
Economic and political necessity dictated policy to the German state. There was a construction boom in railroads, highways, fortifications and building projects – all in preparation for the war. It was directed by the state. The state issued contracts, the state paid for these undertakings. How? By the vast exploitation of the working class, by forced labor, and devious ways, not the last of which was the heavy taxation referred to throughout this article. To whom was it paid? To itself? No, these contracts resulted in enormous profits to large sections of the bourgeoisie.
We observe that the indicated controls are such as to guarantee the existence of private enterprise and the inflow of steady, even though, for the sake of argument, small profits. The German ruling class, however, was faced with the alternative of no profits or profits with control. Better limited profits than chaos, no profits and a permanently rebellious and dangerous proletariat, is the axiom of the capitalist.
 
Dividends and Profits
The fascist state, it is true, has designated a limit to dividends, not their abolition but their limitation, to 6–8 per cent. Yet Otto Tolischus of the New York Times points out that dividends of 14 per cent are not uncommon. But suppose no dividends were paid? Dividends are not identical to profit. No dividends or low dividends could mean a rise in profits since it would signify the concentration of profit in a smaller circle. The absence of dividends, or even the failure to realize profits, which may be due to many circumstances, would not necessarily have anything to do with the character of the economic and social order. During the crisis in the United States dividends and profits ceased for many concerns, yet it had no fundamental significance so far as the bourgeois order was concerned – it is typical of capitalist economy with its recurrent crises. If no profits or dividends were realized in Germany today, as was the case in previous crises there, nothing would be changed, so long as bourgeois class relations to capital prevailed.
Yet the opposite is true. Dividends and profits have been constant; they have increased under Hitler’s rule. In 1932, dividends were paid at 2½ per cent; in 1935 they increased to 6 per cent. The value of shares rose from 5 billion marks in 1932 to 11 billion in 1938. Undivided profits increased from 175 million marks in 1932 to 2,200 million marks in 1938, an increase by twelve times!
These increases were made possible by government expenditures for war, by the intensified exploitation of the working class, whose average working day was increased 12 per cent. Yes, it is illuminating to reread Marx’s Capital, especially those chapters on surplus value!
What is also illuminating is that during all these years no measures for the expropriation of the capitalist class were enacted. Control? Of course, but these, again, were not directed against the existent property relations. The class positions of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat remain unaltered. Nor has nationalization of finance or industry been manifested. On the contrary, the tendency toward reprivatization was dominant.
What, then, does Macdonald mean when he says a fundamental change took place in 1936 which brought about a structural change in German society? Obviously, the date itself has no meaning to our discoverer of a new social order. Germany was preparing for the final effort to break her chains – war! German economy became a full-fledged war economy. Everything was subordinated to solving this crisis, for war is an expression of the deepest capitalist crisis.
 
The Limitation of Profits
Macdonald makes a great deal out of the limitation of profit, as if it were of fundamental importance. Unusual, yes, but not fundamental. Setting a limit to profit and compelling reinvestment in industry is necessary in Germany to insure the steady flow of war goods and even the expansion of the war industries in the midst of the war, to increase the quickly depleted supplies. But this situation holds true for England and will hold true for the United States. Germany’s world position makes this, for her, even more incumbent. Yet despite limitation of profits, profit, as we have already shown, is not eliminated, the rise of new millionaires is not halted.
David M. Nichols, the New York Post Berlin correspondent, in a dispatch dated December 9, 1940, points out how the ruling classes are benefitting from the war itself. These groupings are:
“(1) Armament manufacturers whose profits are rigidly controlled on a cost plus basis but whose turnover has been vastly increased.
(2) Smaller manufacturers and building contractors whose profits are less rigorously limited and whose benefits have come indirectly as a result of the demand for heavy goods.
(3) Merchants and manufacturers not directly or indirectly connected with war activity, whose fields have been freed of foreign competition as a result of Nazi trade policies.
(4) Owners of large agricultural estates, especially those devoted to wheat production.”
Referring to an official survey made in Germany relating to the new wealth of Nazi Party leaders, Nichols writes:
“As they neither reject the principle of private ownership, nor of private incomes, they have no objection to these men earning (!) a lot of money.”
Nichols points out, too, that incomes from securities, parasitic incomes based on investments, have been the most rigidly controlled, profit being limited to 6 per cent.
“Any declared profits OVER this figure must be deposited with the Reichsbank, where they are available in government securities and credits by which the Nazis are financing, roughly, half of their 50,000,000,000 M. yearly expenses. The Minister of Economy, Walter Funk, has stated publicly, however, that THIS MEASURE WILL NOT BE EXTENDED.” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Ship building concerns are paying dividends of 10 per cent. The number of firms previously earning less than 6 per cent now report great increases. While wages have increased from 54.2 to 55.1, independent incomes from trades and professions were more than doubled, from 11.6 to 25.6.
The Hermann Goering Werke has no doubt expanded and earned great sums as a government institution. But its origin lay in the refusal of private industry to undertake the costly production of synthetic materials. Nonetheless, with the existence of the Goering Werke, Krupp’s profits were 6 per cent, as reported by the New York Times of March 11, 1941.
Without doubt, German industry fully enjoys the fruits of the war boom, but, observing that victory is not yet in sight, is hesitant about “taking risks.” And this, in the “new social order,” where industry supposedly enjoys no independence. That the problem has a measure of seriousness is evident by Economic Minister Funk’s allusion to it as reported in the New York Times of March 13, 1941. Funk admonishes business to be ready to take risks and refrain from shifting the entire burden of the war upon the government. The economic minister referred to the limitation of dividends at 6 per cent and declared that all dividends over such limitation would be prohibitively taxed – not eliminated, confiscated or prevented, but taxed! And note, too, that despite government control, supervision and direction, profits and dividends more often than not rise above 6 per cent.
Funk threatened that unless industry and business in general took the risks required and growing out of the war, the government would step in:
“When private enterprise does not take risks it gives itself up, and then we not longer need private enterprise.”
Mark well, “then we no longer need private enterprise.” That is, if private enterprise does not meet the needs of the war, then the government will step in. This was stated, not in 1932, nor even in 1936, the year of the great change, but in 1941, the second year of the war. The statement is important because it lifts the veil to the true economic relations existing in the Third Reich, and none of it conforms to the fancies of Macdonald.
Moreover, Funk says, of the industries or enterprises with a low capitalization, that there will not at present be a prohibitive taxation of their dividends in order to permit that section of the bourgeoisie to significantly raise their aggregate capitalization!
 
The Situation in Agriculture
It is common knowledge that the Nazis, upon their acquisition to power, returned large agricultural estates to the Junkers, lowered taxes for such estates throughout Germany and prepared for a national rise in the productivity of agriculture. Efforts have been made to extend the areas of land cultivation and to stabilize agricultural prices. Only moderate success was achieved in these aims. Why? For one reason, because:
“Large sums have been spent of land reclamation and improvement ... BUT THE ACREAGE AFFECTED HAS BEEN SMALLER THAN THE AREA TAKEN FOR AIRPORTS, ROADS, BUILDINGS AND OTHER PURPOSES CONNECTED WITH REARMAMENT.” (de-Wilde: Germany’s Wartime Economy, June 15, 1940, page 94. Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Partial price stabilization in agricultural goods has been attained only because the government was the chief recipient of agricultural goods, and the distribution of agricultural goods came under its strict supervision. Agricultural production, however, remaining low in relation to needs and by no means corresponding to the requirements of the war economy, accompanied with a shortage of livestock, cereals, fats and similar commodities, has driven Hitler to all the corners of Europe.
 
Financing the War
Taxes, according to deWilde, reached the figure of 27 billion marks per year with the public debt rising at the rate of two billion marks per month for the first three months of the war. Government expenditures average well over 50 billion marks a year. The total national income varies between 85 and 90 billion marks. The attempt to finance the war by prohibiting war profits (how very much like England and the United States) failed. As we have already shown, there was an improvement in profit earnings. As regards labor, however, the government did carry out its program in complete accord with German business. Yet even here, where an effort was made to freeze wages, labor shortages led to increases in various fields, quite in accord with the capitalist law of supply and demand in relation to labor.
Taxes, of course, are the main source of income for the government. The government has taxed business, excess profits, commodities, etc., to the limit. Where no further taxes could be levied the responsibilities for raising new funds were placed on provincial and local governments, or through the looting of occupied countries and the collection of reparations before the war has even approached some definitive conclusion!
Yet even these measures are not enough and the government sought to increase taxation. This led Dr. Funk to:
“Repeatedly warn against heavier taxation which would impair the capital of industry and DEPRIVE BUSINESS OF THE INCENTIVE TO PRODUCE (!), a factor he apparently believes essential even in a totalitarian state.” (deWilde: Germany’s Controlled Economy, page 95. Emphasis mine – A.G.)
And finally the whole war effort is summed up by deWilde:
“Germany’s totalitarian government has had no hesitation in subordinating everything to the war and in exacting sacrifices from everyone. AT THE SAME TIME THE STATE HAS NOT, WITH FEW EXCEPTIONS, ASSUMED DIRECT CHARGE OF PRODUCTION. It decided what was to be done, BUT IMPOSED THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CARRYING OUT THE PROGRAM SQUARELY ON PRIVATE ENTERPRISE ...” (deWilde: Germany’s Controlled Economy, page 96. Emphasis mine.)
What does this all sum up to? Bearing in mind the general principles outlined throughout this article, we find that Germany represents in reality a monopolist capitalist nation under a totalitarian regime, suffering from restrictions of isolation in the world economic system of finance capitalism and driven on by the basic organization of its economy to wage war. Rauschning knew what he was talking about when he wrote that the Nazi leaders’ main aim was “... the renewal of Germany’s power in the field of foreign policy.”
How explain the methods employed by German imperialism? Lenin explained it in part when he wrote in his introduction to Bucharin’s Imperialism and World Economy:
“The typical ruler of the world became finance capital, a power that is peculiarly MOBILE AND FLEXIBLE, peculiarly intertwined AT HOME AND INTERNATIONALLY, peculiarly DEVOID OF INDIVIDUALITY AND DIVORCED FROM THE IMMEDIATE PROCESSES OF PRODUCTION, peculiarly easy to concentrate ...” (Emphasis mine – A.G.)
Faced with extinction, German imperialism is making a valiant effort in this war. Why should the chance be taken? Because it lies in the very nature of capital. No more apt description of the character of capital is to be found than that of P.J. Dunning, quoted by Marx:
“Capital is said by a Quarterly Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very true; but this very incompletely states the question. Capital eschews no profits, or very small profit, just as nature was formerly said to abhor a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. A 10 per cent will insure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent will produce eagerness; 50 per cent positive audacity; 100 per cent will make it ready to trample on all human law; 300 per cent, and there is not a crime at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance of its owner being hanged.”
And who is to say what possibilities will be opened to German imperialism in the event of a victory in the war?
I am fully aware of the fact that the foregoing in no way exhausts this immense subject. But I have endeavored to show by examining various features of German economy both prior to and in the war, that while there have been changes in the character of economic life under the totalitarian regime, no fundamental departures from monopoly capitalism is observable.
Macdonald has produced nothing tangible in verification of his theory of the existence of a new social order in the Third Reich. All that he has done is to show measures of state control, state direction and planning as it related to the rearmament of Germany for the war and as it is operating in the midst of die gigantic conflict involving the future existence of imperialist Germany. His article not only does not indicate any basic reasons why the Marxist analysis of fascism should be altered; it does not add anything of fundamental value to the study of fascism in general or German fascism in particular.
ALBERT GATES.

Notes
1. See the article by Dwight Macdonald on Germany and the fascist social order in the last issue of The New International.
2. The absurdity of Macdonald’s position is nowhere better expressed than in the statement that Germany as a result of its current victories is importing capital rather than exporting it. Reference is had here to the destruction of industries in conquered countries, or the removal of machinery, etc., to Germany. Yet the dominant economic feature of the war is the suspension of normal economic activity.
3. Economic necessity, arising from Germany’s position in world economy, an inferior position, is translated by Macdonald as a proof of economic superiority. Germany with her immense industrial organization is doing what any other capitalist country, under like conditions, would be compelled to do.
 

Gates: Memoirs vs. Hitler (September 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Memoirs vs. Hitler
(September 1941)

From New International, Vol. VII No. 8 (Whole No. 57), September 1941, pp. 223–4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.

Ambassador Dodd’s Diary
by Prof. William E. Dodd
Berlin Diary
by William L. Shirer
published by Alfred A. Knopf, $3.00
SINCE the outbreak of World War II, the number of books written and published on Germany seems endless. In contrast to the comparative silence on the subject prior to the war, publicists, journalists, deposed Nazis, business men and others are now the loudest in their condemnation of Herr Schickelgruber and his murderous aides. Each puts down on paper his or her own particular piece of information, usually obtained in the dark of night, in dank cellars, darkened rooms, and vast crowds, from sub-secretaries, restaurants waiters, sympathetic janitors, tap-dancers, “persecuted” financiers and business men. Thus, the gossiper’s view of Germany has been widely circulated and much expert opinion is based thereon.
The diary form of interpreting current events in Europe is, likewise, a popular method of churning out books. There are a large number of these published and sold. More often than not, they, too, are completely unreliable. But now and then one or two, out of a veritable plethora of scribbling, have genuine value. Two books of such value are Ambassador Dodd’s Diary and Berlin Diary.
The two authors were “intellectually” anti-fascist prior to their stay in the Third Reich, the one a famous historian at the University of Chicago, for many years a student in pre-war Germany, an ardent New Dealer; the other, a seemingly sensitive journalist, strongly democratic and liberal.
Neither book is a seriously thought-out analysis of the nature of fascism, its historical place, or its significance in modern society. They are day-to-day reflections. Professor Dodd wrote of his horrified reactions to a barbaric regime from the point of view of a historian of pre-war Germany, and he sought to understand events historically. In sharp contrast, Shirer’s writing is that of a trained journalist who could sense important events and understand, in part, their significance in a collapsing world.
 
The Period They Describe
The importance of the two books lies in the material they contain. In large measure they support the Marxists in the latters’ analysis of fascism and the true nature of the present epoch.
There is a happy division of time between the Dodd and Shirer books. The Ambassador spent some four years in Germany prior to the outbreak of the war; Shirer was there immediately prior to the declaration of war and through a considerable period of the conflict. Their observations, therefore, dovetail somewhat, the one picking up where the other left off.
A large section of both books deals with the chicanery, the truthlessness, the feudal brutality and the cynicism which are inherent characteristics of fascist rule. The examples cited by the authors are sufficient verifications of the above charges, although in truth such verifications are repetitious. The labor movement for many years has supplied an endless series of such proof.
The books are important for entirely other reasons. They deal, throughout, with the following problems which have troubled, not only bourgeois democracy, but the workers’ movement as well: Is the phenomenon of fascism a “world revolution”? What is the significance of this revolution? Is fascism a new social order? What are class relations in Germany? These questions are not necessarily answered by the authors; they are constantly discussed, however, and both of them are highly confused. But in their confusion, and quite unconsciously too, they supply material which permits answers to all these questions.
 
Their “World Revolution”
The diarists are convinced that fascism implies a world revolution. But in the concepts of the authors, this world revolution does not mean a new economic and social order. What they really mean, since they are both products of the strongest bourgeois democratic nation in the world and thoroughly saturated with the ideology of bourgeois democracy, is that this is a world revolution of totalitarianism against bourgeois democracy. Dodd, for example, states in various places in his book, that he is not an economist and therefore does not understand the significance of many of the economic measures taken by the Nazis. On his part, Shirer admits that he is neither a historian nor an economist and therefore speaks without authority on these subjects.
Yet the importance in what they do write dealing with the economic characteristics of the Third Reich, is that they demonstrate that it is capitalist, undernourished, diseased, nonconformist, but capitalist, nevertheless. In the peculiar writing method of a diary, Dodd and Shirer show that no fundamental change has taken place in the economic order from that of other capitalist countries. There is greater control, higher taxes, bureaucratic interference and abuse, robber methods of expropriation and brutal exploitation, but withal, it is capitalist. Consciously or unconsciously, the authors show that the all-pervading aim of the German rulers in relation to economy was the preparation for war, the struggle for world domination. Of what? World markets, raw materials and colonies.
 
Preparing for War
They demonstrate this by tracing the development of German rearmament, illustrating how the Reich industries were totally confined to the production of war materials. In large measure, the conflicts in the ranks of the financiers and industrialists arose over this preparation for the war, the division of profits. The war economy, both diarists prove, was the basis for the economic revival of Hitler Germany. This whole development was accomplished, contrary to popular opinion, in the open. The Nazi leaders made no secret of their plans. It is true that they lied constantly and that lying is part of the fascist system, but behind the public front, every ambassador, consul, journalist, business expert, etc., knew what was happening in Germany, and what the rearmament of Germany implied.
Dodd, throughout his book, deplores the conduct of the British and French ambassadors. He shows their lack of cohesion, how often they were at sword’s-point, back-stabbing each other, the British supporting Hitler at a series of diplomatic crises, the French retiring in anger. He explains the endeavors of France to make a bloc with Italian fascism with the hope of getting at Great Britain in the Mediterranean through such an alliance. Dodd bemoans the manner in which both Great Britain and France sacrificed Loyalist Spain to both Germany and Italy. But this is already old stuff, treated with another pen and based upon information garnered through the diplomatic offices of all countries.
One thing stands out in the two books: Germany could have been halted in the very beginning had England given the French permission to undo the rearmament of Germany and the military reoccupation of the Rhineland. Shirer, for instance, describes the fear of the Nazi leaders and their preparations for flight in the event the French had marched. Actually, the remilitarization of the Rhineland was a gesture which could not have been upheld by Hitler had it been challenged. But in this instance, as in all others, the democratic powers not only permitted the resurgence of German arms, paving the way for World War II, but the Chamberlain government and its aristocratic supporters aided it in a number of ways.
 
The Fear of Socialism
What prevented action by England and France? In the final analysis it was the determination on their part to prevent proletarian revolutions in Germany and Italy, the fear of socialism. This, as the books point out, was not mere rhetoric on the part of the democratic diplomats. It was their all-consuming fear.
There are other secondary though not less interesting materials in the books which show how American business men, senators, congressmen and politicians flocked to Germany to study the new phenomenon, the new efficiency of “order,” “no strikes,” “static wages,” etc. All of them received their “training” in the true meaning of fascism and they were all “impressed” – especially with the industrial efficiency, which was based on the destruction of the trade unions and the workers’ political organizations. It wasn’t a matter of “trains running on time,” for as Shirer constantly points out there was a damned lot of inefficiency and bureaucratic red tape ,but admiration, a class admiration, arising from a hatred of the militant working class, personified at that time in the CIO movement.
The books are worth reading. They offer a graphic picture of the rottenness of current capitalist society. If apparently they deal only with Germany, they also picture, from another vantage point, the conditions in the other countries. One can observe, if only one has the eyes to see, how rotten, deceitful, wasteful, inefficient and dead is the bourgeois order under which we live. For it is bourgeois society the ambassador and and the journalist describe.
 

Gates: Burnham and His Managers - II (August 1941)






Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Burnham and His Managers – II
(August 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 7 (Whole No. 56), August 1941, pp. 175–9.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

(From last issue)
I BEGAN MY REVIEW of The Managerial Revolution by declaring that the Burnham theory is composed of half-truths assembled to fit a fantastic pattern unrelated to current social life. It is built upon a structure of assertions unfortified by empirical evidence and posited in such a way as requires the blind acceptance of his assertions in order to endorse his conclusions. It is my intention in this second review to evaluate the managerial society and discuss the future of socialism. There will be, naturally, a number of gaps in this criticism, but that is unavoidable. If we successfully answer the main theses, we shall, in fact, have replied to the hundreds of minor problems raised in the book.
Behind the facade of a strange combination of words, Burnham has woven a simple theory. If capitalism is doomed, and socialism is precluded as a theoretical and realistic social alternative, some new social order must take the place of the present profit economy. Burnham’s alternative social order, erected on the ruins of capitalism, and his belief in the impossibility of socialism, is the managerial society, in which the managers, through state control, become the inevitable owners of the instruments of production.
The proofs cited by Burnham to show that this revolution is in fact taking place, that it is world-wide and has been irrevocably achieved in Germany, Russia and Italy, and begun in the United States, we rejected as arising from a misconception of monopoly capitalism and a general failure on his part to appreciate economic theory and history. An intimate knowledge of the nature of monopoly capitalism might easily have demonstrated to Burnham that actually he did not prove much by his examples. We ate certain, however, that objective “scientific” proof is not precisely what Burnham sought. But let us see how it improves the position of the new society.
 
Property in Managerial Society
Consciously or not, Burnham’s description of capitalist property relations contains a key to his reasoning. Whenever he refers to bourgeois society he speaks of “control” of the instruments of production, and “control” of distribution. Why control and not ownership? Because it is an important link of Burnham’s theory that in present-day capitalism, recognizing the economic phenomenon of separation of ownership and control, he establishes a complete and universal separation of ownership and control, viz., a condition which automatically (at least on paper) insures the replacement of capitalism by managerial society. The state becomes the owner of the major instruments of production in order to avert perdition created by the chaos of bourgeois society. The managers, who have already become the dominant group in the state, in turn are now the dominant economic class. Thus are facts squeezed into a preconceived shape to fill the Burnham mold. On page 72 he writes:
The economic framework in which this social dominance of the managers will be assured is based upon the state ownership of the major instruments of production. Within this framework there will be no direct property rights in the major instruments of production vested in individuals as individuals.
The state – that is, the institutions which comprise the state – will, if we wish to put it that way, be the “property” of the managers. And that will be quite enough to place them in the position of the ruling class.
It is important to bear in mind while on this trip through fairyland, that the bourgeoisie does not merely “control” the instruments of production and “control” distribution, but that it owns the instruments of production and its owns and controls the means of distribution. This fact of ownership is decisive. Moreover, it has a decided bearing upon the problem of the way in which managerial society will come into being. Is the managerial revolution truly a social revolution? Is it an evolutionary change? Is it a social transformation directed by a state in the absence of cataclysmic social struggles? Burnham cannot clarify us because he does not himself know. Hiding behind repeated declarations that it is impossible to answer every question related to the managerial revolution, he evades the crucial problem of how this revolution occurs.
 
Burnham Writes a Revolution
Several propositions are “established” by Burnham: 1. The bourgeoisie merely controls the instruments of production and the means of distribution. 2. The managers are already in control of the governmental bureaus which have become the new instruments of state rule. 3. The state owns the instruments of production and therefore owns and controls the means of distribution. 4. The managers through their established preeminence in the new state have “enough to place them in position of ruling class.” 5. There will be “no direct property rights in the major instruments of production vested in individuals as individuals.” Property becomes collectivized state property controlled by the managers.
What, in the meantime, has become of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat? The bourgeoisie, we are informed, has been decisively defeated. Where it hasn’t already been defeated, it will inevitably suffer such a fate. The proletariat remains an exploited class in the new society. In so far as the social status of the proletariat is concerned, it has not been fundamentally altered. We are indebted to Burnham for at least this admission, since the continued existence of the proletariat created, in turn, a class relationship in the new society of the highest social significance. (Does it remain, in a managerial society, a proletariat in the accepted scientific meaning of the term? Burnham so implies, but gives no good economic reasons why.) For, even on the basis of the Burnham theory, whatever transpires, nothing really changes so far as the international working class is concerned.
But what of the bourgeoisie? There is, in truth, no problem for the simple reason that Burnham has postulated a theorem which cannot be proved since there are no facts to prove it. For example, in what country does the state own the instruments of production? In what country have the managers (as described by Burnham) assumed control of the state bureaus or governmental institutions? In what country is property state owned, collectivist and, therefore, nationalized? The answer is clear. The Soviet Union is the only country in which the bourgeoisie has been expropriated. There, the state owns property which has been transformed into collective property and nationalized. Managers direct the daily affairs of industry and agriculture, but not alone and, significantly enough, without political, power, since it is vested in Stalin’s bureaucratic regime. Moreover, the Russian manager is a specie quite different from the manager Burnham thinks and writes about. Burnham’s theory presupposes the existence of independent political and economic control of society by the managers, and this phenomenon, so far as we are able to observe, exists only as an abstraction. It bears no resemblance to society as it really is.
 
Once Again Our Examples
Let us return to the German, Italian and American examples. Perhaps we shall be more fortunate in new geographic surroundings. But here, too, the governments do not own the instruments of production; property remains bourgeois in every sense of the term. The managers do not control “the bureaus of the state.” They do not, as a matter of fact, exist or function in the manner described in Burnham’s theory of the managerial state. Property rights are vested in individuals as individuals.
In Germany, Japan and Italy, where the state actively intervenes in the production process, and in the United States and Great Britain, where the prevalent tendency is in the same direction traveled by the totalitarian states, you have the sharpest expression of what is an unavoidable stage in the development of capitalism. But even if the state power in each of these countries were to assume complete control of the production process, the capital-labor relationship would suffer no basic change. The very development of monopoly capitalism is the living antithesis of bourgeois democracy and laissez-faire capitalism. Monopoly capitalism, especially in the period of world economic decay, is the most important propelling force toward statification of politics and economics.
Thus, twentieth century capitalism is in a death struggle to survive. As a profit economy, i.e., a world economy circumscribed by private ownership of the means of production organized in national states, where the production and reproduction of constant capital intensifies an already existent insoluble contradiction inherent in the very nature of bourgeois production, there remains, at least in the eyes of each national bourgeoisie, one hope: world domination for itself as a means of overcoming the falling rate of profit.
Modern capitalism means permanent war and war means the total mobilization of society. Such a gigantic venture implies a fusing process between the compact monopolistic national bourgeoisies and their respective states. What is significant in this development is that the democratic nations now arrayed in a war alliance against the Axis merely follow in one measure or another the patterns already established in the enemy countries; i.e., extensive and intensive state intervention in the economic process in accordance with war requirements.
Again, this process, necessitated by the stagnation of bourgeois economy, has no relation to, nor in any way proves anything about, managerial society and the fantastic “revolution” created out of Burnham’s imagination.
 
Background to Burnham’s System
Yet it is not entirely true that the managerial revolution is merely a product of Burnham’s imagination. Burnham’s theory is an eclectic formation of ideas based on observing the variegated experiences of a proletarian revolution in Russia, fascist counter-revolutions in Germany and Italy, the insulated development of Japan, and current developments in England and the United States. Thus, from the Soviet Union, Burnham arrives at the property forms of the managerial society. The fascist states furnish the key to his description of political life in the new society, although in this respect he seems not altogether sure since he is strongly influenced by his bourgeois democratic environment as an inhabitant of the United States. But so far as the economic side of his theory is concerned, he borrows essentially from the Soviet Union.
It is with the Soviet Union in mind that Burnham writes on page 182 that “The managerial state does not have to make a capitalist profit.” Naturally, if the new society is not capitalist, it would not “have” to make a capitalist profit. But it would have to make a profit, whatever its description, since it rests upon the exploitation of the proletariat, as does capitalism. In the Soviet Union, the proletariat produces surplus products which are appropriated by the bureaucracy. The bureaucracy is an élite class in Russian society and enjoys the fruits of Russian labor. It is true that the Russian state does not have to make a capitalist profit, but it indeed does make a profit and must necessarily make one, otherwise its existence as a bureaucracy under Soviet production relations would be farcical. But Burnham’s example was intended not solely for Russia, not primarily for Russia, but for Germany. And there too, he stands on quicksand. For Russian economy bears not the slightest resemblance to German economy where the basic institutions of capitalism remain intact. Burnham’s point, in any case, is without significance. Profit or the lack of it does not itself alter the economy.
As further evidence of Burnham’s essential confusion, we quote from page 156:
In managerial society, however, politics and economics are directly interfused; the state does not recognize its capitalist limits; the economic arena is also the arena of the state. Consequently, there is no sharp separation between political officials and “captains of industry.”
If this is a description of managerial society, it is also an accurate picture of present-day capitalist society. Perhaps it will be said that, in any case, in managerial society, “the state does not recognize its capitalist limits.” I confess that I do not know what is meant by this statement. What is a capitalist limit and what capitalist nation is impeded in its actions by this limit? That the Soviet Union does not recognize “its capitalist limits” is clear, since it is not a capitalist nation. But, for example, what capitalist limits has Germany exceeded, and what are the limits respected by Great Britain? This essential characteristic of managerial society is hardly impressive or elucidating as a description of the new social order.
 
Managers, Bureaus and Capitalism
The managers differ from the capitalists on how to run economy? In what way? It is not clearly or satisfactorily explained. Yet this is a crucial point. Will there be planned production? Or, more accurately, is there genuine planned production in the existent managerial states? Hardly! Again, is it the innate desire of managers to keep production on a high level and to seek to constantly raise that level? For what purpose? Obviously, it is not to raise the level of existence of the proletariat. Burnham acknowledges that. Is it to increase the wealth and riches of the state or to increase the wealth and riches of the managers? A very important question! Burnham refrains from an explanation, or what explanation he does make is based entirely on metaphysical considerations.
On page 150, the professor says:
The social position of the managers is buttressed in the bureaus both against the claims of the capitalists and also against the pressure of the masses, neither of which groups can function effectively through the bureaus.
We have already pointed out how the state acts in the interests of the total national capital irrespective of how its acts may interfere with or affect the position of the individual capitalist and especially the middle class. This is so patently borne out in the present efforts of the United States to erect its powerful war machine. At the same time we acknowledge that the masses cannot “function effectively through the bureaus,” precisely because the bureaus are instruments of the bourgeois state, functioning in the total interests of the bourgeoisie. The bureaus, a plethora of which exist under the Roosevelt government, are obviously a means through which the bourgeoisie functions. One who cannot see this simple truth can hardly represent himself as an authority on the progression of social orders, new or old. In this instance, Burn-ham repeatedly alludes to the “bureau” development in American government as the concrete expression of the inexorable victory of managerial society. We do not recognize any theoretical or practical reason why this development is contradictory to bourgeois society, nor do we observe how the existence of this “phenomenon” is contradictory to the existence of the bourgeoisie as the dominant class in society. The assertion that it is proves nothing. In this instance, again, the facts contradict the theory.
 
Capitalists in Managerial Society
In consideration of all the foregoing, why do not the fascist regimes in Germany and Italy once and for all rid themselves of the bourgeoisie? Why do they tolerate this expensive parasitic class which only interferes with their plans and is in truth a nuisance? Why, indeed!
The answer is not hard to find. The fascist regimes are bourgeois regimes, formed in the period of the deepest world capitalist crisis whose historic aim is the maintenance of bourgeois society through the only means possible and arising on the basis of concrete national conditions. The fascist movements are not social revolutionary movements. They do not think or act in a social revolutionary way. They do not have a great theory, a world social aim. Difficulties which beset them are solved empirically and from day to day. In other words, they are never truly solved. They do not know anything else but capitalism; their thoughts and their aims are bourgeois. The great striving of this “wave of the future” is to build a strong nation based upon arms, to vanquish the enemy so that the fatherland may be strong and prosper on the ruins of the defeated. Thus, no great social plan emanates from this movement. What we do observe is the fruition of an inherent tendency of monopoly capitalism which is by its very nature totalitarian and anti-democratic. Thus the real victors under fascism are big business, the heavy industries, the fascist elite, which enrich themselves by means of thievery. This is especially so in Germany, where the fascist pinnacle is notoriously ignorant of economics and history. They cannot conceive of a world without the bourgeoisie and without the proletariat, production without profit, an enslaved peasantry, a militarized youth, and war as a means of enriching the fatherland. They are incapable of envisaging an enormous historical role such as is ascribed to them by Burnham.
 
Socialism and the Future
We have reserved a discussion of Burnham’s views on socialism for the end of this review because it leads to a fulsome summary of his managerial ideology and explains many things about the manner in which he developed the whole theory of the new revolution.
The basic premise for Burnham’s exclusion of socialism as the next possible alternative to capitalism is the failure of socialism to succeed, the uninterrupted defeats it has suffered. It would be futile, of course, either to deny these defeats or to brush them aside as insignificant lapses in the onward march of the proletariat to power. The salient fact remains: reaction is in the ascendancy. There are, indeed, many ways of interpreting this truth, depending, naturally, upon one’s class point of view. The revolutionary socialist, as a social scientist, strives to examine the reasons for the protracted defeats suffered by the world proletariat, in order that the mistakes committed by its movement may be averted and victory achieved. Burnham, the anti-Marxist, proceeds with another measuring rod: success.
In speaking of the failures of the socialist movement, reformist and revolutionary, he writes, on page 55:
This fact [the defeats] does not, as some think, prove anything about the moral quality [sic] of the socialist ideal. But it does constitute unblinkable evidence that whatever its moral quality, socialism is not going to come.
This is proved by the fact that it has been defeated in all tests engaged in with the bourgeoisie, except one, and there the revolution degenerated (or developed?) into managerial society.
This observation is accompanied by the statement that:
Socialism is not possible of achievement or even approximation in the present period of history (p. 48).
The proof? Again the USSR, which is not socialist but is the most advanced managerial state. If managerial society has succeeded best in the country believed to be laying the basis for socialism, then you have the most conclusive evidence of the future of this new social order. If socialism were really to replace capitalism, why hasn’t it already done so? It hasn’t because socialism is impossible – at least for many, many decades. Or, it is an impossible social alternative because it has not won any victories.
Burnham, however, must be aware that this kind of thinking and reasoning is not very profound, enlightening or “scientific.” Following a series of statements anent the “grander scientific pretensions of Marxism” which “have been exploded by this century’s increases in historical and anthropological knowledge and ... scientific method,” Burnham proceeds to “prove” why socialism is impossible.
 
The Role of the Proletariat
At the outset of his discussion of this question, Burnham writes (page 58):
(a) The rate of increase in the member of workers – especially the decisive industrial workers – compared to the total population, has slowed down and in the last decade, in many nations, has changed to a decrease.
The statement is made to buttress the argument that socialism is impossible. One of the reasons why it is impossible is that, contrary to the opinions of the Marxists, the proletariat, that class which is to overthrow capitalism and establish socialism, is declining absolutely and relatively. This, if a fact, would have profound effects upon the movement for socialism. Yet, upon what facts does Burnham sustain this conclusion. If he means that in the midst of the world crisis of capitalism the number of proletarians, measured by those employed, declined, this cannot be gainsaid. But that is hardly the way to determine the extent of the proletariat as a class.
However, by no matter what measuring rod the professor employs, he cannot prove this assertion. Here as elsewhere, no facts are cited. What has happened in the present era of the war is that the ranks of the proletariat are increasing. The longer the war lasts – and war has become a permanent feature of bourgeois economy, as Burnham himself admits – the greater will be the demands put on industry and the greater will be the need for industrial workers, i.e., proletarians. This is borne out by events in Germany, Great Britain and above all in the United States. In each of these examples, the problem has been one of obtaining sufficient labor supply. In all the warring countries, and in the United States, great projects for the training of workers have been organized to maintain a continuous influx of trained proletarians into industry. The growth of the proletariat in the leading bourgeois nations is a fact of utmost significance and importance.
Following this misrepresentation, Burnham adds another. On page 51, he writes as follows about the prospect of the socialist revolution:
There has been a corresponding change in the technique of making war, which, since social relations are ultimately a question of power, is equally decisive as a mark of deterioration in the social position of the working class.
On page 53, he adds:
Just as the new techniques of industry weaken the general position of the workers in the productive process as a whole, so do the new techniques of warfare weaken the potential position of the workers in a revolutionary crisis. Street barricades and pikestaffs, even plus muskets, are not enough against tanks and bombers.”
We do not propose to spend a great deal of time in answering this obviously conscious and malicious attack on the Marxist concept of the socialist struggle for power. Suffice it to say that the assault has no merit.
No Marxist living in the 20th century has ever declared it was possible to seize power by the pikestaff or the musket. Burnham knows that the Marxist concept of power was never so simple and narrow. Moreover, the conditions of world imperialist war solves this problem far more simply than Burnham can possibly imagine. (I refer our readers to the articles by C.D.E. in the May and June issues of The New International for a discussion of this question.)
As an additional reason why socialism is impossible, the professor writes on page 51:
The workers, the proletarians, could not, by themselves, run the productive machinery of contemporary society.
Here again, we do not feel required to enter into a lengthy discussion of what the proletariat is or is not capable of achieving by itself. It is only necessary to add that the proletariat (the socialist revolution) has never conceived of the productive process, upon the victory of the revolution, as being run by the “proletariat itself.” Two questions are thrown together here – one the struggle for power, the other, the organization of production on a socialist basis. The proletarian power envisages a joint effort on the part of all groupings, a fusing of their collective talents for socialist purposes.
What Burnham really means by the above is this: the productive process is an intricate one. Only the managers by their technical and scientific training are capable of directing production – thus, the future really lies in their hands. Only they can achieve the miracle by reducing the proletariat to veritable slavery.
What should one do or say about this new managerial society, since it is an exploitative society, a war society, subjecting other nations and classes to a new form of exploitation? According to Burnham, nothing! It is coming, no matter what is done. On page 153 he says:
Our business is not to judge it good or bad, not to express likes or dislikes, but to analyze it in its relation to the problem of what is happening to society.
Is it a progressive social development? Burnham will not answer this, although he implies both, that it is and is not! Shall anything be done about it? Nothing can be done about it since it is ... inevitable!
Thus are new societies born in the minds of men.
The realities of social development in the present epoch, however, do not sustain Burnham’s theory. That is one good reason why he avoids facts as a foundation, or as a proof of his numerous fantastic declarations.
The one salient fact of the present era of capitalism, no matter what country one may turn to, is the existence of the proletariat. It is the existence of the proletariat as a living class, that is the nub of the entire situation. All bourgeois states fear it – despite its many defeats. Roosevelt and Churchill, Hitler and Mussolini, never cease their appeal to the workers of their respective countries. Each is lavish in his promises of the great future that is theirs if only they slavishly carry on production to make possible victory in the war.
Above all, they each promise a new social order after the war. And the social order which they each promise is either “socialism,” a more equitable society, a happy life, or democratic equality. Why this constant deference paid the proletariat? Because each of these rulers, the democratic as well as the fascist, realizes that in the larger sense, their future is dependent upon what this class does. If Burnham does not understand this, at least the real rulers of capitalism do and they understand far more and far better than the cloistered professor.
As long as the proletariat remains the future is not hopeless. Socialism and freedom are truly ahead.
 

Gates: Chicago Primary Candidates Avoid Main Issues (February 1939)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Chicago Primary Candidates Avoid Main Issues
(February 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 5, 4 February 1939, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

CHICAGO, Ill. – Another primary contest to select mayoralty candidates representing the two major parties is under way here.
The democratic nomination is being contested by Mayor Edward J. Kelly, co-leader of the Cook County machine, and Thomas J. Courtney, present state s attorney, erstwhile aid of the Horner down-state machine, and the darling of the Chicago Daily News and the “better” business elements.
The “regular” candidate for the Republican nomination is Dwight Green, young, vigorous, and the “Young Republicans” man. Big Bill Thompson, denied the “regular” nomination, is running as an independent. He has his own machine, so many times routed but never destroyed.
 
“Draft Ickes” Campaign
A “draft Ickes” campaign threatened for a time to complicate the primaries. Chicago’s perennial political reformers, Professors Merriam and Paul Douglas, began the Ickes boom in much the manner of the first LaGuardia fusion campaign. They rallied all the Chicago liberals and their movement grew daily.
The Stalinists and their mouthpiece, the Chicago Daily Record (pronounced “Wrecker” in many places), became at once the most active drafters. The paper carried daily dispatches from Washington on the latest doings of Honest Harold, as true a liberal as ever graced God’s country, and certainly the equal of LaGuardia.
But – Ickes refused to run. Roosevelt demanded his presence in Washington; he could not be spared in this critical period for the Roosevelt administration.
 
What About Programs?
Programs are of little importance in the race. Kelly speaks of increasing government costs, and praises his administration for keeping such costs to a minimum. Efficiency, honesty, and above all return “services” – an economy candidate.
Courtney is for low-cost city government. A crusader against the gangster and the gambler, he has been hacking away at gambling joints for almost a year. As state’s attorney, he already has a powerful machine behind him. Unfortunately for him, however, his downstate allies and his Cook County friends cannot help in this local election. Governor Horner, head of the state machine, is conveniently ill, and has been silent about the primaries. And Courtney needs his aid!
Dwight Green also demands honest government, an economical administration. He too is an ardent crusader against crime. He stands as the man who put Capone behind bars, having been federal district prosecutor during the Capone trials.
Big Bill Thompson is against all the machines, especially the Republican machine which prevented his nomination. He stands for economy in city government, and for an unrelenting war against crime. Like the others, he promises to take politics out of the school. The humor in this threat lies in that not so long ago, when Big Bill was mayor, the school treasuries were found to have been looted.
But, above all, he is the man of the people. Big Bill is only for a defensive war, consequently he is sponsoring an anti-war referendum which would prevent Con-
gress from voting on entering a foreign war. But his main trouble is that he cannot be heard. The press is deliberately silent on the doings of Thompson. It will remain so until the campaign actually gets started, for once it begins he will be smeared as richly as he deserves.
 
What About Relief?
None of the candidates has a statement to make on the issues that really concern the Chicago workers. Relief, W.P.A., the sales tax, the right to picket, the right to organize in unions without police interference, are not so much as mentioned by these advocates of good city government.
Kelly is head of the administration which is responsible for the Memorial Day Massacre. A local politician, with a nominal salary, he owns a $50,000 Florida home, an Eagle River estate worth more than that, and a large Chicago home.
Courtney has with impunity raided union offices, fought the C.I.O., and was part and parcel of the local administration until he joined the Horner forces in the 1938 elections. His aide-de-camp,
Captain Jack Gilbert, of the Chicago police force, has just been indicted in the Milk Trust cases, and is a well-known labor-baiter. Big Bill’s reputation is too well-known to need much comment. Corrupt to the core, he is regarded as a poor fourth in the campaign, and yet he may become the surprise candidate.
Green is typical of the resurgent Republicans. A complete reactionary – he stands for cutting relief rolls, and slicing relief.
The Stalinists have withdrawn their candidate. They are committed to supporting the Democratic party, but are writing critical editorials about Courtney. Conclusion: they will support Kelly! Did he not attempt to settle the stockyards strike peacefully? The Memorial Day massacre was the result of a little flat-foot enthusiasm for which Kelly must not be held responsible. After all, they were defending property, and the Stalinists are now firm defenders of private property.
The Chicago section of the Illinois Labor Party has not yet announced its position.
 

Gates: Union Leaders Help Kelly Get Close Victory (April 1939)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Union Leaders Help Kelly Get Close Victory
Chicago Mayoralty Poll Shows Trend from New Deal
(April 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 23, 11 April 1939, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


CHICAGO. – In a record vote totalling 1,478,637 ballots, Mayor Kelly was re-elected over his Republican opponent, Dwight Green, by a small plurality of 183,000 votes. A great outpouring of independent votes and the support of Courtney votes gave the Republican candidate an amazing total of 637,107 ballots. So close was this vote that it appears clear that had a state election been held, the Republicans would have swept such an election and placed a Republican governor into office.
The enormous Republican vote is explainable in a general way as a reaction to the incumbent office holders. Despite the efforts of Chicago’s labor organizations and the Communist Party to depict the struggle between the two candidates as a struggle between progress and reaction, the New Deal and old guard Hooverism, it is clear that no such sharp distinction was accepted by the mass of voters. Insofar as such, a distinction was accepted, it was limited to the ranks of organized labor.
 
New Deal Losing Favor
There is no doubt that Roosevelt’s popularity is waning. At least, this seems to be the case in Illinois, and to a considerable extent in Chicago. The New Deal is having a hard time convincing the people that it has actually brought about a permanent improvement in the condition of the broad masses.
It is true, that Green received his great vote primarily in the Gold Coast wards, the districts inhabited by the small home owner, the white collar worker and small business man. But it would be false to assume that in his more than 600,000 vote no workers or unemployed votes could be counted. It would be just as false to conclude that all of Kelly’s 800,000 votes were workers’ votes. And that is so even granting that a majority of the workers cast their ballots for the Mayor.
It must be borne in mind too, that Kelly was publicly acclaimed and supported by wide sections of the financial and business interests, the department store magnates, reactionaries, as well as by the trade unions and the liberals.
 
Labor Support Helps
One element swung the election in Kelly’s favor. We refer to the active and militant support rendered to him by the A.F. of L, the C.I.O., Labor’s Non-Partisan League, the liberals and the Communist Party. While the latter is no great shakes as a vote getter, the fact is that the trade union movement in this city does control or manipulate almost a quarter of a million votes. Therein lies the margin of victory (or possible defeat) for the local Democratic machine, If Kelly can thank anyone for his victory, he can thank organized labor.
The crying need of the workers is an independent political party of the workers. Had there been such a party, it could no doubt have gained a number of aldermanic seats, especially in those wards which are predominantly worker and where the machine candidates were elected solely on labor support.
We know, of course, that the labor skates and the Stalinists will at once reply that an independent labor party would have led to the defeat of Kelly. That would have merit only if the re-elected mayor was a workers’ candidate, or that it would matter a great deal to the masses whether Green or Kelly took office.
Essentially, however, there is no great choice between the one experienced political hack and the republican new-comer. Fundamentally they are both capitalist candidates notwithstanding that Kelly came out against W.P.A. and relief cuts and Green said nothing; that Green came out for the Dies committee and Kelly said nothing; that Green came out in favor of lower taxes and Kelly said little; that Kelly defended his “economy” regime and Green claimed he could economize still more, or, that Kelly stood on his record as a “good” mayor, and Green had no record.
One must remember that the Civil Liberties Union stated there was little to choose between the two candidates in their attitude toward the matter of civil liberties, trade union rights, picketing and so forth.
In the parliamentary field, in Chicago, as well as in the nation, the great task still remains: to break the masses away from the two major capitalist parties. Independent political action of the workers suffered a blow in this election through the action of the labor organizations, the Stalinists and the liberals. It is necessary to sharply reverse this situation before the workers can progress on the political field.
 

Gates: Labor Skates Back Mayor Kelly in Chicago Primary (March 1939)







Glotzer Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Gates
Labor Skates Back Mayor Kelly in Chicago Primary
C.P. Paper Boosts Man Responsible for Steel Strike Massacre
(March 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 13, 7 March 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





Since the article printed below was written, Mayor Kelly has won the democratic nomination in the primaries. As explained in the article, Mayor Kelly’s nomination, which in Chicago is equivalent to election, was aided by the combined efforts of the labor skates and the Stalinists.



* * *
As the Chicago mayoralty primary draws to a close it appears more certain now that Mayor Kelly will win the Democratic nomination and Dwight Green the Republican.
The campaign of Bill Thompson is almost non-existent, and in addition to the silence of the press in respect to his candidacy, he is certain to lose.
In the Democratic fight, however, during the early days of the campaign, Tom Courtney was conceded an even chance to win over Kelly.
 
Labor Skates Back Kelly
What has turned the tide? The intervention of organized labor in support of the mayor. The active campaign in behalf of Kelly now carried on by both the A.F. of L. and the C.I.O., the latter through Labor’s Non-Partisan League, has become little short of a scandal.
Within the last two weeks the labor-skates in the Kelly-Nash-Arvey machine have finally succeeded in rallying a large number of local unions to their support. Every day a new list of labor unions who have endorsed Kelly is published. The Executive Committee of the Chicago Federation of Labor through John Fitzpatrick has denounced Courtney publicly and called upon the organized labor movement to support Kelly.
 
Forget Steel Massacre
Labor’s Non-Partisan League pursues the same policy as the A.F.L. Kelly’s conduct during the massacre of the striking steel workers in 1937 has been completely forgotten. No more mention is made of the fact that during the great wave of sitdown strikes in Chicago, it was Kelly’s police who broke them up by a concerted campaign of brutality toward the strikers. In the first weeks of the primary, L.N.P.L. did not openly advise voting for Kelly, but they did tell the workers not to vote for Courtney or Green. As the voting drew near this straddling position gave way to open exhortations to vote for the regular democratic machine ticket.
Finally, there is the Communist Party and its mouthpiece, the Mid-West Daily Record. Its conduct is far more scandalous than that of the labor-fakers only because its pretensions are mightier. Passing off as a working class party the C.P. plays the game of labor’s misleaders with a great deal more experience and finesse than its union counterpart.
The Chicago Stalinists have their own mayoralty candidate in the person of Jack Johnston. This is an outright piece of fakery since his candidacy is more a matter of form than anything else. Aside from a speech or two made by him in his own favor, few know that he is a candidate. The Daily Record hardly mentions his name since all space is devoted to Mayor Kelly.
Heretofore the C.P. and the Daily Record, following a nationwide practice, without in so many words calling for support of Kelly, denounced Courtney as an enemy of the New Deal, progress, peace and democracy. It is true that Kelly was at all times pictured as the champion of all that is progressive, honest, virtuous and beautiful. It was discovered that he is labor’s champion, the enemy of reaction and the business interests. By inference, Kelly was presented as Roosevelt’s man. And this was strengthened by biographical sketches showing that some twenty-five or thirty years ago Kelly had actually worked for a few weeks. Need one have any more proof that Kelly was the friend of the working man?
But on Feb. 28, the Daily Record published its special local election issue and no longer equivocated. Kelly, the murderer of striking steel workers, was “labor’s choice” and the labor movement was called upon to cast its vote for him. The issue contained paid ads of Kelly candidates. Column after column was devoted to praise of his machine and his aldermanic candidates. In addition to the paid ads, the Daily Record published a list of its own selections of “labor’s” candidates and almost the entire list was culled from the Kelly-Arvey-Nash machine.
The Daily Record has been experiencing financial difficulties and its campaign for sixty thousand dollars has been falling far short of its mark. Yet good copies of this special Kelly issue were distributed free! Reliable information has it that the Kelly machine paid for this issue!
In addition, it has been reported, that hundreds of Kelly’s precinct captains have been compelled to subscribe to the Daily Record! There, no doubt, is the pay-off. This fact is borne out by precinct captains who visit workers’ homes carrying copies of the Daily Record. They exhort these workers to vote for Kelly on the ground that he is labor’s friend and labor’s candidate. The proof is in the numerous columns devoted to Kelly in the Daily Record!
 
Plays Ball
All in all it is a happy arrangement between the infamous Kelly-Nash-Arvey machine and their Stalinist bootlickers. Kelly no doubt realizes that in his fight against Courtney he requires every possible vote and he is prepared to play ball not only with the trade unions but even with the Stalinists. He wants their backing because it may mean the margin between victory and defeat – and, he is prepared to pay for it. There is no doubt too, that the Stalinists received this little remuneration, no matter in what form it is given, because it fits in perfectly with its pattern of betrayals of the working class.
The great task of the workers in Chicago, as elsewhere, is the establishment of a strong party of their own, an independent labor party, representative of its interests.
 

