

There can be few doubts that genuine socialists in Kinnock’s Labour Party are currently under great pressure to conform with the right-wing leadership or to shut up. Many of those who remain in the Labour Party despite these pressures do so in the belief that their party has been fundamentally a socialist party, and that the socialist roots can once again bear socialist flower and fruit. Central to this belief in an earlier golden age is the figure of James Keir Hardie, the leader of the party at its foundation. The conditions then seemed ideal – the party had not been corrupted by the power of government, it had few MPs and even these were not bought off by lavish salaries, since MPs were not paid at the time.
In Hardie the Labour Party had a leader who had risen ‘from pit to parliament’, a man known as the ‘Member for the Unemployed’ and ‘the man with the cloth cap’. He was a tireless and financially incorruptible campaigner for Labour Party politics. Even his exit from this world seemed tinged with socialist martyrdom, since he died broken-hearted at the outset of war. So it is no surprise that the Labour left of today should admire him, and that Militant should write of those years:
The Labour Party was originally founded to represent the interests of ordinary working people in parliament. It was constructed out of the sweat and sacrifice of tens of thousands of workers. These early pioneers were prepared to work without any thought of personal gain, devoting money and energy too building up their party. Of the giants – Keir Hardie [was] perhaps the most famous ...
[1]
But the remarkable thing about Hardie is that his memory is revered by the right wing of the Labour Party in equal measure. As a recent biographer has put it:
The very phrase ‘If Keir Hardie were alive today’, was guaranteed to restore even the most fractious delegates [at Labour conferences] to comradeship and unity. Left and Right could be reconciled in recognition of a common tradition ... Hardie served as a touchstone of an earlier, purer tradition ...
[2]
When he died, Sylvia Pankhurst, soon to be criticised by Lenin for being wildly ultra-left, called him: ‘the greatest human being of our time’, [3] while Ramsay MacDonald, right-wing party leader of the 1920s, described him as ‘the Moses who led the Children of Labour in this country out of bondage’. [4] Equally Phillip Snowden, who, as Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer in MacDonald’s National government, pursued the most orthodox imaginable monetarism fifty years before Healey rediscovered it, said of Hardie: ‘He was not the politician, but the prophet and the seer. Compromise was not in the man’s nature. He was the unsparing iconoclast ...’ [5]
This article will use the example of Keir Hardie to explore four fundamental questions that face socialists in Britain today: (i) Was the Labour Party ever part of a revolutionary tradition, and what was the nature of its early politics? (ii) The Labour Party was always a party with broad working-class support. What did it mean in practice to be a ‘party of the working class’? (iii) Did the Labour Party grow out of working-class struggle and did the class turn to it when they advanced? (iv) What was the position of the left in the party and was it ever likely to seize the leadership?
 
Mysticism, religion and opportunism
For people used to the scientific analyses of Marxism, Hardie’s political ideals are difficult to grasp, not least because they kept changing. This is the definition he gave in 1894:

Socialism leaves every man free to hold what 	religious views he pleases, to worship God as his conscience may 	dictate ...
 
Socialism is not the abolition of the family life 	from the home circle. If it was, I would be opposed to it.
 
Socialism would leave every man free to spend his 	earnings as he pleases, only he could not invest them and thereby 	become a burden on his fellows by living at their expense.
 
Socialism would give every opportunity for the 	development of industry and mechanical invention, as they were found 	to be necessary for the well-being of the community.
 
Socialism would make the land and industrial 	capital of the nation common instead of private property, and use 	them in enabling everyone willing to work to earn a living ...
 
Socialism, by banishing wealthy competition would 	give men the chance to grow into the image of God ...
[6]

That definition might seem a bit vague. After all the Labour Party has always prided itself on being a practical body, unlike we unrealistic revolutionaries. Hardie explained what socialism meant when he spoke in Perth during 1904:
... in Perth steps had been taken in the direction of socialism, for here they had Corporation tram cars, and he was pleased to see that the Municipality supplied water, gas and electricity ... That was what was meant by socialism.
[7]
Given such definitions it is not surprising that academics argue over if and when Hardie became a socialist.
While his conversion to socialism is of an uncertain date, his conversion to Christianity can be precisely dated to 1878. It was indeed a conversion, for Hardie’s parents were committed and active agnostics. The importance of Christianity to Hardie’s politics cannot be too highly stressed. He said ‘time and again that the impetus which drove him first into the Labour Movement and the inspiration which carried him on in it “has been derived more from the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth than from all other sources combined ...”’ In his Texts for Speakers: A Few Hints, he wrote: ‘As a basis on which to develop a Socialistic system of thought, let me recommend the first four books of the New Testament.’ [9]
This religiosity was no joke. The spiritual world played a direct part in Hardie’s activity! He attended seances with his lifelong companion, an ex-Salvation Army leader, Frank Smith. At one of these, spirits no less eminent than the Scottish Bard, Rabbie Burns, came back from the grave to help him decide how to vote on Gladstone’s Home Rule for Ireland Bill. Hardie arranged to communicate with Frank Smith after his death, and, according to Frank Smith contact was indeed made.
Hardie’s eccentricity soon attracted the attention of the Daily Mirror reporters, then, as today, always hot on the track of the essential news stories: ‘His most marked characteristic is his love of animals. He is often to be seen stopped to talk to a horse in the street.’ [10] Such behaviour might seem strange until we realise the obvious – Hardie believed in reincarnation and that lost souls might return in the shape of animals.
While the source of Hardie’s socialism seems intangible and its positive arguments obscure, Hardie was absolutely clear on what was not included in his vision: ‘Socialism was not bloody revolution, it was not throwing bombs, not upsetting very seriously the present thoughts of men ...’ [11]
His analysis of capitalism was that ‘capitalism is the product of selfishness.’ From this it follows that ‘selfishness is by no means a monopoly of the rich ...’ [12]
This conclusion led him to demolish the idea of class itself, and above all of class struggle:
The working class is not a class; it is the nation. This being so, it is a degradation of the Socialist movement to drag it down to the level of a mere struggle for supremacy between two contending factions. We don’t want ‘class conscious’ Socialists ...
[13]
If there are no classes and no class struggle, but only selfishness, then there is no reason why capitalists should fear socialism. Thus in one speech to businessmen Hardie said:
I would like to say most respectfully that your business and your property are nearly as bad for you as poverty is for the working class. For you as well as for the worker, Socialism comes with its message of hope and emancipation. Why you should want to fight Socialism I do not know.
[14]
What a shame Rupert Murdoch did not hear this speech!
Yet Hardie was capable of strong fighting talk. In 1905 he sent a telegram to the unemployed of Manchester who had rioted:
Hearty congratulations. The spirit of the Peterloo massacres is again upon the authorities. So too is the spirit of revolt ... Neither bludgeons nor prison can destroy it. As our fathers won then, we shall win now, if only we have their pluck. Fight on.
[15]
Hardie was even prepared to claim Marxism as his own when it suited him, though he also criticised it for lacking ‘human feeling’. Every issue of the Labour Leader, the newspaper he created and edited for ten years, carried a front page article written under the pen-name ‘Marxian’. In 1909 when the Labour left attacked him he wrote: ‘The Labour Party is the only expression of orthodox Marxian socialism in Great Britain’ and quoted someone who saw it as ‘coming up completely to the lines laid down by Marx’. [16]
Clearly we will not get very far if we approach Hardie as a precise political thinker.
But it is all too easy to poke fun at the chief speaker of the National Pleasant Sunday Afternoon Movement who claimed inspiration from Jesus Christ, Karl Marx, Doctor Doolittle and the Ghostbusters, all at the same time. For Hardie was an extremely shrewd politician. He was the central figure in the foundation of three historic parties – the Scottish Labour Party, the Independent Labour Party and the modern Labour Party. After the First World War Labour Party leaders were quick to pay tribute to the cohesion of the organisation he created. On the Continent mass Communist breakaways, inspired by the Russian revolution, shook reformist parties to the roots. In Britain, however, the Labour Party was not only able to ride the revolutionary storm with minimal losses, but provided the organising centre for the new reformist ‘Socialist International’. Part of the credit was indeed due to Hardie. His Labour Party did not depend so much on reasoned political principles around which arguments and splits could easily occur, but on the trade union bureaucracy which was not subject to the same political divisions as Communists and Social Democrats abroad.
Hardie’s total lack of political consistency was no accident. As he put it: ‘The strength of the party largely lies in the fact that no time is wasted in internal wrangling over what the policy shall be.’ [17] A completely unprincipled political flexibility complemented his absolute and total consistency on one issue. He told an interviewer:
You ask me to state what I consider to be the question ... upon which organised labour ought to concentrate ... I reply: in making preparations to increase the number of Labour Members in the House of Commons. This, to me, is the question of questions.
[18]
It was this belief in capturing Parliament as the source of all power and progress that drove Hardie on, enthusing him and his audience at the hundreds of meetings to which he trekked tirelessly year after year.
Obviously we cannot understand Hardie’s ideas nor the central role he played in the British labour movement if we look upon him simply as a well-meaning crank. His religiosity, distaste for clear political thinking, and his fudging of class divisions, reflected deep currents in British history. In the 1920s Trotsky gave a brilliant explanation of the trends that dominated the intellectual make-up of the British labour movement for much of the time. At the root of everything was the early, but very gradual growth of capitalism. As a result ‘the Reformation and the bourgeois revolution happened close together in time [which] held back the work of critical thought in relation to the church.’ [19] So the first revolutionary movements such as the Levellers and the Diggers expressed their ideas in religious form. The absence of a clear break with religion meant that the mixing of social movements and the churches continued right into the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Hardie was not the only labour leader to have religious leanings. Tom Mann almost joined the priesthood at one stage. A.J. Cook began as a lay preacher, as did Arthur Horner, the leading Communist miner of the 1920s. Even today we find Tony Benn talking of ‘Christian socialism’ and see Heffer and Kinnock in attendance at church services.
By the same token, sharp class divisions have been systematically smoothed over and blunted through much of British history. After Cromwell’s revolution the bourgeoisie merged itself with the aristocrats it had risen against: ‘The revolutionary upheavals of the 17th century were profoundly forgotten. In this consists what is called the British tradition. More than anything else the British bourgeoisie is proud that it has not destroyed old houses and old beliefs, but has gradually adapted the old royal and noble castle to the requirements of the business firm ... and it laid down from above upon its proletariat the heavy lid of cultural conservation.’ [20]
Trotsky sums up his argument like this: ‘the richer, stronger, mightier, cleverer, firmer a bourgeoisie has proved to be, the more it has succeeded in holding back the ideological and consequently the revolutionary development of the proletariat.’ [21]
But this hold on workers’ development was not unbreakable. Despite the weight of ‘the British tradition’, genuine class struggle could break through the veil of superstition and political vagueness. This is clear from the Chartist movement of the 1830s and 1840s. Chartism grew up after the industrial revolution had disturbed Britain’s ideological slumber. It generated a number of powerful revolutionary thinkers, whose arguments foreshadowed many of Marx’s. The most outstanding of these leaders was Bronterre O’Brien, the ‘Chartist schoolmaster’.
Compare his political outlook with that of Hardie’s a full half century later. On religion O’Brien wrote: ‘no rich man believes in religion of any sort except as a political engine to keep the useful classes in subjection.’ While Hardie believed the root of capitalism was personal selfishness, O’Brien had this to say:
We do not accuse the moneyed capitalists of intentional robbery ... These spoliations they commit, not from sinister design, but from accidental position in society; or rather the spoliations are committed for them by the silent operation of causes over which they have no control under the existing arrangements of society.
On the idea that rich and poor have a common interest O’Brien replied:
Don’t you believe those who tell you that the middle [i.e. capitalist] and working classes have one and the same interest. Hell is not more remote from heaven, nor fire more averse to water, than are the interests of the middle from those of the productive classes.
Finally, O’Brien repudiated the belief that the government was the seat of all power:
Everybody seems to think that the Government makes itself what it is, when the real fact is, that the Government is made by the profit-men to protect them ... Is it the Government who make the laws, or is it not, on the contrary, the great profit-men who make them to enrich themselves and then have the Government to execute them?
[22]
In spite of the great quality of Chartist ideas and of its movement, the sustained expansion of British capitalism after the 1840s killed off the workers’ political party. All the ideas that O’Brien and later Marx put forward seemed to be confounded. Many British workers, though by no means all, shared to some degree the wealth created when this country was ‘the workshop of the world’. The idea that the state was the tool of capitalists, or that workers and bosses had opposing interests did not seem to accord with reality, and many British workers could boast of secure employment and a comfortable existence when their more revolutionary-minded counterparts on the Continent fared rather worse.
The period from 1850 to the 1880s saw the complete divorce of politics and economics in workers’ minds. Workers who had the vote usually backed the Liberals, who openly stood for free enterprise and big business above all else. Yet economically many workers were organised into strong craft unions. The division of politics and economics has never been challenged by the Labour Party. Nevertheless, we shall see how Hardie’s politics represented a partial break with the total class collaboration in political affairs that had existed since the demise of Chartism. But, alas, Hardie did not return to the Chartist tradition. The Labour Party he founded rejected the Liberal Party as a vehicle for change. Yet Hardie’s ideas were still indelibly marked by the conservative trends that Trotsky described in the British labour movement, of religiosity and the blurring of class conflict.
To understand the roots of Hardie’s politics we must look at his early life.
 
From union bureaucrat to Labour MP
James Keir Hardie was born illegitimate in the tiny Lanarkshire village of Legbrannock in 1856. He grew up in grinding poverty, starting work at the age of eight and going down the pit two years later. There he worked for 16 years, during which he taught himself to write on slates blackened with smoke. He had at least one very narrow escape from death when a pit shaft closed up above him. At 17 Hardie joined the religious temperance movement of the ‘Good Templars’. Soon, however, rank-and-file miners at his pit chose this sober and articulate youngster to represent their demands to management. The result was dismissal: ‘We’ll hae no damned Hardies here’ was the manager’s comment. He was not able to work in the mines again.
So far what has been described could be applied with minor variations to any number of rank-and-file pit militants before and since. But now something happened that radically broke the pattern. Hardie became a full-time official. Alexander MacDonald, hardworking but thoroughly ‘moderate’ leader of the Scots miners was on the look-out for level-headed teetotallers to hold responsible posts in the union he was rebuilding. He picked Hardie to organise the Hamilton area of Lanarkshire.
At the time there were two fundamental approaches to trade unionism. Even across the distance of a century they are easily recognisable as ‘new realism’ (which is in fact a very old and tired form of class collaboration) and the path of mass militancy. Hardie’s policy for Scottish mining fitted firmly into the former. It went by the name of the ‘wee darg’, which meant restriction of output. By selecting well-organised pits for such action it was hoped to raise the local price of coal and so, by increasing individual coalowners’ revenues, to reach agreement on the raising of wages. This selective action, by encouraging one employer to negotiate concessions, might lead others to follow suit. Hardie’s vision of trade unionism was summed up in the rules of the Ayrshire Miners’ Association which he drafted. In them he looked forward to: ‘that good time when Capital and Labour shall meet together under one roof tree, to smoke the pipe of peace, and as the smoke slowly ascends it shall carry with it into oblivion all the sense of discord that ever existed.’ [23]
But two factors meant that the policy of the ‘wee darg’ was doomed to failure. Scottish coalowners combined together to defeat the workers, and railway transportation of coal obliterated local price differences. So Hardie’s policy could neither force the separate coalowners to negotiate, nor affect local prices. The obvious alternative was a general strike offensive. Though difficult to accomplish, mass action stood the only real chance of success.
At the end of 1879 Hardie was drawn into a stoppage by Lanarkshire miners. He proposed a plan of limited strikes to a mass meeting but was greeted with jeers and derision:
In vain he pleaded that only one week of strike action had cost the district union four hundred and fifty pounds in strike pay. The men shouted back their defiance. They would stay out till the grass grew on the pit winding gear. In the end the meeting voted to carry on the strike ... and to pay no more financial contributions to the Lanarkshire Miners’ Union ...
[24]
From the first Hardie was a wily tactician, and when he saw the way the wind was blowing he threw his energies into regaining the men’s confidence by energetically leading the strike. Hardie was now found at the head of a vigorous picketing campaign, and arranging for potatoes on credit from local shopkeepers. Ultimately the union lost, though this episode was long remembered as the ‘tattie strike’.
Within a year of defeat Hardie was again actively discouraging strikes. Unionism would be built by peaceful methods and sober behaviour. Its weakness was, according to him, that too many lacked morality: ‘Why is it that there is so much bare poverty still in the land ... To my mind the answer is clear as the noonday sun. The people are pouring [money] down their throats in intoxicating drink.’ [25] But Hardie’s drift to the right was checked by his position as a full-time union official. As such he had to both keep at the head of, and control, workers’ agitation. This aspect was well demonstrated in the Scottish Miners’ Federation which he set up in 1886. Within a year it was dragged into a major strike movement. But as fast as Hardie sent one section back to work another came out. Riots occurred at Blantyre. Again Hardie quickly moved in to organise mass pickets against the large-scale scabbing that threatened not only the livelihoods of the miners, but the future of the union apparatus itself. Right-wing union bureaucrats may often be so divorced from rank-and-file agitation that it slips from their control. The left-wing official, such as Hardie, may be no less a bureaucrat; but he or she will do everything to keep workers within the ‘proper’ channels. When militancy bursts out of these, they lead the fight in order to keep it within the bounds of official methods.
The 1887 strike was a far greater defeat than the ‘tattie strike’ and for Hardie it represented a turning point. Within two weeks of its termination he wrote: ‘We want a new party – a Labour Party pure and simple.’ [26] Hardie’s idea of the Labour Party was born at this time not as a result of workers’ rising self-confidence, but as a result of a lack of self-confidence because a broad movement had suffered defeat. As we shall see later, Hardie’s personal experience and political evolution in 1887 would be mirrored by a whole generation in the 1890s.
The relationship of Labour politics to working-class struggle was expressed in Hardie’s attitude to the demand for the 8-hour day – the major industrial issue of the time. He had no hope that the miners could win this by their own struggle. This lack of faith in the working class led him to look to the bourgeois state for remedies:
... it has become necessary to protect men against themselves. They have not the sense to know when their day’s work is over ... The miner finds it next to, if not quite, impossible to continue an 8-hour day without outside help and he therefore looks with confidence to Parliament ...’
[27]
In the late 1880s Hardie adopted that diluted form of socialism which equated workers’ emancipation with state nationalisation and which the Labour Party came to espouse in time. Although ‘co-operative production under state management’ was the goal, Hardie, as we saw, set little store by political clarity. Indeed it was an obstacle, because the aim was to grab votes from any source and by any means. The Labour Party he wanted to see: ‘will be Conservative enough to preserve everything that is good, Liberal enough to reform what is capable of being reformed; and Radical enough to uproot and destroy whatever is altogether wrong ...’ [28] The message was clear and would be hammered home again and again. Never mind the politics – get workers’ representatives into Parliament and all would be well. Hardie was developing from a trade union bureaucrat into a reformist politician.
In 1888 he stood at the Mid-Lanark bye-election as an independent workers’ candidate. Hardie had not planned it that way. He had tried strenuously to get the Liberal nomination but failed. This failure convinced him that the Liberal Party was an unreliable instrument for promoting the interests of trade union officials like himself. He refused to withdraw his candidature despite hefty bribes and offers of alternative constituencies, because he did not want to appear a pawn of the Liberal Party, which only accepted workers’ representatives on sufferance. Hardie polled 8% of the vote at Mid-Lanark. The same year he founded the Scottish Labour Party. Although this meant an organisational separation from the Liberals, apart from the small print in the constitution, the Scottish Labour Party did not represent a break with Liberal policies in general. It meant adding a number of limited reforms, such as the 8-hour day, to the list of Liberal demands which in no way challenged the existence of capitalism.
In 1892 he did succeed in becoming MP for West Ham South. Here we can detect the hand of divine providence. If Hardie had had to run against both Liberals and Tories he would doubtless have failed. But the Liberal candidate was kind enough to commit suicide, so Hardie had a straight fight against the Tories, and by attracting the Liberal vote, he got in.
Now came his greatest feat of political shrewdness. He turned up at Westminster not wearing the customary silk hat and black suit, but ordinary clothes! The press was in uproar. It matters little that on his head was a deerstalker hat, the ‘legend of the cloth cap’ was born. Hardie had discovered how to attract workers’ admiration, and appear to be striking a blow for the class, without making a single political commitment, or in this case uttering one syllable. He was later to polish this technique and it became a hallmark of his style. It was at this time he also acquired the reputation as ‘Member for the Unemployed’, by his persistent questions on the issue in the House of Commons. In fact he was only asking for the establishment of ‘land colonies’ where the unemployed would be set to work and not be a burden on the community, but that aspect did not attract so much attention as his criticisms of the government.
 
The ‘new unionism’, the ILP and the origins of Labourism
‘New unionism’ In 1893 Hardie chaired the founding conference of the Independent Labour Party. Its origins paralleled his own career. In 1889 the comparative peace spread by years of capitalist growth and the old ‘realism’ of trade union officials was shattered. A movement known as ‘new unionism’ sprang up. It represented every tactic that the old unionists feared. The match-girls’ strike, the organisation of gasworkers and above all the 1889 London dock strike symbolised the movement. The latter used the mass self-activity of previously unorganised workers to drive the class forward. The hallmarks of the new unionism were mass picketing and the spreading of action as widely as possible, both geographically and across industries. The prominent demand for the 8-hour day showed that the movement was not just concerned with wages but the quality of daily life for the workers. Its leaders often came from the Marxist Social Democratic Federation (SDF). In 1890 the attitude of Mann and Tillett, two of the most prominent leaders of new unionism, towards parliament was crystal clear:
all our public utterances, all our talks to our members, have been directed towards cultivating a sturdy spirit of independence ... In fact, we have been at pains to discredit appeals to the legislature ... The statement that the ‘new’ trade unionists look to governments and legislation is bunkum; the key-note is to ORGANISE first, and take action, in the most effective way ... instead of specially looking to Government.
[29]
Neither Mann nor Tillett were political theorists and their ideas were very fluid. But at the height of the new unionism they were clearly groping towards a form of revolutionary syndicalism in which parliament was not of importance. They even hinted at a sort of workers’ council organisation centred on the Trades Council. This would become:
London’s Labour Parliament, nothing less, where every affiliated union having a difficulty could turn to for, and obtain, real and substantial help ... Our contention is that at least 500,000 of London’s workers might be organised in bona fide labour organisations, that these might be affiliated to the London Trades Council, and that if this were so an enormous change for the better would soon come about ... if London properly sets the pace in true labour matters, Britain generally will soon follow on, and when Britain leads the way, Europe and America won’t be far behind.
[30]
Soon, however, the wave of new unionism, which had swept the entire country in 1889 and 1890, was being driven back. The bosses used lockouts and organised scabbing to recover their ground. New union membership plummeted, and as it did so the officials sought to keep their organisations alive by the bureaucratic method of negotiation and avoidance of strikes so common to the old unions. As defeat followed defeat many workers, and the new unionist leaders, began to lose faith in the policy of ‘sturdy independence’ in working-class struggle. The route taken was very much on the same lines as the post mortem after the 1984–5 miners’ strike. Can the forces of the state be beaten? Can trade unions afford to defy laws passed by parliament? In our time a small minority, including the SWP, have concluded that defeat came because there were not enough mass pickets, that the bosses’ law and order was not fought on a broad enough basis. But that small minority did not exist in Britain in the 1890s. The two principal revolutionary groups – the Social Democratic Federation and the Socialist League – were too sectarian to get involved in union struggles or help the mass of workers learn the lessons.
The shift in the thinking of new unionist leaders like Mann and Tillett can be precisely dated. They repeatedly turned down offers to stand for parliament in the summer of 1891. In June Mann wrote: ‘the belief is quite sincerely held ... that Parliamentary action is desirable as a substitute for unionism . . . how absurd this view is.’ [31] But in September Tillett willingly accepted nomination for Bradford. Without the intervention of a revolutionary party the growing numbers of workers looking for a solution to their problems turned to the capitalist state rather than to struggle against it. The logic of the parliamentary road also made sense to those trade union officials who had been touched by the excitement of ‘new unionism’ but lost faith in mass self-activity. One example of this mood was the President of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers. Reflecting on his union’s strike for shorter working hours a few years before, he wrote:
When you consider the enormous amount of money expended and the suffering such a strike must bring ... also the ever recurring enormous expense to maintain those men ... I still think that had the Legislature passed an enactment for the nine hours’ day, the whole of that misery and expenditure would have been saved the worker and his union.
[32]
The turn from workers’ direct struggle towards the path of parliamentary change was the basis for the formation of the reformist Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1893. Mann, the anti-parliamentarian of 1889 soon became its Secretary. He and thousands of new unionists with him had shared the same experience as Hardie. If the working class had not shaken its chains there would have been no basis for the new party. But it was only when the class lost confidence in its ability to break those chains by its own efforts that it looked to some outside agency for salvation.
The new unions were the first mass organisation to back independent labour representation in parliament. But this institution was not to be used as a propaganda platform from which to denounce the system and encourage extra-parliamentary action. It was a substitute. For in the words of H.H. Champion, who preceded even Hardie in campaigning for a Labour Party: ‘If we can get what we want through Parliament, it is folly to wave the red flag in Trafalgar Square’. [33]
The relationship of reformist politics to workers’ struggle was revealed clearly in West Yorkshire where the ILP held its founding congress. This area provided one third of the delegates to that congress. A brief wave of new unionism had swept through the hitherto unorganised woollen workers, but it was driven back by a vicious 5-month lockout at the Manningham Mills in Bradford. Union organisation was smashed. But when a bye-election came along in late 1891 the Liberal candidate was Illingworth, Bradford’s largest employer and close friend of the owner of the Manningham Mills. A number of workers organised together and stood Ben Tillett as a Labour candidate. They were enraged to see leading TUC members campaigning for the big businessman Illingworth. A strong movement for workers standing on an independent Labour ticket for parliament was born as a result of this combination of struggle followed by defeat of self-activity.
 
The origins of Labourism It is essential to understand the context in which Hardie’s grand plan worked itself out. Since Chartism the British working class had had no political organisation to call its own. In the period after 1850, workers had come to accept bourgeois values so thoroughly that the ruling class was prepared to give them the vote – first to the better off workmen in 1867 and then to all male householders in 1884. These workers were quite willing to see local businessmen, even their own bosses, speaking for them in parliament. In an expanding capitalism it was easy to imagine that what was good for your boss must be good for you.
Occasionally trade union leaders were elected to parliament, but most of them ran on a Liberal ticket and so were known as Lib-Labs. (Tory MPs who were trade union officials were not unknown.) Such people hated the idea of solidarity on the industrial field, and their hostility to even the most mild of parties standing independently of the two major capitalist parties was equally great. As the Webbs put it:
The leaders, indeed, did not really care about Trade Union influence in the House of Commons ... In national politics they were mostly Liberals with the strongest possible admiration for Gladstone and Bright; or else (as in Lancashire) convinced Conservatives, concerned to defend the Church of England or Roman Catholic elementary schools in which their children were being educated or carried away by the glamour of an Imperialist foreign policy. They asked for nothing more than a few working-class members in the House of Commons, belonging to one or other of the ‘respectable’ parties.
[34]
These trade union leaders were a reflection of the post–1850 period. Even the campaign for forcing an 8-hour day from parliament was opposed by leading ‘old unionists’ on the grounds that this ‘would be a wrench which trade and commerce could not possibly bear ...’ [35] The same attitude went for wider representation of Labour in parliament. At the founding conference of the Labour Party, John Burns, once leader of the 1889 dock strike but now a firm Lib-Lab, declared himself against such a party because ‘he was tired of working-class boots, working-class trams, working-class houses and working-class margarine’. [36]
The stranglehold of such characters over the TUC and labour politics was broken in the last two decades of the century by the deepening crisis of capitalism. British employers now had to face formidable competition from rival capitalists in Germany and America. They were forced to attack their own workforces to a greater degree than before. The illusion that the interests of the worker and his or her immediate boss were identical was put under strain. This did not mean that workers immediately generalised from that feeling to say that the whole state apparatus, nationalism, and the rest of the baggage of capitalist ideas were now to be discarded. But the idea that the local representative to parliament should remain the leading employer in the area lost its attraction. Had local Liberal parties adapted to the changing mood, the ILP and Labour Party might never have come into being. But Liberal machines were too bound up with local self-interest and ‘jobs for the boys’ to adopt what they saw as scruffy workmen for candidates, even if these scruffy workmen agreed with most Liberal policies. Ramsay MacDonald, like Hardie, was converted to Labourism when his Liberal candidature was snubbed. Many workers who had supported the Liberals noted this sort of occurrence becoming more frequent.
Clearly the idea that Labour should have its own representatives was an advance for the British working class. The Lib-Labs represented complete identification of workers and the employing class. The Labour Party idea stood for a public break with this tradition. It would be totally ultra-left and sectarian to ignore the great importance of this development. Reformism is not the same as reaction. Equally, there is no sense in arguing that Keir Hardie blocked some kind of pristine Leninist alternative that might have existed in Britain at the turn of the century. The only revolutionary organisation that did exist at that time – the Social Democratic Federation (SDF) – was dominated by H.N. Hyndman, whose sectarian and anti-union attitudes meant that the revolutionary movement was in no position to attract a mass following, even if conditions had been less unfavourable.
With these qualifications in mind we must still recognise the early Labour Party for what it was. The fight for independent labour representation was certainly a hard and bitter struggle against Lib-Lab backwoodsmen. But it was not a struggle for socialism, which, if it means anything, involves challenging the capitalist system of society. It was a campaign within the terms set down by the system when it granted the vote to workers.
Hardie revealed as much at the ILP Conference of 1893. He readily accepted the long-term aim of the party being ‘common ownership’ of production, yet at the same time fought very hard to prevent the new organisation being called a Socialist Labour Party. Soon he was battling with all his might, and using every trick in the bureaucratic book to prevent unity with the openly socialist Social Democratic Federation in ‘One Socialist Party’. Wasn’t his position hopelessly contradictory?
For genuine socialists it was: they do not think you can achieve socialism by mentioning it in the small print but doing everything possible to exclude it from daily practice. But the opportunist faces no such problem. Socialism may be the final aim; but pretending to be merely ‘Independent’ is a much better vote-catcher. Hardie was proud of his opportunism:
[The ILP] is avowedly a Socialistic organisation and has been so from the first. But a great merit it possesses is that of enlisting to its aid at election time men who though not yet Socialists themselves agree with the Independent political action of the ILP on Labour questions ... They are in most cases men with no strong bias for or against Socialism, and do not trouble themselves much about it ...
[37]
Hardie’s ‘independence’ was a sham. In reality he was attempting to combine two hostile political trends. To understand what he was doing it would be useful to remember two very important statements by Marx; first that ‘the emancipation of the working class is the act of the working class itself, and second, that ‘the prevailing ideas in society are the ideas of the ruling class’. There are three possible attitudes that can be taken in regard to these statements. One would be to conform entirely to the prevailing ideology. This is the position of the Tory worker who shows deference to the boss. Another would be to fight for the emancipation of the working class and against the ideas of capitalism (especially in regard to the state). This is the position of the revolutionary. The third approach, which Hardie adopted, was to mix elements from both sides. Thus he called for a separate party of workers but fought against a straight commitment to fighting for socialism. He set bourgeois parliament above all else, but denounced the capitalist system and the unemployment it created.
At the 1895 general election Hardie lost West Ham South. The ILP generally found its progress checked and entered a period of demoralisation and decline, yet just five years later the Labour Representation Committee was set up. This became the Labour Party in 1906 with an established parliamentary base. What had brought about the change? Working-class activity had very little to do with it. As historians of the trade union movement have noted:
From 1899 to 1907 there was a period of industrial peace unparalleled between 1891, when strike statistics started, and 1933, when a comparable period began ... The annual average of working days lost through disputes was less than three millions, and in no years was the total as large as five millions. By contrast ... from 1908 to 1932 there were only six years scattered over the whole period, showing a figure less than five millions, and the annual average (excluding 1926) was fourteen millions.
[38]
Again it was a retreat of the working-class movement that forms the background to the growth of Labour politics. It is also in such periods that the power of the trade union bureaucracy is greatest vis-a-vis the rank and file. Changes at the bureaucratic level explain the emergence of the Labour Party itself. It was a shift of opinion within the TUC that gave Hardie the basis for his political initiative. The prospects did not appear favourable until the very end of the century.
Hardie first attended a Trades Union Congress as a miners’ official in 1887 and was soon embroiled in a flaming row with its Secretary – Henry Broadhurst, old unionist and Liberal MP. The dispute centred on the 8-hour day. Hardie proposed that the TUC undertake a political campaign in favour of having parliament pass a Bill. The old guard wanted such political issues kept out of the industrial arena. For Hardie to raise politics in the TUC was a daring and progressive step. But the manner in which he did this is significant. He did not argue in favour of building up the workers’ collective strength, but actually played upon its weakness as a point in his favour: ‘He wanted to put this plain question to those who opposed the Parliamentary action proposed – “What do you propose to do instead?” If they said “Organise”, he replied, “You have tried it for 40 years, and what have you got? You have done your best and you have not secured ... even a respectable minority of the people of this country”.’ [39]
At the time Hardie and his supporters made little headway. In fact the old guard soon reorganised the TUC in such a way that from 1895 political representatives (such as Hardie had now become) along with Trades Councils, were excluded from its meetings. The block vote was also introduced to give the large reactionary unions of coal and cotton greater power in the Congress. Yet Hardie’s arguments were soon victorious.
Defeats such as the catastrophic Scottish miners’ strike of 1894, the boot and shoe lockout a year later and the engineers’ lockout of 1897–8 explain why the TUC was prepared to promote a parliamentary party in 1899. The period was rounded off by a number of legal attacks on the unions which showed the extraordinary confidence of the ruling class in the face of a quiescent workforce. The Taff Vale judgement is the best-known of these. By making unions responsible for damages incurred on employers during a stoppage it became virtually impossible to strike without jeopardising union funds. With the Liberals refusing to recognise the urgency of the unions’ plight, Hardie was able to use this period to win over a substantial portion of the union bureaucracy.
But his arguments had a popular appeal too. The following extract from his ‘Friendly Chat with the Scottish Miners’, written after 70,000 of them had been literally starved into submission in 1894, shows his remarkable skill in using workers’ aspirations for changing their situation, and yet playing on their feeling of impotence after a defeat:
MAKING THE MINES PUBLIC PROPERTY
... before you can bring this state of things to pass you first have to do something you have not yet done ... During your strike the Tory workmen and the Liberal workmen stood shoulder to shoulder. Why? Because their interests were the same ... Why should these two be found in opposition camps at election time?
SO LONG AS THE WORKERS ARE DIVIDED, THE RICH IDLERS WHO ROB AND PLUNDER THEM ARE SAFE ...
I want to see you together ... If you want to abolish strikes you will join the ILP.
[40]
The Machiavellian quality of his logic stands out well when contrasted with this cruder, but more honest version of reformist politics in the following week’s Labour Leader:
The Scotch coal strike which to all appearances has ended in the utter rout of the men, has nevertheless been a great victory. For whom? For the Labour movement ... The result of the bitter experiences of the last 18 weeks has been the decision of many miners to ... throw in their lot with the ILP ...
[41]
In the following year came the defeat of the boot and shoe workers centred in Leicester. This helped Ramsay MacDonald become the local MP shortly afterwards, since it channelled votes towards reformist politics. At the time the Labour Leader drew this conclusion: ‘The men have been defeated. That is the long and the short of it ... [But] the municipal election the other day in Leicester shows that the men have learnt their lesson well.’ [42]
This does not mean that Hardie’s politics were in opposition to the trade unions. He was a reformist, not a reactionary. The ILP, like the Labour Party that followed, depended on a living labour movement to provide it with votes. That is why Hardie always insisted on the need for trade unionism, but in a moderate form that would not compete with the parliamentary process. In many strikes he argued that ILP members take collections. During the engineers’ lockout he went so far as to suggest a general strike to defend the existence of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, a most important union. But this strike was not intended as an alternative to reformist politics. It was to be officially controlled and kept within narrow economic bounds. In this as in all else Hardie was sincere and consistent in his policies – but these were thoroughly reformist.
For Hardie the trade unions were invaluable as defensive economic organisations. But they should never attempt to be offensive political bodies. Trade unionism could defend wages, it was not to challenge property rights. Thus he insisted that ‘the workman who robs his “master” is robbing himself of that which even his “master” could never take from him – his manhood.’ [43]
The relationship that Hardie sought with the trade union movement, and which was later achieved, was described by Trotsky: The Labour Party and the trade unions – these are not two principles, they are only a technical division of labour.’ [44]
 
The union leaders and independent Labour representation
The period in which the Labour Party was formed was one in which the union bureaucrats called the tune in the movement. And in even greater numbers they chose the path offered them by Keir Hardie, of reversing Taff Vale not by direct action but via the parliamentary road. To finally win them over Hardie had to prove that the new party would be perfectly safe for them.
First he routed the ILP rank and file. The membership accepted that change must come by reformist methods, but they were also keen that change should be in a socialist direction. In other words they took the ILP constitution and left rhetoric of Hardie and his like seriously. They therefore clamoured for unity of the left (including the Marxist SDF) and for the ILP to stand as an openly socialist organisation with its programme of collective ownership of production to the fore.
ILP conferences had decided time after time for socialist unity. The results of a ballot announced in 1899 showed 2,397 votes in favour of unity by federation, and 1,695 for unity by direct fusion with the SDF. It had not even been considered worthwhile to ask if anyone was against unity. Keir Hardie and the rest of the ILP National Administrative Council ignored this decision until the prospect of the alternative alliance with the trade union bureaucracy could be held out as a carrot to the membership. Once this was in prospect he wrote:
The work of bringing ... trade unionists into line is no child’s play. Great tact and forbearance are both needed, and care has to be taken not to give the opponents of the movement any real reason for continuing to oppose it ... [Unity with the SDF] would speedily make shipwreck of the ILP ...
[45]
Hardie’s delivery of the ILP’s muddled but sincere socialists into an alliance dominated by the needs of the trade union bureaucracy was one of the high points of his career. When this arrangement was challenged by the ILP in 1909 it provoked his most vigorous political statement – My Confession of Faith in the Labour Alliance.
The impotence of the rank and file within the ILP was inevitable once the majority accepted the parliamentary road to socialism. The weakness of the left in both the ILP and the Labour Party had little to do with its numerical strength. David Howell, historian of the ILP, has explained how the ILP leaders imposed their will on the rank and file, the majority of whom were far to the left of the National Administrative Committee (NAC). The source of the NAC’s power was acceptance of the electoral road:
When seats were contested, the results were often disappointing and financially damaging. One legacy ... was to strengthen NAC insistence on its own control of such contests ... The NAC responded by proposing that one of its representatives take sole charge of financial matters during any by-election, that if the original grant had to be supplemented then authorisation of the Parliamentary Committee was required, and that any by-election agents should be appointed by the same committee.
[46]
Even if finance had not been a problem for running candidates, the NAC would still have a stranglehold over the rank and file. Since even the most left ILP members agreed that the road to socialism lay through the nationalisation of the means of production via Acts of Parliament, the parliamentarians of the party could dictate to the rest. On 23 April 1901 at 11.30 pm Keir Hardie put a motion proposing the complete takeover of production and distribution before the House of Commons. Alas the emancipation of the working class had only half an hour, since proceedings ended at midnight and so the motion fell. Keir Hardie said he would be back to try again! This was perhaps a joke to the Tory party who had a safe majority in the House. But to the ILP membership, who set such store by parliament, such procedures were of central importance.
The means to getting Hardie’s motion passed had to be by obtaining the votes of a majority of workers at election time. Under capitalism the majority of workers are influenced by capitalist ideas. Only through their own struggle and by an agenda set by workers’ self-confidence rather than the parliamentary order book, can they change their ideas and society as well. However, if you accept the timing as decided by parliament, and the terrain to be the constituency ballot, which is so far removed from the direct class struggle, then you accept that winning votes takes first place. In other words, the socialists in the ILP were hostages of the backward ideas held by the majority of the working class. That was why Hardie won over the choice of name for the ILP, on socialist unity and so on. Furthermore, as long as Hardie made a show of earnestness towards the goal of socialism through the House of Commons, he kept the idea of the parliamentary road alive. In a period of working-class passivity the illusion was all too easily maintained.
 
The founding of the Labour Representation Committee The establishment of the Labour Representation Committee was not the result of mass activity but of a resolution passed at the 1899 Plymouth Congress of the TUC. The resolution showed that Hardie had convinced a substantial section of the union bureaucracy that the socialist elements in a new party would pose no threat to their wheeling and dealing. The motion Hardie put at the founding conference of the Labour Representation stated his attitude clearly. The intention was to establish:
a distinct Labour Group in Parliament ... which must embrace a readiness to cooperate with any party which for the time being engaged in promoting legislation in the direct interest of labour, and be equally ready to associate themselves with any party in opposing measures having an opposite tendency.
[47]
This wording was carefully chosen. No specific political programme was suggested beyond advancing the cause of labour. The SDF delegates, who wanted a political commitment to class struggle mentioned in the LRC’s programme, were thus neatly brushed aside. At the same time Hardie’s motion blocked the right-wing officials who wanted to limit any new body to the single issue of fighting Taff Vale, and once this had been achieved, re-entering the Liberal fold. This was why a ‘distinct Labour Group’ was specifically mentioned.
In addition to this non-committal resolution, Hardie built in a union bureaucrat majority on the LRC’s National Executive Committee. The ILP, SDF and Fabian ‘Socialist Societies’ had only five of the 12 seats. The Marxist SDF soon quit the new organisation in disgust.
Affiliation to the LRC began with the ‘new unions’ which had long been committed to parliamentary representation although they accounted for only one-tenth of TUC members at the time. With them came the Boot and Shoe Union, still shaken by its defeat, and the Railway Servants, who were the first to feel the effects of the Taff Vale judgement on their funds. Other unions soon followed.
It might be argued that the trade union bureaucracy could have formed its own party, but linking up with the political force around Keir Hardie had one great attraction. It had nothing to do with the ILP’s socialist programme which the majority of union officials disagreed with. It was simply that the unions were organised sectionally into trades. The ILP offered the proposed Labour Party a leadership which transcended separate groups and therefore could attract the votes of all the different workers.  
Evidence that many affiliations to the Labour Party were determined by electoral expediency rather than political convictions comes from the two major industrial groups – coal and cotton. The Miners’ Federation was by far the most important union at the turn of the century, in terms of membership, influence and electoral power. It was the last big union to affiliate. The rejection of the Labour Party until 1909 was on purely pragmatic grounds. Because miners were geographically concentrated, they could elect their own MPs without depending on any broad alliance appealing for workers’ votes. The cotton unions were if anything to the right of the miners in politics. In Lancashire there was a strong working-class Tory tradition and James Mawdsley, a cotton union leader, had been a Conservative MP. Yet the cotton unions affiliated before the miners because they lacked the electoral weight of the pit villages. As the Cotton Factory Times put it: ‘no single branch ... is numerically strong enough of itself to elect a member of Parliament. The aim of the [Labour Representation Committee] is to combine the whole of the Labour forces. This will add strength to candidates.’ [48]
The LRC and later the Labour Party served as the political expression of the trade union bureaucracy. This may seem paradoxical, for in one sense the TUC bureaucrats wanted to ‘keep politics out of the unions’. They wished to be free to do their jobs of negotiating workers’ pay and conditions. Politics were an unwelcome intrusion, whether they came from the left or the right. Left-wing militancy was feared because the rank and file might unite across sectional union boundaries and fight for something more than the better wages which bureaucrats promised. Equally, right-wing intervention from the state was feared since this disturbed free collective bargaining. In 1900 this right-wing threat was paramount in the shape of the Taff Vale decision, which made the work of the union bureaucracy well-nigh impossible. So it is no exaggeration to say that the union officials accepted Hardie’s plan for a party to fight state intervention in unions, because this would keep politics away from their affairs. The aim was to keep politics and economics separate.
Labour Party policy had been defined by Hardie in this simple phrase: ‘Our party is neutral ground.’ [49] If the road to power was electoral, and the majority of workers currently voted Liberal or Tory – then the Party must not repel any worker who held Tory or Liberal views! Thus in 1906 Hardie described the Labour Party as ‘a new platform on which both Liberals and Conservatives could meet to fight together on exactly the same lines as they were fighting in a strike.’ [50] There is one big difference between a strike and a ballot box. The former is the direct activity of workers for their own interests. Through struggles workers learn about the system and their own power to change it. The ballot box is used by reformists as a substitute for self-activity, and thus serves to maintain the hold of capitalist ideas. When Hardie talked of his party being ‘neutral ground’ he was talking nonsense. There is no neutral ground in capitalist class society, and to suggest that there is means in practice capitulating to ruling-class ideas.
This was soon borne out by the LRC. Its very first annual conference took place during national mourning for the death of Queen Victoria. Here was a woman at whose behest armies had smashed and plundered their way across half the surface of the globe. Yet to show respect for her the two-day conference was cut to one day and a planned demonstration in support of the LRC was abandoned. Keir Hardie, who had long identified himself as a republican and acquired a useful notoriety as a result, again managed to blur the issue. His attack on the fuss made about Queen Victoria consisted of deploring the presence of soldiers at the funeral: ‘I enter my protest against the barbarous display of the bloodthirsty implements of war, amidst which the remains of a peace-loving woman will today be laid to rest.’ [51]
The Hardie technique was used with effect during the Boer War. All his biographers point out that he opposed the war. He even denounced it as a fight deliberately engineered to boost capitalist profits. But every bold statement had to be compromised lest it release emotions the Labour bureaucracy could not contain: ‘... the war ... would result in our losing South Africa (a cry of “Good Job”). No; it would not be a good job. He did not want to see one bit of British territory lost, for he believed that by a strong federation of free people the British Empire could be an immense power for good.’ [52]
When Hardie went on a world tour the British press was filled with reports that he was spreading sedition in the colonies. Again his position was paradoxical. He denounced the racism he met in South Africa and was nearly assaulted by a mob for his pains. Yet when he arrived in Australia he declared that: ‘The experiment in keeping Australia white is a great one ...’ [53] In India he appeared on platforms chanting the nationalist slogan of ‘Bande Mataram!’ But when he got back home he explained why he criticised British methods of rule. Along with his obnoxious and patronising tone, his motives were clear:
Those natives were kindly, affectioned, well-meaning, responsive to sympathy, having no higher ambition than to live loyal under the British Flag, were being treated as pariahs ... The people there would be loyal if they felt that their grievances were being acknowledged and redressed, but repression ... would produce that feeling of hopeless despair which bred discontent and disloyalty and menaced the safety of the Indian Empire ...
[54]
The glaring contradictions in Hardie’s position were not the aberration of one man; they reflected, and still today reflect the contradictory politics of the party he created.
At the 1900 General Election Hardie was desperate to win a parliamentary seat, so desperate in fact that he stood in two places at once! He was successful in Merthyr where votes came to him because of the open support of the Liberals. Once in parliament the notion that ‘being a party of the working class’ would somehow guarantee any progress towards socialism was shown to be fictional. The idea of an electorally successful party which therefore had to be ‘neutral ground’, left the Labour Party in many respects indistinguishable from the left wing of the Liberals.
Hardie fully accepted this position. Indeed, while protesting the independence of his party he pleaded with prominent Liberals, who might be better vote-pullers than his own crew, to come and take the lead. At one point he appealed to the prominent Liberal, John Morley. Then to a number of left Liberals (or Radicals as they were known at the time) – Sir Charles Dilke, and others. The most pathetic and fawning plea went out to David Lloyd George. Aware of this man’s well-known and practically unbounded personal ambition, Hardie held out the prospect of attracting great numbers of workers’ votes, if only he would come over to the leadership position in a Labour/left Liberal alliance: ‘Here is a leadership sufficient to gratify the loftiest aspirations and it is within your reach; it is yours for the taking. You have but to stand firm ... and you will become a leader with a following greater than any politician has yet known.’ [55] Hardie’s hopes of a Labour/Radical alliance came to nothing.
 
Manipulating the membership
Lenin was later to write of the Labour Party:
Of course, most of the Labour Party’s members are workingmen. However, whether or not a party is really a political party of the workers does not depend solely upon a membership of workers but also upon the men that lead it, and the content of its actions and its political tactics. Only this latter determines whether we really have before us a political party of the proletariat. Regarded from this, the only correct point of view, the Labour Party is a thoroughly bourgeois party, because, although made up of workers, it is led by reactionaries, and the worst kind of reactionaries at that ... It is an organisation of the bourgeoisie, which exists to systematically dupe the workers ...
[56]
The most graphic illustration of this assertion was unknown to Lenin when he made that comment in 1920. But Keir Hardie had his hand in the secret electoral pact cooked up by Ramsay MacDonald and Herbert Gladstone of the Liberals. This was systematic duping indeed. Liberal and Labour differed little in policy. Both parties looked for votes from the working class: so it was logical that they should contrive not to run against each other in elections. This deal had to be made in the utmost secrecy. MacDonald carefully vetted meeting-places for his discussions, since discovery would completely prejudice the image of Labour independence. Despite his later prominence, Ramsay MacDonald was a relatively new face. Without Hardie’s assistance he could never have carried the deal off when the inevitable questions came rolling in from the constituencies about why they were to run in one area but not in another. Keir Hardie, this most Christian of politicians, went around the country crossing his heart and swearing that:
Although there has been no definite arrangement made at the Liberal Headquarters and no compact entered into ... where a Labour candidate is in the field you can rest assured there will be no new Liberal candidate introduced ...
[57]
It was a mark of Hardie’s tremendous popularity that such obvious deception should be swallowed whole.
This cynical manipulation of rank-and-file Labour supporters was not only shown in these secret dealings. Hardie was able to flaunt ILP and Labour Conference decisions on any number of occasions, and to do so openly. The first time this happened was over women’s suffrage. The ILP’s position was totally clear. At that time there was a property qualification which meant that only certain men had the vote. The ILP called for the franchise to be extended to all adults, men and women, irrespective of property. Hardie had made his name as a strong campaigner for women’s suffrage. But he, along with the bourgeois feminists argued that the change should be in line with the current franchise, ie that the vote for women householders must be the immediate demand, which meant that only middle- and upper-class women would see any change. Conflict became open when Hardie lost his position at the 1907 Labour Conference. He then resorted to blackmail to get his way, declaring: ‘... if the motion they had carried was intended to limit the action of the Party in the House of Commons, he should have seriously to consider whether he could remain a Member ...’ [58]
In a party where principles came first he would have been thanked for his services and shown the nearest exit. In a party where parliamentary success was paramount the loss of such a well-known and prestigious figure was almost unthinkable. Keir Hardie had his way and as a result a ‘Conscience Clause’ was introduced which allowed Labour MPs to vote how they wanted when ‘matters of conscience’ were at stake. It had another long-term effect which is still with us today. The ‘1907 formula’ meant, in the words of one right-wing biographer:
that party conferences could not bind the party in parliament. Labour leaders from Ramsay MacDonald to Harold Wilson [and beyond] continued to treat conference decisions, often the product of unrealistic euphoria conceived in the heady atmosphere of delegates assembled for an annual safety-valve of oratory, as statements of opinion, but not as mandates. Harold Wilson ... like Keir Hardie, viewed government by annual conferences as incompatible with the working of a democratic system.
[59]
For a revolutionary party, a member who gets to parliament is there to use that body as a platform for socialist propaganda, and so Hardie’s position would not be accepted for one minute. In the Labour Party the relationship is the other way around. The Party in the country and its local organisations exist to make propaganda for the return of the parliamentary group. The latter have therefore almost always had the whip hand in any disagreement.
 
The first witch-hunt Proof of this state of affairs came with the election of Victory Grayson as an ‘Independent Socialist’ candidate in the Colne Valley bye-election of 1907. His success followed the 1906 General Election in which the Liberals came to power and the Labour Party increased its MPs from 2 to 29 (largely thanks to the MacDonald-Gladstone pact). Although the Labour Party claimed credit for the passing of the Trades Disputes Act which reversed Taff Vale, much of this success was due to the Liberals’ willingness to make concessions. Indeed the Labour MPs were more than a little peeved that the TUC frequently went direct to the government when negotiating the Trades Disputes Act rather than using their good offices. However, once the Act had passed along with a few other minor reforms, the Labour Party resumed its natural position as the wagging tail of the Liberals.
Grayson’s election represented a challenge to the Labour Party. He was selected and run in open opposition to the party machine and declared himself the true bearer of ILP politics – in other words he was going to argue as a socialist in the House of Commons, and use it as a platform for raising the masses. He expected nothing from parliament since:
The ancient Chamber is swaddled in the medieval vestments of pompous and now meaningless procedure. The legislative machine is exquisitely devised to prevent, or at least render difficult any change in stereotyped institutions ... [The] impression is one of hopelessness and futility ... For myself, as a conscious Socialist, I have no hope for the House of Commons, constituted as it is.
[60]
For Grayson the struggle in parliament was subordinate to the movement outside. He was more than prepared to be thrown out of the House if making his propaganda inside it offended, and this was what happened.
Grayson’s victory, his magnetic personality and speaking skills made him a terrible threat to the Parliamentary Labour Party. Hardie, who well knew the value of propaganda stunts, had always made sure that they served, rather than hindered, the parliamentary path. Hardie at first sought to bring Grayson under control and professed sympathy for him. But when Grayson rightly accused the Party of paying more attention to supporting the Liberal licensing regulations than fighting over unemployment the ILP ‘Big Four’ – Hardie, MacDonald, Snowden and Glasier – decided he must be witch-hunted. MacDonald’s attitude to Grayson’s supporters almost outdid Kinnock’s ‘maggots’ speech: ‘your members . . . care nothing about the unemployed, but prefer to gas copiously about them . . . [those] who degrade the consideration of the unemployment problem as Mr Grayson did last week in the House of Commons must be regarded as the greatest enemies which the unemployed have ...’ Again the question of using parliament or fighting for socialism was put sharply. MacDonald told the ILP: ‘We ask you to find money for the establishment and maintenance of men who use the House of Commons in order that they may work through it, not merely demonstrate through it ...’ [61]
The 1909 ILP Conference saw a showdown between Grayson and the ILP Big Four. The Conference opened with a thinly-veiled attack on Grayson for his energetic raising of the issue of unemployment. In his Chairman’s address, MacDonald said:
I sometimes receive resolutions beginning in this way: ‘Seeing that the Unemployed are of more importance than the rules of the House of Commons’ – You know the rest ... The unemployed can never be treated by any Parliament except one which has rules of procedure and these rules must prescribe majority responsibility. Every facility given to a minority to impose its will upon the majority is a facility which any minority can use, and not merely a Labour or a Socialist minority. To protect the conditions and the existing democratic government is just as essential to the building up of the Socialist State as is the solution of the problem of unemployment. The Party which proposes to strike at the heart of democratic government in order to make a show of earnestness about unemployment will not only not be tolerated by the country, but does not deserve to be.
After this appalling statement Keir Hardie leapt to his feet to say that Ramsay MacDonald was ‘the biggest intellectual asset which the Socialist movement has’ and then led prolonged cheering.
In spite of this stage management the Conference voted by a majority to back Grayson’s political stance of making a bold show of socialism instead of tailing the Liberals. But once again Hardie and the others were to blackmail the left into submission. The Big Four simply resigned from office. The conference thereupon reversed its tone and pleaded, begged and voted by all but 10 votes for them to stay. But Hardie wanted nothing less than a total witch-hunt of the ILP left. He said: ‘In almost every branch there is this snarling disruptive element. You have got to fight it down and fight it out.’ [62] To prove they were complete masters of the situation, Hardie, MacDonald, Snowden and Glasier, let their resignations stand for two full years. Yet their power over the ILP was in no way diminished. Fortunately for them the problem of Grayson himself declined when Colne Valley fell at the next election. Grayson eventually left the ILP with a number of left-wing branches to form the British Socialist Party along with the Social Democratic Federation (by then called the Social Democratic Party).
 
The ‘Labour Unrest’ and the First World War
Hardie’s strategy always consisted of balancing the class struggle with the prevailing ideas of capitalism, particularly belief in the nation and change through parliament. After 1910 this balancing act became very precarious as the scales were upset, first by a dramatic assertion of direct industrial muscle from militant workers, and then by an equally powerful upsurge of undiluted nationalism at the outbreak of the First World War.
 
The class struggle 1910–1914 The years 1910–14 were known as the period of ‘Labour Unrest’ and involved class struggle which put even the period of ‘new unionism’ into the shade. Since 1891 challenges to Hardie’s type of reformist politics had always been overcome quite easily because they had occurred within the precincts of reformist parties. An appeal to the need for success through parliament had seen off all attacks. But this new threat was far more dangerous, for it came from the mass of workers themselves. Until 1910 things had mostly gone Hardie’s way. The working class had created a labour movement, but it had been circumscribed in such a way that the trade union bureaucracy had succeeded in channelling workers’ energies in reformist directions.
After 1910 this was no longer true. The rank and file burst the bonds of bureaucracy and compromise to assert both its practical contempt for the plodding Labour parliamentarians and its faith in mass direct action as the real means to progress. Massive strikes exploded in the docks, railways, mines and elsewhere. When the working class moved into action the last place they looked was to Labour or parliament. The President of the Board of Trade reported:
the almost complete collapse of the Labour Party in the House as an effective influence in labour disputes. They were not consulted with regard to, and had no share in the Seamen’s or Transport Workers’ movement last summer. During the railway strike, they attempted to act as a go-between for the men and the Government. But they had very little influence over the actions of the men, or on the result. During the Miners’ Strike ... the Labour Party exercised no influence at all.
[63]
The fear of this situation must have haunted Hardie ever since his humiliation at the hands of militant miners in the 1880s. His instincts were sharper than MacDonald who led the party in the House of Commons but had had little direct experience of workers’ struggle. Hardie did not react with open horror at the sight of a self-confident working class as his close friends did.
MacDonald’s reaction to the syndicalists who led this new movement was that:
The hospitality which the Socialist movement has offered so generously to all kinds of cranks and scoundrels because they professed to be in revolt against the existing order has already done our movement much harm. Let it not add Syndicalism to the already too numerous vipers ...
[64]
Bruce Glasier was equally horrified by the spate of strikes:
How, then is the nation to deal with a menace of such almost incredible coercion – a coercion which is altogether apart ... from the question of the justifiability of the claims of the workers on strike ...
[65]
Hardie was, compared to them, a wily old fox. He knew, as he had done back at the outbreak of the ‘tattie strike’ long before, that at times abrupt left turns were needed to reimpose one’s influence. Indeed he had become increasingly disaffected with MacDonald’s style and the resultant utter disregard shown by workers, bosses and other political parties for Labour at that time.
So he mounted a vigorous verbal attack on the use of troops and police in the South Wales coalfield. He denounced the government for taking the side of the employers and so on. At the ILP Conference of 1912 he made the following remarkable speech:
The ILP ... is not a reform organisation; it is revolutionary in the fullest sense of the word. The ILP does not exist to patch up the present order of society so that it may be made a little more tolerable; it exists to overthrow the present order and to build up the Socialist humanitarian state in its stead ...
Comrades of the working class, we do not want Parliament to give us reforms. We are not asking Parliament to do things for us. We are going to Parliament ourselves to master Parliament ...
[66]
A year later he introduced a motion to ILP Council saying, ‘that only by the overthrow of the existing order and the creation of a Socialist State can the working class be emancipated.’ [67] Was this a transformation? Had Hardie really exchanged Jesus Christ for a full-blooded revolutionary Karl Marx? To think this would be to misjudge the great depth of his opportunism.
At that time Lenin referred to reformists such as Hardie as opportunists. This description was quite apt. Hardie was able to utter the most revolutionary of phrases if he thought this would bring the mass movement to heel. The real reasoning behind his left rhetoric was revealed when he wrote for the obscure theoretical journal of the ILP – the Socialist Review. His aim was to turn mass action towards safe parliamentary channels. In doing so he exploited the limitations of trade union action which applied even to the Labour Unrest. In Hardie’s hands every concept of class struggle, such as the idea of workers’ control, was stood on its head. Left was made to appear right, direct action more conservative than parliamentary methods which he called ‘political action’:
The experience of the strike, however, of late has shown conclusively the imperative need for workers to control Parliament ... The action of the strike can at most be only ameliorative; it never can be revolutionary. That belongs to the sphere of [parliamentary] politics. A strike can secure the adoption of the principle of a minimum wage, but only Parliament can nationalise the mines, or the railways, or other industrial undertakings. And so political action is revolutionary, whereas direct action is but palliative. The strike can be used to supplement, but not to supplant political action ... Parliament is therefore the citadel upon which the forces of democracy must concentrate their attack. A general strike against Liberalism and Toryism [i.e. voting Labour] is the need of the hour. The industrial strike, even when successful settles nothing ... The political strike is the only form of strike which is all gain and no toss ...
[68]
 
War and death Hardie’s opportunist genius did live beyond the grave, even as he hoped his soul would do. Practically all his biographers explain his demise in the autumn of 1915 as a result of a broken heart following the outbreak of the First World War. As we shall see, with Hardie appearances were deceptive to the very end. Like other leaders of the Second International Hardie had strongly denounced the rising war fever that gripped Europe in its imperialist years before 1914. He proposed a very radical sounding scheme of an international general strike against the war. But closer inspection shows his intention was to use threats of a general strike more as a bluff to prevent war than a serious agitational goal. Still, Hardie’s opposition seems to have survived the general abandonment of internationalism that followed the outbreak of war on 4 August 1914. His meetings were disrupted, he was abused on all sides, and his health was already failing.
But there are any number of quotations showing that Hardie did not oppose the war, only the manner with which it began and the particularly vindictive war aim of absolutely crushing Germany. He wanted more negotiation, a bit less aggression and so on. Here are a few quotations which demonstrate the point:
A nation at war must be united, especially when its existence is at stake ... We must see the war through, but we must also make ourselves so familiar with the facts as to be able to intervene at the earliest possible moment in the interests of peace ...
None of [the ILP’s pamphlets] clamour for immediately stopping the war. That would be foolish in the extreme, until, at least, the Germans had been driven back across their own frontier ...
But surely, whilst supporting and upholding our gallant defenders both by land and sea, it is our duty to find out what we are fighting for. I am not pro-German, still less am I pro-Russian, I am simply pro-British.
[69]
Yet a broken heart was the root cause of his decline. But the heartbreak was that of a Labour bureaucrat whose organisation was being torn apart before his very eyes. The idea of independent Labour representation being a viable ‘neutral ground’ had survived the Labour Unrest battered and bruised. The balancing act of class and nation completely fell apart in the nationalist hysteria of the early months of war. This was symbolised by events in the House of Commons, where Hardie’s guarded criticisms of military policy were ridiculed and, worst of all, a Labour MP – Will Crooks – closed the parliamentary session by leading the House in a passionate rendering of God Save the King. As the record of the proceedings noted: ‘All the Members joined in singing the National Anthem’.
To Hardie it must have seemed that the ‘distinct’ Labour Party for which he had dedicated his life, was damaged beyond repair. Very soon the Labour Party was absorbed into Lloyd George’s coalition government which included Tories and Liberals. Thus the Labour Party’s first taste of real power was to be over the corpses of British, German and other workers killed in an imperialist war. It took some very skilful manoeuvring by Ramsay MacDonald to restore Labour to an independent organisation after the war.
Hardie had spent his life trying to square the circle – adapting working-class aspirations to ruling-class ideology, denouncing ruling-class ideology so as to make room for workers’ aspirations, and so on. When the capitalist system was not in deep crisis and the working class was not fighting for itself, he enjoyed dramatic success. But when either of the two sides fought for real, his synthesis was shown to be the hollow illusion it had always been. The real choice was either a struggle for socialism against the state, or working through the state for the maintenance of capitalism.
 
Conclusion
The secret of Keir Hardie’s magical attraction for Labour’s left and right is now clear. In the days when the Labour idea was little more than a one-man band, Hardie had to play all the parts – right, left and centre. But the central tenets of his method were straightforward. First came a quasi-religious identification of the working class, the nation and the state. He liked to paraphrase Louis XIV’s famous dictum when he said ‘the state – ’tis us’. This led directly to ‘the question of questions’ – the winning of votes.
In 1909 he wrote that Party policy ‘will be guided by one sole consideration – how to increase its strength in the next Parliament.’ For ‘Upon our success in this depends the ratio to which the improvement of the condition of the people will proceed’. [70] Hardie’s sincerity as an opportunist is unquestionable. He refused any number of bribes on his path towards power through parliament. He was also very skilled in this form of politics. The secret of forming a well-established workers’ party was to encourage a feeling of political antipathy towards the openly bourgeois parties of Liberals and Tories without challenging the basic ideology of the system. If the labour movement was to lift Hardie and his supporters into power it had to be encouraged and kept alive when weak, but reined in when strong and confident.
The creation of the Labour Party was certainly a step forward on the old Liberal/Tory division. It represented a step away from total mental subordination to the boss and his representatives. It brought the arena of political debate into the working class itself and thus made possible a sharp separation of reformists and revolutionaries. However, the early years of the Labour Party were no socialist golden age. If it had been possible, these years – in which the pressure of office were absent, where there were very few votes to lose and a world to win – should have yielded a picture of struggle and challenge. Instead we find a reality that is with us today – total opportunism among the leadership and a left wing battering its head fruitlessly against the brick wall of parliamentary politics.
Hardie built his structure well and made it durable. The trade union bureaucracy was built into its base. Their money and influence guaranteed them a decisive voice in Party affairs. Even more important, he created an organisation which was thoroughly parliamentary in its outlook, and which would therefore always be impregnable to defeat from within by the revolutionary left. Since parliament was supposed to be the origin and fount of all progress through the passing of socialist legislation, every phase of the Party had to yield to this ultimate aim. The national organisation of the Party was subordinated to the Parliamentary Labour Party. Organisation in the constituencies was subordinate to the Party’s national organisation and so on. Opportunist control was not centred in the winning of conference debates but on the reformist premise which left, right and centre shared.
Rosa Luxemburg was writing about German reformists when in the year of the Labour Party’s birth she wrote her pamphlet on Reform or Revolution. Yet she foresaw its future, because she understood its political basis:
people who pronounce themselves in favour of the method of legislative reform in place of and in contradiction to the conquest of political power and social revolution, do not really choose a more tranquil, calmer and slower road to the same goal, but a different goal ... If we follow the political conceptions of [reformism] our programme becomes not the realisation of socialism, but the reform of capitalism.
[71]
* * *
Notes
1. Militant, 13 December 1985.
2. K.O. Morgan, Keir Hardie, Radical and Socialist, London 1975, p. 1.
3. Ibid., p. 290.
4. W. Stewart, James Keir Hardie, London 1921, with an introduction by James Ramsay MacDonald, p. xxi.
5. From an article by Snowden in the National Library of Scotland, Dep 176, Box 25.
6. British Weekly (date unreadable). National Library of Scotland, Dep 176, Box 2.
7. Perthshire Courier, 2 August 1904.
8. F. Johnson, Keir Hardie’s Socialism, London 1922, p. 4.
9. Note 9 is missing in the printed version.
10. Daily Mirror, 18 May 1906.
11. Quoted in Eastern Evening News, 10 June 1896.
12. E. Hughes (ed.), Keir Hardie’s Speeches and Writings, Glasgow 1927, p. 119.
13. Ibid., p. 120.
14. F. Johnson, op. cit., p. 12.
15. Daily Mirror, 2 August 1905.
16. J. Keir Hardie, My Confession of Faith in the Labour Alliance, London 1909, emphasis in the original.
17. Labour Leader, 22 December 1894.
18. Press cutting from the Hardie Collection in the National Library of Scotland, Dep 176 (2) 5.
19. L Trotsky, Writings on Britain, London 1974, vol. 1, p. 20.
20. Ibid., p. 20.
21. Ibid., p. 23.
22. Quoted in T. Rothstein, From Chartism to Labourism, London 1983, pp. 114, 103, 109–10, 107.
23. F. Johnson, op. cit., p. 4.
24. F. Reid, Keir Hardie – The Making of a Socialist, London 1978, pp. 48–49.
25. Quoted in ibid., p. 84.
26. The Miner, April 1887.
27. The Miner, January 1887.
28. The Miner, July 1887.
29. The ‘New’ Trades Unionism, London 1890, pp. 4–5.
30. Ibid., pp. 12–13.
31. The Trade Unionist, 20 June 1891.
32. The Trade Unionist, 11 April 1891.
33. Quoted in Labour Elector, 15 March 1890.
34. S. & B. Webb, History of British Trade Unionism, London 1920, pp. 680–681.
35. G Howell, Trade Unionism New and Old, London 1907, p. 201.
36. Labour Party Foundation Conference and Annual Conference Reports 1900–1905, Hassocks 1967, p. 16.
37. Labour Leader, 6 October 1894.
38. Clegg, Fox and Thompson, A History of British Trade Unions since 1889, Oxford 1964, vol. 1, p. 326.
39. TUC Congress Report, Liverpool 1980, p. 53.
40. Labour Leader, 20 October 1894.
41. Labour Leader, 27 October 1894.
42. Labour Leader, 24 April 1895.
43. Hughes, op. cit., p. 79.
44. Trotsky, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 248.
45. Labour Leader, 25 April 1899.
46. D. Howell, British Workers and the Independent Labour Party, Manchester 1983, p. 313.
47. Quoted in C.F. Brand, The British Labour Party, London 1965, p. 11.
48. Quoted in Clegg, Fox and Thompson, p. 376n.
49. Hardie’s Speeches and Writings, p. 60.
50. Evening Swindon Advertiser, 3 June 1905.
51. Quoted in Stewart, op. cit., p. 255.
52. Labour Leader, 9 March 1901.
53. Quoted in Stewart, op. cit., p. 255.
54. J. Keir Hardie, Indian Budget Speech, London 1908.
55. Labour Leader, 1 March 1903.
56. V.I. Lenin, On Britain, Moscow 1979, pp. 460–61.
57. Unattributed press cutting from Hardie Collection, dated 3 December 1904 and proceeding from Barrow, in National Library of Scotland, Dep 176 2 (5).
58. Quoted in Morgan, op. cit., p. 169.
59. Ibid., p. 169.
60. V. Grayson, The Appeal for Socialism (no date or place) p. 10.
61. Quoted in B. Tillett, Is the Parliamentary Labour Party a Failure?, London, no date, pp. 6–7.
62. ILP Conference Report 1909, pp. 47–48, 80.
63. Quoted in J.M. Winter, Socialism and the Challenge of War, London 1974, p. 25.
64. Socialist Review, vol. 8, p. 124.
65. Socialist Review, vol. 9, p. 103.
66. Labour Leader, 31 May 1912.
67. Labour Leader, 27 March 1913.
68. Socialist Review, vol. 9, pp. 215–16.
69. Merthyr Pioneer, 15 August 1914, 28 November 1914, 5 September 1914.
70. Socialist Review, November 1909.
71. Rosa Luxemburg, Rosa Luxemburg Speaks, New York 1970, pp. 77–78.
 



The Internationale has long been the anthem of the workers’
movement throughout the world. Its power to move people has survived
the repression of fascism, the cruel parody that was Stalinism and
free market capitalism. Those who sing it need know nothing about it,
and be familiar with only the first verse and the chorus, yet feel a
strong sense of international unity. Why has it proved both so
durable and inspirational?
The verses were written on 30 June 1871 [1]
in the immediate aftermath of the brutal crushing of the Paris
Commune, when the author, Eugène Pottier, was hiding in fear of his
life. His lyrics (the music came later) [2]
were intended to impart the historical experience of an important
workers’ struggle to a worldwide audience. At the same time they
inevitably reflect Pottier’s views. He was a follower of
Proudhonism, an ideology popular in France until it was destroyed
along with the Commune. It is a measure of Pottier’s achievement,
however, that The Internationale can function simultaneously
as history, political argument and a rallying statement.
Pottier was born in Paris in 1816, a year after Napoleon’s
defeat at Waterloo and the consequent restoration of the Bourbon
monarchy. The city had been the cradle of the 1789 French Revolution
and of the unprecedented social turbulence that followed. During
Pottier’s lifetime it was the epicentre of world political life,
the “capital of the 19th century”. [3]
Although the bourgeoisie were now in the saddle and the country was
industrialising rapidly, the aspirations for liberty, equality and
fraternity that had been unleashed by the storming of the Bastille
could not be quelled by a foreign-imposed ruler. The genie was out of
the bottle. French capitalists interpreted the motto of 1789 –
Liberty, equality, fraternity – as meaning freedom for market
forces to operate, equality as a level playing field for those keen
to exploit the workers and fraternity as all classes uniting behind
the French flag. But for people such as Pottier it meant the promise
of a society in which poor people, like himself, had justice.
Pottier held a number of jobs, none of them well paid. He left
school at the age of 13 to work with his father making packing cases,
later becoming a shop worker, usher and eventually a textile printer.
[4] But from early on his passion was
poetry and politics. At the age of 14 he witnessed the insurrection
of 1830 that cost the lives of 1,800 revolutionaries. At that time he
wrote his first song – Vive la liberté! [5]
In 1848 he was on the barricades once more, participating in the
establishment of the Second Republic. Pottier was outraged when a
relative of Napoleon, Louis Bonaparte, made himself emperor in 1851.
In response he wrote a poem entitled Who Will Revenge This? [6]
The answer came in 1870 when the Parisian masses rose up and
overthrew the emperor, following this with the creation of the
Commune in March 1871. Pottier already had established a reputation
as the workers’ poet. It earned him a seat on the Communal Council
representing the 2nd arrondissement. He came top of the poll
with a 93 percent share of the vote [7]
and served on the Public Services Commission of the Commune. After 72
days the French government, then based at Versailles, sent in the
army to massacre the communards in what became known as “Bloody
Week”. Pottier sought asylum first in Britain and later in the US.
He eventually returned to Paris and died there in 1887. Even in his
coffin Pottier remained controversial. Ten thousand people, including
many leading former communards, turned up at his funeral, but the
cortege was attacked by police who attempted to seize the red flag
carried by mourners. [8]
The power of Pottier’s Internationale lies in the fact
that he was able to encapsulate his personal experience of a specific
event and yet express it in universal terms. This can be seen from
the first lines:



Arise ye starvelings from your slumbers
Arise ye criminals of want.



Under capitalism the working class everywhere suffers poverty
while those who protest are often criminalised. In Paris this
phenomenon took the sharpest of forms – mass hunger and civil war.
In 1870 Louis Bonaparte launched an attack on Prussia which failed
disastrously. The emperor himself was captured and food supplies to
the capital city, containing the second largest concentration of
people in the world, were cut off for months. While the few wealthy
citizens who had not fled continued to live in luxury the rest were
reduced to eating cats, dogs and rats to survive. Yet far from hunger
cowing working class Parisians it radicalised them. They still
rejected the humiliating peace treaty the reactionary new government
signed. For this snub they would indeed be treated as criminals. When
the Commune was finally defeated many thousands were massacred, but
even more, some 50,000, were put on trial. [9]
Pottier himself was condemned to death in his absence.
The first verse continues:



For reason in revolt now slumbers
And at last ends the age of cant.
So away with all your superstitions
Servile masses arise, arise,
We’ll change forthwith the old conditions
And spurn the dust to win the prize.



These references to “reason” and “supersitition” arose
from the role played by the Catholic church which had always
supported reaction and authority in France. Ever since the
Enlightenment in the 18th century battle had been joined between the
church, which insisted that the existing order had been divinely
ordained and could not be changed by human beings, and those who said
that all institutions could and should be judged by reason and
abolished if found wanting.
Adolphe Thiers, who as head of the French government was the
architect of Bloody Week, insisted that religion was necessary
because it could:
propagate that good philosophy which teaches that man is
here to suffer, and not that philosophy which says the contrary –
be happy ... If you think that here below you are entitled to a
little bit of happiness, and if you do not find it in your actual
situation, you will strike at rich people fearlessly for having kept
you away from your happiness. [10]
After 1871, in revenge for the perceived humiliation of the church
at the hands of the Commune, the enormous basilica of the Sacré-Coeur
was built on the hill of Montmartre. Visible from every corner of the
city it was Paris’s most striking landmark until the construction
of the Eiffel Tower.
Pottier’s call to reason therefore reflected the motivation
behind many of the Commune’s policies. Education was taken out of
the hands of priests and nuns. Marriage became a civil affair with
divorce easier to obtain. While daytime religious ceremonies
continued in Parisian churches, in the evenings they became great
meeting halls where the mass of the population could debate and
democratically control power.
The second verse reads as follows:



No more divided by reaction
On tyrants only we will make war
The soldiers too will take strike action
They will break ranks and fight no more
And if those cannibals keep trying
To sacrifice us to their greed
They soon shall hear the bullets flying
We will shoot the generals on our own side.



This is an exact description of the outbreak of the Commune
itself. On 18 March 1871, shortly after the end of the
Franco-Prussian War, the French government sent its army to seize the
cannons of the Parisian citizen militia. However, confronted by
masses of women protesters the soldiers decided to mutiny rather than
follow orders. When General Lecomte insisted that his troops fire on
the people he was seized and executed by his own men. Verses three
and four show the influence of Proudhonism on Pottier:



No saviour from on high delivers
No faith have we in prince or peer
Our own right hand the chains must sever
Chains of hatred, greed or fear.
E’er the chiefs will out with their booty
And give all a happier lot
Each at the forge must do their duty
And we will strike while the iron is hot.

Laws cheat and the state oppresses
Their taxes drain the people more
The rich themselves escape such stresses
So now what rights have the poor?
We’ve enough of languishing in misery
Equality’s why we fight
No more rights without any duties
And no duties without our rights



Here Proudhonist thinking on power and the state is laid out.
While various rival political currents were present in Paris, the
Proudhonists dominated the organised workers’ movement and
controlled the French section of the International Workingmen’s
Association (IWMA, or First International). In the March 1871
Communal Council elections they captured one third of the seats.
Their version of anarchism owed much of its attraction to the fact
that under the Ancien Régime and the Napoleonic Empires the
French state had been a model of centralised bureaucracy and physical
repression in the service of the ruling elite. Proudhon (1809–1865)
concluded that freedom was impossible while a state structure
existed. He therefore called on workers to ignore politics and the
state, and focus their efforts on grassroots self-activity.
When, in 1864, the IWMA was founded and Marx was tasked with
formulating its platform he acknowledged the positive part of the
Proudhonist argument. The General Rules begin with these
words: “That the emancipation of the working classes must be
conquered by the working classes themselves.” [11]
Pottier’s rejection of any “saviour from on high” expresses
this sentiment perfectly.
However, Proudhonism had serious weaknesses. Whether or not
workers choose to ignore it the capitalist state plays an active role
in maintaining the system. Furthermore, the theory took no note of
the unevenness in consciousness that exists in the working class. As
a result Proudhonists did not recognise the need for the more
advanced and conscious sections of the working class to provide
leadership in the struggle against capitalism and its state. Marx
disagreed with the anarchist attitude to politics and therefore
supplemented his initial statement on workers’ self-emancipation
with the following: “To conquer political power has, therefore,
become the great duty of the working classes.” [12]
In the Commune arguments about the state and issue of leadership
culminated in bitter disputes. Opponents of Proudhonism warned that
it was not enough to establish a model of democracy and liberation
for others to emulate. The French state was, after all, preparing to
attack Paris and drown the Commune in blood. They proposed
countermeasures, which involved forming a Committee of Public Safety
armed with extensive powers, to take a leadership role in combatting
the government forces massing at Versailles. Pottier showed that the
experience of struggle had taken him beyond the strictures of
Proudhonism and he voted for the new body, though with misgivings:
“The situation demands energy and unity of action. So despite its
title, I vote for ‘the Committee’.” [13]



Those mining bosses and the rail kings
It’s they, the real monsters
Throughout their lives they do just nothing
But rob the poor workers
Whilst in their bank vaults they hoard
All our labour does create
By demanding that it is restored
We now ask for a just fate.



Here Pottier reflected the current state of French
industrialisation which was built on railway expansion generally and
mining in the north east, the most economically developed area of
France. The reference to banking is pure Proudhon, however. His
approach to economics was summed up in the famous aphorism, “Property
is theft.” Where Marx located the exploitation of workers at the
core of the capitalist production process, for Proudhon poverty and
riches were explained by the taking of bank interest, dividends and
“unearned increments”.
If workers could obtain interest free loans they could organise
cooperative industrial production which would link together in local
communes. Proudhon believed this could successfully compete against
the capitalists, whereupon the current economic system would collapse
and a new society would emerge. He himself made several abortive
attempts to set up a People’s Bank and get the process started.
There is no space here to discuss the flaws in this vision, only to
note its presence in The International.
Women played an enormous role within the Commune, both in defence
of the cannons on 18 March and during its short life. Examples
include the actions of people such as Louise Michel, the Women’s
Union, the mass assemblies and the fighting of Bloody Week. Although
line two of the last verse only hints at this, in the context of
prevailing nineteenth century attitudes any reference to women being
part of the struggle, rather than bystanders, was noteworthy:



We peasants, artisans and others
Enrolled as daughters, sons of toil
Let’s claim the earth for workers
Drive the indolent from the soil



Pottier’s verses end by affirming that despite the terrible
suffering inflicted by the Versailles army the struggle would revive:



On our flesh long has fed the raven
We’re too long vultures’ prey
But now farewell the spirit craven
The dawn brings a brighter day.



The dawn that Pottier foresaw would not appear for many years,
because repression of the communards was so savage and thorough. But
his hope for a brighter future was not misplaced. Paris itself
experienced an insurrectionary situation in 1944, and the biggest
general strike in history during May 1968. To defiantly predict such
possibilities from the depths of the abyss into which the communards
were thrown required deep commitment and courage.
We now turn to the chorus:



So comrades come rally
And the last fight let us face



This first section is straightforward. The battles of 1871 had
indeed been the “last fight” for many tens of thousands of
communards. In Bloody Week some 30,000 working class women and men
were slaughtered in cold blood. Furthermore, it is the notion of a
final all-out struggle with capitalism that marks out The
Internationale as a revolutionary song. In taking this stance
Pottier again showed that the experience of the Commune had carried
him beyond Proudhon’s gradualism and disregard for the question of
the state.
It is worthwhile comparing his words to the British Labour Party’s
(now defunct) anthem, The Red Flag. Although one would be hard
put to discover any bloodsoaked banners in the history of the Labour
Party, that song has suitably dramatic references:



The people’s flag is deepest red,
It shrouded oft our martyrs dead



The position of the apostrophe in “people’s” is interesting.
Had it been placed after the “s” it would have implied solidarity
across borders. In fact the song was written by an Irishman in 1889,
no doubt reflecting his people’s long national struggle against
British imperialism. They had had many martyrs, but The Red Flag’s
historical provenance means it lacks the internationalism or
proletarian roots of the communard’s work. And despite the emotive
language The Red Flag’s lyrics are non-committal as regards
the question of reform or revolution, whereas Pottier’s call to
final struggle is unequivocal.
The concluding part of The Internationale’s chorus is the
most enigmatic section of all. What do the words “The
Internationale unites the human race” actually mean? Things become
even more mysterious if an exact rendering of the original French
words is considered: “Groupons nous, et demain; l’Internationale
sera le genre humain”; literally “Let us group together, and
tomorrow the International will be the human race”.
The International referred to here is clearly the IWMA, and it is
this body’s composition and character that holds the clue to the
meaning of the lines. Although the First International had adherents
from many lands its core was provided by four countries – Germany,
Italy, Britain and France – with radically different movements.
In Germany support came from socialist organisations which would
merge to form the Social Democratic Party (SPD). In Italy the
followers of Mazzini formed the IWMA. Organised in small
conspiratorial groupings they were dedicated to stoking up popular
revolts. Britain’s contingent was composed of trade union
affiliates whose officials mostly gave political allegiance to the
Liberal Party. Their motivation in linking up with the International
was economic rather than political: the IWMA could provide solidarity
to workers on strike and, in particular, prevent the shipping in of
foreign scab labour.
Unlike the Germans, the French section of the IWMA rejected the
idea that its local branches constituted the base of a socialist
party (since it eschewed political leadership). It dismissed Mazzini
who was not only “an opponent of socialism”, but whose “sole
aim ... was to secure a united bourgeois republic”. [14]
As we have seen, Proudhonists ignored state issues. Equally, British
trade unionism was not seen as a model to follow because the French
aim was far more ambitious than limited reforms or improvements in
pay and conditions. For Pottier and his comrades the First
International was already the germ of a new society based on comradeship.
These differences conditioned what it meant to be a member of the
IWMA. In Britain and Germany the masses of working class people
became part of the organisation through their leading institutional
organ (party committees or union executives). In Italy only a tiny
dedicated minority was involved. In France members did not join a
party or a union; they joined the IWMA directly and in so doing
believed they were engaging in self-emancipation and self-activity
from below. In their terms they had begun the process of superseding
capitalism.
It is interesting, therefore, that the immediacy of the
relationship between the IWMA and its members posited in Pottier’s
chorus was altered in translation. Eleanor Marx, who first put
Pottier’s lyrics into English, changed his phrase “The
Internationale ... will be the human race” to “The
Internationale ... unites the human race”. This latter
form was more suitable for British supporters of the IWMA. Franz
Mehring’s German version departed even further from the original:
“Die Internationale erkämpft das Menschenrecht” – ”The International fights for human rights”.
Pottier’s words also show the exceptional emphasis the French
section placed on internationalism. For Germany and Italy the decade
up to 1871 was one of unification out of disparate small states.
Mehring explains that in both countries “the national struggles
naturally forced the idea of internationalism into the background”.
[15] British trade unions were, as
their name implied, organised into separate bodies along craft lines
and their main emphasis was on the benefits of solidarity across
borders rather than abolishing borders themselves.
Pottier and his comrades hoped every worker in every
country would become part of the First International. They believed
that through this self-governing communes would develop and the state
would disappear along with the divisions caused by the existence of
different governments. So the meaning of the chorus is literal. If
the masses grouped together in the International this organisation
would come to embody the human race.
The Paris Commune did indeed display remarkable internationalism.
Many of the key figures in the Commune had originated abroad.
Alongside Louise Michel and Jean Varlin stood people like Leo Frankl,
a Hungarian Jew who headed the important Labour Commission charged
with advancing workers’ economic rights. Elizabeth Dmitriova, a
Russian, led the Women’s Union. The most prominent generals leading
the Parisian workers’ militia – the National Guard – included
Cluseret (an American citizen), Dombrowski and Wroblewski (Poles).
Before 1871 French workers had seen the national anthem, the
Marseillaise, as their hymn. Afterwards it would be The
Internationale. The experience of struggle and of the Commune had
changed mass consciousness.
Understanding Proudhonism or the Commune helps to decode Pottier’s
Internationale, but this does not convey its full meaning. If
this song had been merely a Proudhonist tract it would suffered the
fate of Proudhonism itself. That ideology along with the Commune’s
other currents – Blanquism and neo-Jacobinism – reflected an
early stage of development. None provided the answers needed by the
workers of Paris in their confrontation with the French ruling class,
its state and army. Consequently these movements faded away after
1871, curiosities relegated to the museum of ideology. Equally,
though a history of 1871 in verse might be interesting it would not
have an enduring impact.
The secret of the poem is that Pottier was able to use his
immediate experience and ideological framework and yet transcend them
to weave a universal message in which the internationalist heart and
soul of the Parisian workers in their titanic fight comes through. No
knowledge of the Commune’s exciting new vision of women’s
liberation, education, art, justice and workers’ control is needed
to sense what the struggle for socialism can mean, or that workers
share a common interest the world over.
As a result of this masterful act of creation Pottier’s verse
has sustained a life of its own long after his death. Its substance
has been added to by the people who have sung it and the struggles
they engaged in. It was sung by mutinous sailors on the Battleship
Potemkin during Russia’s 1905 revolution; by workers in Madrid
during 1936 who vowed ¡No pasarÃ¡n! – Franco’s fascists
would not pass; and by the protesters in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Perhaps the most poignant rendering was on May Day 1943 during the
Warsaw Ghetto uprising when the Nazis were about to liquidate the
last remnants of resistance. One of the few survivors wrote:
The Internationale was sung. The entire world, we
knew, was celebrating May Day on that day and everywhere forceful,
meaningful words were being spoken. But never yet had The
Internationale been sung in conditions so different, so tragic,
in a place where an entire nation had been and was still perishing.
The words and the song echoed from the charred ruins and were, at
that particular time, an indication that Socialist youth was still
fighting in the Ghetto, and that even in the face of death they were
not abandoning their ideals. [16]
Reciting Pottier’s verse today therefore links us to a long and
proud tradition. Now, at a time of imperialist wars abroad, the
stoking up of racism on the domestic front and a global crisis of
capitalism The Internationale continues to play a role in
inspiring an alternative vision.

Notes
1. Bourgin and Henriot, 1945, p. 202.
2. The tune was added by Pierre
Degeyter in 1888, a year after Pottier’s death.
3. Walter Benjamin, quoted in Andrew
Benjamin, 1989, p. 1.
4. Musuex, 1896, p. 5.
5. Musuex, 1896, p. 6.
6. Musuex, 1896, p. 6.
7. Bourgin and Henriot, 1945, p. 305.
8. Museux, 1896, p. 152.
9. See Lissagaray, 1976, p. 320.
10. Quoted in Gluckstein, 2006, p. 37.
11. IWMA, 1864.
12. IWMA, 1864.
13. Bourgin and Henriot, 1945, p. 34.
14. Mehring, 1936, p. 408.
15. Mehring, 1936, p. 317.
16. M. Edelman, The Ghetto
Fights, London 1990, p. 83


References
Benjamin, Andrew (ed.), 1989, The Problems of Modernity (Routledge).
Bourgin, George, and Gabriel Henriot, 1945, Procès-Verbaux de
la Commune de 1871, volume 2, (Paris).
Edelman, Marek, 1990, The Ghetto Fights (Bookmarks).
Gluckstein, Donny, 2006, The Paris Commune (Bookmarks).
IWMA, 1864, General Rules.
Lissagaray, Prosper Olivier, 1976, History of the Paris Commune (New Park).
Mehring, Franz, 1936, Karl Marx: The Story of his Life.
Musuex, Ernest, 1896, Eugène Pottier et son Oeuvre (Paris).
 



Götz Aly
Hitler’s Beneficiaries: Plunder, Racial War and the Nazi Welfare State
Verso, 2007, £19.99
Hitler’s Beneficiaries is an important milestone in the study of Nazism and the Holocaust. At first glance, a book on German government financial policy and taxation is not likely to set the heart racing. However, a detailed study of these aspects yields some extraordinary results.
Aly begins with the pre-war Nazi period, 1933–9. When Hitler’s chancellorship began, unemployment was around 40 percent or six million. By 1937 it had fallen to 1.6 million. At the outbreak of the Second World War there was a severe labour shortage, which partly motivated the Nazi policy of blitzkrieg and foreign conquest. The economic turnaround was the result of a huge rearmament programme which would inevitably lead to war and devastation. But until 1939 that fact would not have been evident to those who were formerly unemployed. Furthermore, the resources needed to fund the war drive did not come from the German working class. The Nazis were mortgaging the economy to speculative profits to be obtained in the future through European conquest.
In the meantime, however, a short-term financial boost could be obtained through “Aryanisation” of Jewish assets both in Germany and, with the annexation of Austria and conquest of Czechoslovakia, further afield. Though Aly barely touches upon it, there was of course an ideological motivation here. The Jewish minority was not singled out arbitrarily. However, the drive was also financial. Göring, head of the Four Year Plan that was designed to prepare Germany for war, insisted that proceeds from the requisition and subsequent sale of Jewish businesses, warehouse stocks, furnishings and works of art “whether in Munich or Nuremberg, in Stuttgart, Karlsruhe or Hamburg”, belonged “exclusively to the Reich central government”. This was necessary because: “I know no other way to keep my Four Year Plan and the German economy going.”
Once the war began, the Reich aimed to avoid the economic burden falling upon ordinary German people and so sought to “shift responsibility for funding the Nazi war machine to the citizens of foreign lands”. In 1943, after Mussolini was strung up by his own population, Goebbels would write that “the people must be convinced that we are their fair and generous administrators.
The methods the Nazis employed to “shift responsibility for funding” were as varied as they were outrageous. Aly relentlessly exposes every one in all its nauseating detail. From a stylistic point of view, several of the chapters are so dense and technical that they border on the unreadable. But ultimately the effort of wading through it is worthwhile because the weight of the evidence becomes overwhelming.
Conquered lands were forced to pay Germany for having the Wehrmacht occupy their soil. Poland, for example paid 100 million zlotys per month for the “services” of 400,000 soldiers, even though a mere 80,000 were stationed there. The same method of extortion was extended across Europe as the Reich expanded. And it was not only foes who were caught in the net. Romania was bled dry in order to satisfy the financial appetite of its Nazi ally.
When the German army marched into a country it would issue its troops with its own currency – Reich Credit Bank certificates. The exchange rate for these against local notes was artificially fixed to make it easy for German soldiers to buy foreign produce at bargain basement rates. This kept ordinary soldiers happy, and they brought mountains of food and manufactures home in their bulging kit bags, or sent them home through the postal service. Shelves were emptied around Europe, leading eventually to mass starvation in places like Greece (where 300,000 perished in less than two months).
Aly reminds us of the Brecht quote, that it is easier to rob people by setting up a bank than by raiding it. Through these bank certificates the “benefits” of foreign occupation filtered through to broad sections of the German population. The government was keen to keep it that way. Restrictions on the amounts of contraband soldiers could shift were lifted, with Göring telling the finance minister, “Mr Reinhardt, desist with your customs checks ... I’d rather have unlimited amounts of goods smuggled in.”
Allied bombing shook the home population out of a sense of complacency. To cushion the blow it was decided “to have the Jews evacuated so that at least some of those who had been hit by the bombs could be given new apartments”. This was an explicit item at the Wannsee Conference in January 1942, which planned the Holocaust in detail.
As problems on the Russian front mounted in 1943, so did the scale of the larceny. For example, the Belgian state spent 83 billion marks domestically during the war, while the German occupiers extracted 134 billion. The same picture was repeated, with minor variations, across Western Europe. In the East, Nazi treatment of the people was still more savage. The Reich commissioner for the Ukraine put it in these terms: “Ukraine is required to provide everything Germany lacks. This requirement is to be fulfilled without regard to casualties ... The grain we lack must be extracted from Ukraine. In light of this task, feeding the civilian population there is utterly insignificant.”
At the same time millions of Soviet POWs were being starved to death. The destination of the food was clear. Göring declared, “We are feeding our entire army from the occupied territories,” and announced an increase in food rations at home. This was “guns and butter”, with the Reich’s grain supplies growing by 10 percent and meat supplies by 12 percent.
Aly’s findings have wide significance. Simply compare Hitler’s Beneficiaries with the infamous bestseller by Daniel Goldhagen, Hitler’s Willing Executioners, whose title Aly almost seems to echo. Goldhagen makes two central claims in his book. First, he makes the Holocaust a unique and privileged feature that can be treated independently from wider Nazi policy. Second, he insists on the centrality of Nazi ideology in the genesis of the Holocaust. This is held to have penetrated so deeply into the German psyche that all sections of the population became active accomplices of the greatest crime in history.
By contrast, Aly sees the Holocaust as one element of a much broader picture, in which the gas chambers, the military occupation of Europe, and the German domestic economic and political situation are all intimately linked. This approach is essential. If the Holocaust is wrenched out of its historical setting, it cannot be adequately explained. One is forced to depend on ahistorical or psychological categories such as irrationality. Unfortunately Goldhagen is not alone in doing this. There is a trend among some very good historians (such as Michael Burleigh and Wolfgang Wippermann in The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945) to overemphasise the element of racial ideology in Nazism at the expense of an overall understanding.
From a Marxist point of view this is to turn the relationship between base and superstructure upside down, privileging the latter over the former for one special event that is held to be so exceptional it stands above all others. The 55 million who died in the war become extras in a backdrop for the Holocaust, while fundamental features such as politics, class and capitalism disappear from view.
Unlike Goldhagen, Aly locates the Nazis’ primary drive in the history and politics of Germany rather than pathology. The key background was the outcome of First World War. In November 1918 a revolution occurred in Germany that culminated in the overthrow of the Kaiser. Hitler remembered very well how, just two days later, the army admitted defeat in the First World War. Germany had lost the war not so much through defeat on the battlefield as on the “home front”. Even worse, from the Nazis’ point of view, the German Revolution unleashed a movement that came within an inch of winning the country over to Bolshevism. As Hitler revealed in Mein Kampf, it was his life’s work to undo the effects of defeat and revolution.
The shadow of November 1918 hung over Nazism throughout its history. But the ghosts that Hitler hoped had been exorcised by crushing of the Communists and Socialists could easily revive. He was shocked on 3 September 1939 when the masses, who had been fed on a diet of Nazi militarism for six years, greeted the outbreak of war with a sullen resentment. This reaction steeled his determination to bolster the “home front” at any cost, and he declared on that day, “A November 1918 shall never repeat itself in German history.”
Aly argues, against Goldhagen, that the dictatorship’s ideological hold on the German masses was much weaker than was the case in the Western democracies. He points out that Winston Churchill made “blood, toil, tears and sweat” speeches and, like Franklin Roosevelt, was far more open about the perils and costs of all-out warfare than Hitler. Both Western leaders were able to raise billions in war bonds to finance the conflict because their populations were convinced of the need to destroy the evils of Nazism. Hitler did not dare to make an equivalent appeal to the pockets of ordinary Germans to fight the Allies. As Aly says, “The much celebrated, seemingly omnipotent Führer never saw himself in a position to demand openly that his people entrust him with their savings.”
Instead of asking for self-sacrifice (and risking refusal), the Nazis sought to pacify the German masses. It is important here to reiterate that there is a distinction between Aly and Goldhagen, though both see the German people as tainted by Nazism. For Aly the large scale apathy shown for the fate of the Jews was not the result of ideology but of material corruption.
There is continuing doubt about how much ordinary Germans actually knew about the Holocaust itself. For Goldhagen’s thesis to work they had to be fully aware, and therefore conscious accomplices. For Aly this is not essential and he ignores the question. His argument does imply that many Germans knew about the exploitation of conquered territories. Of this there can be no doubt, because anything up to 12 million foreign slave labourers were to be found scattered across Germany. Indifference towards them was due, says Aly, to many Germans having been bribed by the loot extracted through conquest.
Hopefully it is clear by now how original Aly’s approach to the issue of the Holocaust is. In this horrific picture of general pillage right across Europe, it was the weakest sections of the population who paid the highest price and, given the anti-Semitism of the Nazis, this was bound to be the Jews. So politics and economics became entwined in a deadly race towards extermination. Aly does not pose this relationship in abstract terms, but in meticulous detail.
One example is the transport to Auschwitz of the 1,767 Jews of Rhodes. It occurred late in the war when the Wehrmacht was preparing to pull back towards its German heartland to ward off the Red Army. The diversion of a cargo ship and trains for this seemingly pointless murderous operation has been said to expose the “whole insanity of the Nazis”.
Aly argues that at this particular stage the occupying forces in Greece needed a quick injection of finance, especially gold, because their depredations had destroyed the value of the local money. As one Nazi official put it, “The delivery of fresh supplies ... was endangered and [this] called, in the interest of the islands’ defence, for the ruthless impounding of gold and currency.” The Jews of Rhodes were doomed to provide this quick monetary fix.
This argument can be taken too far. In his article Plumbing the Depths (www.isj.org.uk/index.php4?s=resources) Alex Callinicos rightly warns that “however instrumentally rational the bureaucratic organisation of the Holocaust may have become, this crime was dictated by considerations neither of profitability nor of military strategy”. The seizure of wealth from the Jews of Rhodes did not require their removal to Auschwitz, nor their extermination in gas chambers. An ideological obsession is a necessary part of the picture here.
In his defence, Aly’s purpose in Hitler’s Beneficiaries is not to explain the Holocaust alone, and so he virtually ignores the specific role of anti-Semitic ideology. Nonetheless, the book provides important new information that helps explain how many interlocking motivations and drives combined to produce political stability inside Germany, tumbling living standards in France, mass starvation in Russia and extermination in the death camps of Poland.
If the evidence contained in the book is riveting and worthy of the closest attention, the same cannot be said of the analytical framework that accompanies it. Aly is leagues ahead of people such as Goldhagen. However, as the title of Aly’s book suggests, his intention is to show that the ordinary German people, and the working class in particular, benefited from Nazism and by implication were accomplices to the crimes of Nazism.
It is one thing to argue that the Nazis feared revolutionary upheaval during wartime and so bought off discontent. It is another to say the people were incriminated in the plundering and murderous activities of their government. The distinction might seem rather too subtle or semantic to be of importance, but the contrary is true.
If the German working class had a material interest in the slaughter of Jews and ransacking of Europe, then they were the enemy of all non-Germans and Jews, along with Hitler and his gang. They could not, therefore, have been the victims (albeit paying a lesser price than many) of Nazi tyranny. The logic of the position is to see the Nazi government and German people as united in the very Volksgemeinschaft (racial community) that Hitler claimed he stood for. Aly comes close to arguing this, and along the way makes some extraordinary statements. We are told that under Nazism “greater equality ... was achieved” and that National Socialism took “an anti_elitist stance” which aimed at “levelling out class distinctions”. The concentration camps seem almost benevolent institutions where at the end of 1936 “only 4,761 people – some of whom were chronic alcoholics and career criminals – were incarcerated”.
There is no space here to expose the deeply elitist thinking that infused Hitler’s Mein Kampf, but some practical examples are worth citing. In Hitler’s “anti-elitist” Germany 200,000 people had been compulsorily sterilised even before the war. The target was the 20 percent deemed “unfit to reproduce”. Some 35,000 forced abortions occurred after the policy was introduced in 1935. Between 1939 and 1941 70,000 Germans (mainly disabled children) were eliminated in gas chambers through Action T4. And so it went on. In the year before the war began the number of political prisoners in concentration camps stood at 163,000. This regime was not based on equality or benevolence, but was thoroughly elitist not only in relation to the different “races”, but within the “race” itself.
The fundamental problem with Aly’s approach is that it suggests the German working class were not exploited, but were in effect exploiters, because they were relatively better off than the victims of Nazism elsewhere in Europe. Aly himself gives evidence to show this was not the case. In 1928, before Hitler’s accession, the total wages paid in Germany were 42.6 billion marks. In 1935 the figure stood at 31.8 billion. Perhaps the first transports of Jews away from Germany to Poland (and eventual extermination) were in order to free up homes for other Germans. However, the latter were homeless because of the war Hitler started and the resultant RAF bombing raids – hardly a benefit for ordinary Germans. By the end of the war 25 percent of housing was uninhabitable.
Aly spends a long time showing how “the upper classes forked over the lion’s share” of increased wartime taxation, as compared to the workers who basked in “Nazi socialism” (not given in parentheses in the book). His proof is that “middle-income” Germans shouldered only 10 percent of the additional wartime tax burden (compared to 20 percent for the rich and 70 percent for Jews and forced labourers). If this is evidence of socialism then the introduction of income tax in Britain during the Napoleonic Wars, by which the rich paid more, ushered in a socialist society 200 years ago. We just didn’t notice it!
In wars the resources of society are thrown into supporting the fight and so it is often the case that those with the most wealth – the exploiters – are required to cough up relatively more than those with the least. Food rationing and state control did not make Churchill a socialist or an “anti-elitist”. Even if Aly’s tax figures are correct, it is still the case that the burden on the poorest increased as a result of Hitler’s criminal war.
In fact, the whole thesis that workers benefited from Nazism is unsound. Every year before the war saw a decline in the portion of the national income going to wages. Soldiers abroad might have sent home loot, but it is not true that their living standards doubled or tripled, as the profits of firms such as IG Farben, AEG and Krupps did. For socialists there is a fundamental distinction between benefiting from the system and merely suffering a lighter burden of exploitation. During the industrial revolution the income of British textile workers may have been higher than slaves on the US plantations, but both were exploited and could, during the American Civil War, unite, with British unions backing a blockade of the Confederates. This is not to deny the impact of differentials on working class attitudes and activities. Divide and rule is the oldest trick in the bosses’ book. But it is the role of socialists to argue that divisions are superficial compared to the fundamental unity of all those exploited by capitalism.
So there are deep flaws in some of Aly’s analysis. Nevertheless, this book is a brilliant piece of research. It brings a surprisingly fresh new perspective to an aspect of 21st century history that has been pored over for decades. Hitler’s Beneficiaries deserves careful consideration.
 



The capitalist system has never been more at risk than in the years following the First World War. In 1917 the Bolshevik revolution inspired a wave of intense class struggle which swept Europe. During the early months of 1919 workers’ councils held effective power into a band which stretched from Hungary and Russia to Austria and Germany. Italy entered ‘two red years’ which culminated in the massive occupation of the factories. Even Britain was for a time on the brink of revolution with the 40-hours’ movement, police strikes in Liverpool and London, and army mutinies in Calais and Rhyl.
Despite the unprecedented level of mass struggle the workers’ movements were defeated one by one and the rule of capital re-imposed. By 1924 only the Soviet state in Russia survived. Trotsky explained the failure of the international revolution in this way: ‘It is all too obvious Just what was lacking in 1919 and 1920: a revolutionary party was lacking. Not until the powerful postwar mass ferment has already begun to ebb did young Communists Parties begin to take shape, and even then only in rough outline.’ [1]
His statement was no exaggeration. When the Russian revolution peaked in October 1917 the Bolsheviks had an organisation of 200,000 workers with many years of political struggle behind them. They published 17 daily papers which had a joint circulation of 320,000 copies. No comparable revolutionary party existed elsewhere. The Hungarian Communists were prisoners of war in Russia when they established their organisation. Just four months later they were propelled into power in an attempt to resolve the chaotic situation in which Hungary found itself. The Communist government here lasted just 133 days.
In Britain the revolutionary current around John Maclean consisted of a tiny handful of militants who managed to publish only three issues of a monthly paper which sold just 3,000 copies. Gramsci’s group in Italy was hardly bigger and claimed a circulation for its fortnightly journal of 5,000. By far the most promising revolutionary organisation outside Russia was the Spartakist League. Yet this entered the revolution with fewer than 3,000 members and only established a central committee to provide effective leadership two days after the revolution had begun.
Why were there no revolutionary parties capable of leading the postwar movements to victory? The standard reformist explanation was developed by Kautsky. It stated that in Russia the repressive conditions of Tsarism forced workers to take an openly revolutionary road, while ‘democracy’ in the West meant then and means now that parliamentary politics are sufficient to transform society. Watered down versions of this argument are still current today. To combat such reasoning it is necessary to demonstrate: (i) that the lack of revolutionary parties outside Russia was not because democracy made them impossible, but because Marxists either did not see the need for such parties or went about building them wrongly; and (ii) that the fundamental lessons of Bolshevism, though coloured by the special conditions of Russia, are still a guide to building revolutionary parties East and West.
 
Part One: Revolutionary Marxism in the West
A complete explanation of the absence of revolutionary parties in Europe must approach the question on two levels – looking at the objective conditions in which Marxists operated and the way they responded to these conditions in practice. This article will concentrate on the last element for one major reason. For much of the time the revolutionary party must be built against and in spite of prevailing conditions. This is not to say that by a sheer effort of will a mass party can be built during a downturn in class struggle, but that an organisation large enough to be capable of independent initiative must be built under the unfavourable conditions of entrenched capitalism. Inevitably the membership of such an organisation will be quite restricted; but unless the party is built on some scale it will never be able to play a leadership role when the crisis ripens. Thus while mass support for revolutionary ideas will only come about during widescale class struggle, a coherent revolutionary party must be created beforehand. Therefore the conscious activity of revolutionaries, whatever the objective conditions in which they find themselves, is of the utmost importance.
In pre-war Europe there was a conscious revolutionary current, and yet it failed to establish any serious parties of its own. A common explanation for this has been that Rosa Luxemburg, the foremost revolutionary outside Russia, had the wrong line and failed to recognise Lenin’s original contribution to the theory of the party. Put in these individual terms, Lenin is cast in the role of hero and genius while at best Luxemburg is damned with faint praise or is seen as the one who, through her failings was personally responsible for world history since 1919. Lindsay German’s excellent introduction to Cliff’s Rosa Luxemburg sometimes slips into this ‘sin of omission’ approach. By 1919 her failure to build a revolutionary socialist party earlier, meant that she lacked this solid base on which to stand ... In a short space of years, the lack of a party in Germany led to the defeat of the German Revolution, followed by the defeat of socialist hopes on a world scale, the growth of fascism in Germany and Stalinism in Russia. [2] It is not surprising that SWP members sometimes ask themselves, why bother with Luxemburg at all if she was totally wrong about the main task of a revolutionary – the building of a party.
The explanation of the missing party cannot be approached on a personal level alone. The answer is wider than a comparison of Luxemburg with Lenin for it must show why neither she nor any other Western revolutionary came to the idea of a revolutionary vanguard party. If Luxemburg was wrong, why did no one replace her at the head of the German revolutionary movement just as Lenin and his party replaced the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries during 1917? I believe Marxists like Luxemburg did not build their own parties in opposition to the mass reformist parties of the day because no-one saw Workers’ power growing out of politics in the workplace. In other words they has no concept of a party which grew by relating to the class via intervention in workplace struggle. Without such a concrete orientation for day-to-day activity there was no means of relating general Marxist theory about the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism without the practical means of achieving it. The importance of workplace politics, both in the creation of a revolutionary socialist party, and in the eventual seizure of power through assemblies of shopfloor delegates (Soviets), was only understood in Western Europe after the Russian revolution in 1917. But in the pre-war years the Marxism of Luxemburg and her fellow revolutionaries in the West was formed by a quite different historical development.
 
(i) The ParisCommune and the rise of the Second International parties
Mass political parties have not always existed. They are essentially voluntary organisations of people who share a common attitude towards society and the various classes within it. In Europe such parties only became possible in the era of ‘political freedom’ combined with economic wage slavery initiated by capitalism. Western bourgeois parties are structured by this framework. They accept the formal separation of politics and economics, and structure themselves to run bourgeois democracy within the confines of the nation state. Here the geographical ballot, which enshrines the concept of political equality as distinct from economic equality, is the guiding organisational principle. In contrast to capitalist politicians, genuine Marxists had to draw up the model for their parties on the basis of workers’ needs in struggle. The only guides at the beginning of the century were the high points of struggle in 1848, and above all the Paris Commune of 1871.
The Commune was for Marx an invaluable insight into the process of socialist transformation. It was ‘the political form at last discovered under which to work out the economical emancipation of labour.’ [3] In The Civil War in France he considerably developed his ideas about the capitalist state and the form needed to replace it. In relation to the former, he argued: ‘The working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready made machinery, and wield it for its own purposes.’ [4] As the alternative to the bourgeois state, the Paris Commune had many features of a proletarian dictatorship: ‘Its members were naturally working men, or acknowledged representatives of the working class. The Commune was to be a working, not a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at the same time ... the police was at once stripped of its political attributes, and turned into the responsible and at all time revocable agent of the Commune. So were the officials of all other branches of the administration. From the members of the Commune downwards, the public service had to be done at workmen’s wages.’ [5]
Marx’s judgement was remarkable given the fact that the uprising lasted barely more than two months. He pinpointed features that were hardly noticeable before the Commune was swept away, and yet which have proved to be essential in subsequent revolutions, such as militias and instant recall methods. Nevertheless, The Civil War in France could not fail to be constrained by the limits of the Commune itself, and in particular the structure of industrial production in Paris. In 1848, of the 65,000 firms operating in the capital, only 7,000 employed more than 10 workers. [6] Twenty years later the average size of industrial enterprise in Paris was still 7.7 workers. [7] This meant that independent workplace organisation could not be a means of uniting workers. Class solidarity had to be forged on purely geographical lines through arrondissements (municipal boroughs) and the National Guard (a defensive militia system inherited from the Second Empire).
This affected all aspects of the Commune’s short existence. It was elected by universal male suffrage according to the law of 1849 – a law enacted in the years of reaction that followed the massacre of Parisian workers in June 1848. [8] Of its 80 or so members only 24 were actually workers. [9] The proletariat was the dynamic force inspiring and leading the movement, but the Commune’s first social decrees showed that its immediate concern lay outside production. They consisted of control of house rents and the postponing of overdue bills. [10] The chief working class measures which Marx listed were abolition of night work for journeymen bakers, abolition of punitive fines at work and the sale of pawned articles. [11]
Marx criticised the actions of the Communards for want of audacity (failure to march on Versailles, or to seize the Bank of France etc.), but given the time he was writing, he could not see the limitations of universal male suffrage as opposed to workplace organisation of power. If the development of industry had been more advanced and the Commune had made a radical break with geographical suffrage, then both he and Engels would have had a much clearer view of the alternative structure of workers’ power under developed Western capitalism. Universal suffrage soon became a central feature of the modern bourgeois states that emerged at the time. The spread of the franchise was very rapid in the later years of the century: USA universal white suffrage introduced 1870; Germany universal male suffrage introduced 1871; Britain, most male workers get the vote in 1884; Spain 1890; Belgium 1893 and so on.
Marx had no truck with worship of the principle of democratic election, which he dismissed as ‘twaddle’ and ‘political drivel’. ‘The character of the election does not depend on this name, but on the economic foundation, the economic situation of the voters.’ [12] Nevertheless there was a weakness in his position. In the case of workers’ revolution, unlike any other, the form of seizure of power – workers’ councils or Soviets formed by delegates democratically elected at the point of production – is at the same time a direct measure of the development of the productive forces in society. As Marx puts it himself, the development of capitalism leads to ‘the revolt of the working class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organized by the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself.’ [13] Workplace election is therefore an indication of the division of labour into large collective units and the readiness of the productive forces to break through the social relations of production. It is a sign of economic and political maturity. Here the electoral form is very important.
This close relation of political forms and economic development is unique to the workers’ movement. The rise of the bourgeoisie within late feudalism was quite different. It developed its economic power through the market, trading and low level commodity production, in the cracks and crevices of feudal society. During this period (which in countries like Britain and France lasted several centuries) its growing economic power was not matched by an equivalent political influence. Indeed political domination as imposed by Cromwell, Robespierre and the like was only the final act in the long evolution of the capitalist system to maturity.
The working class cannot secure power in the same roundabout way. Economic control can only be won by political means, the seizure of state power. But the chief power of the working class is its collective strength at the point of production. This means that the struggle in the workplace must be part and parcel of the struggle for state power. Both find a concrete expression in a single form – the workers’ council or Soviet which is based on elections at shopfloor level but fights to overthrow the bourgeois state and replace it with a permanent system of Soviet democracy.
For all its daring innovations, the Paris Commune did not, and could not have demonstrated this aspect of workers’ revolution. So the difference between geographical and workplace election was never revealed. Three years after the demise of the Commune Marx could write: ‘the proletariat still acts, during the period of struggle for the overthrow of the old society, on the basis of that old society, and hence also still moves within political forms which more or less belong to it, it has not yet, during this period of struggle, attained its final constitution, and employs means for its liberation which after this liberation fall aside.’ [14] Reformists were to exploit this lack of clarity to deny the revolutionary foundations of Marxism. One notorious example of this was the much-distorted Preface Engels wrote for Marx’s Class Struggles in France. The 1895 Preface was known in the Second International as Engels’ Testament. One passage stated: ‘There had long been universal suffrage in France, but it had fallen into disrepute through the misuse to which the Bonapartist government had put it. After the Commune there was no workers’ party to make use of it ... It was otherwise in Germany. [There] the franchise has been, in the words of the French Marxist programme, transforme, de moyen de duperie qu’il a ete jusqu’ici, en instrument d’emancipation – transformed by them from a means of deception, which it was before, into an instrument of emancipation. [15] The words in French were written by Marx himself.
Of course in context, these statements by Marx and Engels are no more than a partial confusion which runs counter to the spirit of their whole life’s work. Even Kautsky felt moved to defend Engels’ revolutionary intentions in the Preface from distortion. [16] Elsewhere Engels remarked that universal suffrage ‘is the gauge of the maturity of the working class. It cannot and never will be anything more ...’ [17] Nevertheless the absence of a clear differentiation between political struggle through workplace or constituency remained an area of concision inherited by even Marx’s best followers.
The period after the Paris Commune was one of political stability and economic growth in Western Europe. In these years, mass collective production spread outside the shores of Britain and extended beyond the original core of textiles to embrace mining, iron and steel manufacture, engineering and chemicals. For the first time there was an objective basis for building parties orientated on the workplace. But unfortunately the very dynamic of capitalist growth weakened the roots of working class militancy and led to a relatively low level of workplace struggle. This meant that socialists were rarely to glimpse the potential of collective shopfloor action, and so were not forced to reconsider their political methods in the light of the current phase of capitalist development. Nevertheless the rise of a massive working class presence in several European countries provided the basis for new political parties, the first and most important of which was the German Social Democratic Party founded in 1875. Though most claimed to be Marxist and joined the Second International, they were all firmly committed to building their organisation on a national, geographical basis, and often patterned themselves according to parliamentary constituencies as the Labour Party does today. Without a theoretical understanding of the importance of politics in the workplace it was exceedingly difficult for revolutionaries to propose a practical alternative to the organisational methods of these Second International parties. Even the brilliant Rosa Luxemburg could not free herself from the constraints of this situation.
 
(ii) Luxemburg’s dilemma
While Luxemburg is rightly recognised to be in the ‘real Marxist tradition’ [18] there is no doubt that till her brutal murder in January 1919 she remained far removed from the Leninist conception of the party. She distrusted the leadership of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) from 1905 onwards, but it took the party’s collapse into chauvinism in 1914 to force her into organising an independent revolutionary faction. And this remained wedded to the social democratic movement until 1918. It took two months of revolution, the open counter-revolutionary preparations of the SPD and the paralysis of the centrist Independent Social Democrats to lead to the founding of a separate party – the German Communist Party.
How can one explain Luxemburg’s refusal to break with the Social Democrats, whose faults she understood better than anyone? Most explanations have concentrated on two areas. The first stresses her reaction to the conservative methods of German social democracy. In connection with this Cliff says: ‘The main reason for Rosa Luxemburg’s underestimation of the factor of organisation probably lies in the need, in the immediate struggle against reformism, for emphasis on spontaneity as the first step in all revolutions. From this one stage in the struggle of the proletariat she generalised too widely to embrace the struggle as a whole.’ [19] This is quite correct, but it does not explain why her response to the problem of mass reformism should be to overestimate spontaneity rather than building an alternative party. The second important reason advanced for Luxemburg’s mistaken position concentrates on the contrast between Lenin’s view of the vanguard and her own. Paraphrasing the latter. Cliff has written that: ‘the need for a revolutionary party ... is a reflection of the unevenness of consciousness in the working class.’ [20] So one explanation for Luxemburg’s failure to build a vanguard party has been that she, with all other social democrats in Western Europe was blind to the different levels of consciousness in the working class: ‘It was not that she overestimated the heights to which workers would spontaneously rise, but that she overestimated the evenness with which this process could occur.’ [21]
But Luxemburg was acutely aware of the different levels of consciousness in the working class and the unevenness of its development. She wrote that ‘in an eventual future period of political mass action the most backward layers of the German proletariat – the land workers, the railwaymen, and the postal slaves – will first of all win the right of combination, and that the worst excrescences of exploitation must first be removed, and on the other hand, the political task of this period is said to be the conquest of power by the proletariat! On the one hand, economic, trade-union struggles for the most immediate interests, for the material elevation of the working class – on the other hand the ultimate goal of social democracy! Certainly these are great contradictions, but they are not contradictions due to our reasoning, but contradictions due to capitalist development. It does not proceed in a beautiful straight line but in a lightning-like zigzag. Just as the various capitalist countries represent the most varied stages of development, so within each country the different layers of the same working class are represented. But history does not wait patiently till the backward countries, and the most advanced layers have joined together so that the whole mass can move symmetrically forward like a compact column. It brings the best prepared parts to explosion as soon as conditions there are ripe for it ... ‘ [22]
Even Karl Kautsky, the man who defined social democratic orthodoxy distinguished between different sections, writing in The Road to Power: ‘However large proletarian organisation may become, in normal non-revolutionary periods it can never include the whole working class of the State, but always merely an elite. This has specific, local or individual characteristics which raise it above the level of the population.’ [23]
It was obvious that even the SPD, with one million members, was a minority in comparison with the German working class of 15 million. The question of building a revolutionary party did not depend on recognising the fact of unevenness, but the political conclusions that might be drawn from it. Luxemburg’s conclusions were radically different from Lenin’s for, while recognising unevenness in the proletariat, she chose to remain in a party broad enough to include the arch-reformist Bernstein. How can this be explained?
Luxemburg’s politics were based on two fundamental beliefs. The first was that through its own mass struggle the working class changes itself and changes society: ‘In the revolution when the masses themselves appear on the battlefield ... class consciousness becomes practical and active. A year of revolution has therefore given the Russian proletariat that ‘training’ which thirty years of parliamentary and trade-union struggle cannot artificially give the German proletariat’. [24] This is the first and absolutely correct promise that she starts from.
The other key plank in her thought was defence of the revolutionary heritage of Marxism and its application to current issues. She made her debut on the German scene with precisely that issue, the pamphlet – Reform or Revolution. In it Luxemburg reasserts the Marxist theory of the state, which is ‘first of all, an organisation of the ruling class.’ [25] As capitalism developed, the state ‘as a set of political and juridical relations, established between capitalist and socialist society a steadily rising wall. This wall is not overthrown, but is on the contrary strengthened and consolidated by the development of social reforms and the course of democracy. Only the hammer blow of revolution, that is to say, the conquest of power by the proletariat, can break down this wall.’ [26]
The role of socialist leadership in this struggle was spelled out clearly in this passage: ‘Our program would be a miserable scrap of paper if it could not serve us in all eventualities, at all moments of the struggle, and if it did not serve us by its application and not by its non-application. If our program contained the formula of the historic development of society from capitalism to socialism. it must also formulate, in all its characteristic fundamentals, all the transitory phases of this development, and it should consequently, be able to indicate to the proletariat what ought to be its corresponding action at every moment on the road toward socialism.’ [27]
It follows from this that she saw a specifically revolutionary party as absolutely necessary: ‘It is not true that socialism will arise automatically from the daily struggle of the working class. Socialism will be the consequence of (1) the growing contradictions of capitalist economy and (2) the comprehension by the working class of the unavoidability of the suppression of these contradictions through a social transformation.’ [28]
She saw its general role as an active interventionist force: ‘The social democrats are the most enlightened, most class conscious vanguard of the proletariat. They cannot and dare not wait, in a fatalist fashion with folded arms for the advent of the revolutionary situation ... On the contrary, they must now, as always, hasten the development of things and endeavour to accelerate events.’ [29]
So we have at the roots of her thinking, at the centre of why we still regard Luxemburg as an inspiration today, two entirely correct and important ideas: (i) The need for revolutionary theory and its practical application through a party, (ii) The fact that through the mass struggle the working class can changes itself and the world.
Her organisational conclusions flow from this evaluation of the situation and quite correctly so. Only bureaucrats start with an organisation and then trim their politics to suit its needs. Luxemburg believed the revolutionary party ‘must logically grope on its road of development between the following two rocks: abandoning the mass character of the party or abandoning its final aim, falling into bourgeois reformism or into sectarianism, anarchism or opportunism.’ [30] This idea was expounded in 1900 and was repeated in a different form in her controversy with Lenin: ‘On the one hand we have the mass; on the other, its historic goal, located outside of existing society. On one hand we have day-to-day struggle; on the other, social revolution. Such are the terms of the dialectical contradiction through which the socialist movement makes its way. It follows that this movement can best advance by tacking betwixt and between the two dangers by which it is constantly being threatened. One is the loss of its mass character; the other the abandonment of its goal. One is the danger of sinking back to the condition of a sect; the other, the danger of becoming a movement of bourgeois social reform.’ [31]
Here again the starting point was fundamentally correct. To talk only of final aims and disregard the means of achieving them – the mass transformation of consciousness through class struggle – leads to a sectarian dead end. To immerse the party in current concerns without a view to the final aim of socialist revolution, leads to an equally disastrous reformist dead-end.
Luxemburg saw the traps but fell into both of them. As a member of the Polish revolutionary group, the SDKPiL she was part of a tiny organisation which, apart from a brief growth in 1905 was little more than a circle of talented intellectuals on the margins of the Polish working class. Its chief (and typically sectarian) distinguishing feature was an obsession with the national question based on Luxemburg’s erroneous position. As a member of the SPD in Germany, however, she was tied to a mass reformist party which eventually smashed the German revolution and engineered her murder.
What Luxemburg argued in 1900 regained her guiding organisational principles until her death. Though correct in the abstract, their application involved growing problems. At the turn of the century the German SPD, Under Bebel and Kautsky’s leadership, seemed to the untrained eye to be pursuing precisely the course she herself suggested – building a mass party which rejected the revisionism of Bernstein and acclaimed revolutionary Marxism. But as time went on, the weaknesses in the party became ever more apparent. By 1905 Luxemburg was fighting for the revolutionary idea against the mainstream of the SDP. Her pamphlet on The Mass Strike was directed against two targets; firstly the trade union leaders who rejected strike action because of Its disruption of ‘normal’ bargaining methods; and secondly against the mechanistic conceptions of the SPD leaders who saw the mass strike as a party controlled protest of purely demonstrative character. Already the gap between what Luxemburg thought the SPD should be and what it as was growing.
Steering between the rocks of sectarianism and reformism became harder and harder. In 1905 she wrote: ‘Bebel’s resolution gives a very one-sided and flat interpretation of the mass strike question. When we learnt about it in Jena, some of us decided to put up a fight against it during the discussions so that we could champion the mass strike ... [But] as on several previous occasions, we “extreme leftists” found ourselves being forced to fight, not against Bebel, but together with him against the opportunists.’ [32]
By 1913 the situation had worsened considerably. Now her friend Karski wrote: ‘we three (Luxemburg, Mehring, Karski) ... are of the opinion that the party is undergoing an internal crisis much more serious than the one when revisionism first arose. These words may seem harsh, but it is my conviction that the party is threatening to waste away if matters go on like this. At such a time there is only one hope of redemption for a revolutionary party: the sharpest and most ruthless self-criticism conceivable.’ [33] But the sort of theoretical campaign Karski and Luxemburg proposed did not lead to an organisational break. The situation would have been quite different had it come to practical issues, for as Lukacs explains: ‘On the level of pure theory the most disparate views and tendencies are able to co exist peacefully; antagonisms are only expressed in the forms which can be contained without disrupting it. But no sooner are these same questions given organisational form, than they turn out to be sharply opposed and even incompatible.’ [34]
By 1917 Luxemburg’s position had become impossibly contradictory. Still arguing against a split from social democracy she wrote: ‘However commendable and comprehensible the impatience and bitterness which leads so many of the best elements to leave the party today, a flight remains a flight. It is a betrayal of the masses. They are left choking and struggling in the iron grip of Scheidemann and Legien [35], people who have unconditionally surrendered to the bourgeoisie. One may withdraw from small sects when they do not suit one any longer in order to found new sects ... The discarding of membership cards as an illusion of liberation, is nothing but the illusion, stood on its head, that power is inherent in a membership card. Both are different poles of organisational cretinism, the constitutional sickness of old German Social-Democracy.’ [36]
Was Luxemburg’s absolute refusal to break from the SPD an example of her own organisational cretinism? I think not. Despite her above statement it is no contradiction to state that in Western Europe she was the almost undisputed champion of revolutionary Marxism because, better than anyone else she understood the dynamic of revolutionary change. Despite the fact that she almost alone penetrated the verbal radicalism of Kautsky and judged the weaknesses of the SPD, she had no practical means of building the very party she really believed in – a party which was neither a sect nor reformist. Her opposition to the SPD leadership therefore remained abstract and never concrete.
This has been explained by a character trait, a certain distaste for humdrum organisational detail and so on. But while this might be true, it does not tell us why she was neither pushed aside by a German Lenin, or why her close friend Jogiches, a man obsessed with the intricacies of revolutionary organisation, could not have filled the gap. It would be wrong to explain Luxemburg’s hesitancy by an obsession with membership figures, otherwise she would not have associated with both the huge SPD and the tiny SDKPiL. Her real concern was that revolutionaries should maintain links with the mass movement. As a consistent political thinker she discounted the trade unions as the channel through which this could be achieved. In this she was more far-sighted than the syndicalists. Indeed she earned the hatred of the union bureaucrats by her brilliant characterisation of union work as ‘a labour of Sisyphus’ – a perpetual struggle to lift working class living standards, which though it builds confidence, on its own can never overturn the system. But if the unions could not replace the work of the party, outside of the SPD she felt there was no mechanism, no practice around which a genuine revolutionary party rather than a sect could coalesce.
The problem she could not solve was how to translate her fundamentally correct theory of socialist change into reality. Of course, the connection between theory and practice is dialectical–what you think affects what you do and vice-versa. So Luxemburg’s theory, deprived of a practical outlet became tied up in its own contradictions and confused. The clearest example of this was the problem of leadership. While she saw this as crucially important, she was driven to separate political and technical direction. In Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy she saw the political tasks of Russia’s leading revolutionaries in this way: ‘a proletarian vanguard, conscious of its class interests and capable of self-directing is only now emerging in Russia. All efforts of socialist agitation and organisation should aim to hasten the formation of such a vanguard’. [37] Yet once the vanguard was organised into the very democratic centralist party she has just proposed, it would become an obstacle: ‘The tendency is for the directing organs of the socialist party to play a conservative role ... which holds up advance on a wider scale.’ [38]
The same contradiction is present in The Mass Strike where she says: ‘the social democrats, as the organised nucleus of the working class, are the most important vanguard of the entire body of the workers ... the political clarity, the strength, and the unity of the labour movement flow from this organisation.’ [39] This is immediately negated when she discusses the way such clarity, strength and unity operates on the ground: ‘There are quite definite limits set to initiative and conscious direction. During the revolution it is extremely difficult for any directing organ of the proletarian movement to foresee and to calculate which occasions and factors can lead to explosion and which cannot.’ [40] The distinction she was making was summed up in this formulation: ‘the task of social democracy does not consist in the technical preparation and direction of mass strikes, but, first and foremost, in the political leadership of the whole movement.’ [41] It is obviously nonsense to separate political and technical leadership in this mechanical way, and most uncharacteristic of Luxemburg’s dialectical method. Any political lead – a slogan, a demand – automatically implies technical tasks. To argue, for example, that a strike must be spread, means sending out flying pickets, arranging transport and so on. Even basic solidarity requires the printing of collection sheets or the organisation of blacking and delegations. The agile mind of Luxemburg seems to have stumbled over this most evident of points.
To sum up, the strength of Luxemburg’s position was an understanding of the need for a principled revolutionary party which also related to immediate struggle. The SPD and unions made a sharp division between politics and economics, the ‘maximum’ programme of revolution and the ‘minimum’ programme of immediate reform. But Luxemburg always refused to separate them, or to allow a split between ends and means. For all that, the end (revolution) conditions the means. Until the end, workers’ power based on councils of shopfloor delegates, was clear, the means – the revolutionary party – could not be found.
 
(iii) Alternatives to Luxemburgism
Luxemburg has been criticised for failing to split from the mass reformist SPD in the prewar years. But in the absence of an alternative revolutionary practice based on politics in the workplace, her position retained a certain validity. This is clear if we compare the fate of her political current which led to the most successful postwar Communist Party, with those of revolutionaries who did break from the reformist parties but had no firm political practice through which they could operate.
There were indeed many who attempted to build independent revolutionary organisations, but none of them came to the idea of workplace political activity. Most remained impotent sects or actually became obstacles to the building of revolutionary parties in the post war period. The idea that ‘if only Luxemburg had broken from the SPD before the war everything would have turned out alright’, is put into question by these examples.
Independent revolutionary opposition to reformism was divided into two camps: one ended in narrow ‘political’ sectarianism: the other led to ‘anti-political’ syndicalism. The revolutionaries who split on political grounds tended to emphasise the final aims of socialism at the cost of cutting themselves off from the workers’ movement. The syndicalists stressed the immediate trade union struggle but effectively discarded politics and the winning of state power on the way.
 
Britain: The British left produced extreme versions of both types of movement. On the one hand there was the Socialist Party of Great Britain (SPGB) which split from the main Marxist party at the turn of the century to campaign for the ‘maximum’ programme – abolition of money and so on. Slightly less lunatic was the British Socialist Party (BSP) which propagandised for socialism but considered workplace struggle to be ‘a field with which they had nothing to do’. [42] For them ‘The Socialist Party was not out for the petty-fogging reforms which the trade unions were striving for’. [43]
The more diffuse syndicalist current was represented by Tom Mann’s Industrial Syndicalist Education League. Mann wanted a movement for ‘direct action’ as opposed to parliamentary debate. It had to be ‘Revolutionary in aim, because it will be out for the abolition of the wages system ...’ [44] Discussing the means of achieving this revolution Mann wrote: ‘The engines of war to fight the workers’ battle to overthrow the capitalist class, and to raise the general standard of life while so doing – must be of the workers’ own making. The Unions are the workers’ own.’ [45]
Between political sectarianism and syndicalism was the Socialist Labour Party (SLP), a party which squabbled with everyone else but believed in revolutionary trade unions. Its attempt to build them failed dismally.
For all their verbal radicalism, without an orientation on workplace politics the political and syndicalist currents rarely went further than Sunday morning soap-box oratory on the one hand and trade union militancy on the other.
 
Ireland: Here the two alternatives were summed up by the work of one man – James Connolly. He understood that: ‘The political institutions of today are simply the coercive forces of capitalist society.’ [46] From this he concluded that ‘the fight for the conquest of the political state is not the battle, it is only the echo of the battle. The real battle is the battle being fought out every day for the power to control industry, and the gauge of the progress of that battle is not to be found in the number of votes making a cross beneath the symbol of a political party, but in the number of these workers who enrol themselves in an industrial organisation [i.e. the trade unions]’. [47] Connolly’s syndicalist opposition to the state became simply the building of the Transport Union.
When the outbreak of the World War revealed the inadequacy of trade union action, Connolly moved from adaptation to the immediate concerns of the class to substituting for the mass movement by military means: ‘We believe that in times of peace we should work along the lines of peace ... in times of war we should act as in war ...’ The Citizen’s Army did not base its strategy on the tempo of the class struggle but on military considerations: ‘the “far-flung battle line” of England is weakest at the point nearest its heart, that Ireland is in that position of tactical advantage ... [So] the time , for Ireland’s battle is NOW. the place for Ireland’s battle is HERE.’ [48]
Connolly’s search for a revolutionary alternative to the stale politics of the Second International proved fruitless in the end. His first approach concentrated on the shopfloor, but politics were put aside. When he did come to address the conquest of state power, the earlier workplace orientation was jettisoned and militarism substituted for mass action.
 
Holland: According to one history of the Dutch labour movement ‘Holland was the first country in which differences of opinion be between revolutionaries and revisionists led to a complete split, something which only happened elsewhere during the war.’ [49] The formal split from the Second International took place fully three years before the final separation of Bolsheviks and Mensheviks in Russia during 1912. Inspired by Anton Pannekoek, who waged an open struggle against Kautsky from 1910, a new party grew up around the De Tribune journal.
It is interesting to note that Pannekoek came closer than anyone else outside Russia to posing the idea of independent workplace political organisation. This fact was later recognised by Lenin in The State and Revolution. Pannekoek’s arguments helped define the ground upon which the split took place, but there were problems with them. His idea of workplace organisation was not based on any concrete examples but rather on inspired guesswork. The new labour institution of which he spoke was posed in semi-mystical terms as a ‘spiritual organisation of the proletariat’. [50] Because of this vagueness, the relationship between the new party and the class remained in an abstract spiritual form which could not serve as the basis for building an effective party. Thus it was that the Dutch revolutionary group was no more successful than the other splits. By the end of the war it was just another vehemently anti-parliamentary sect which became a thorn in the side of the Communist International.
 
Italy: Within the Italian Socialist Party Amadeo Bordiga built a tightly organised revolutionary faction from 1912 onwards. Later he claimed that its principles were the same as those of Lenin in What is to be Done? [51] However the idea of workplace politics was entirely absent and only the idea of rigorous centralism was adopted. So while Bolshevism showed great tactical flexibility and skill in adapting to the rapid shifts in the mass movement, Bordigism fell immediately into mould of sectarian politics. The revolutionary conquest of state power became everything while the immediate struggle of the class was seen as a diversion. Eventually its main policy was reduced to abstention from voting in elections. It became a classic sect which dismissed all struggle for reform as an irrelevant palliative.
Although Bordiga’s group provided the organisational basis for the Italian Communist Party in 1921, its sectarian attitude cost the new party much vital support, for it alienated the pro-Bolshevik majority in the Socialist Party, many of whom preferred to remain with the old party, despite its open centrism and reformism, rather than throw in their lot with Bordiga. It took all the political skill of Gramsci, who developed an understanding of workplace politics in the years after the Russian revolution, to win back some of the ground the Communist Party had lost.
 
Germany: This grand tour of Europe ends with Luxemburg’s home territory of Germany. Here was the best testing ground for the thesis that all the left had to do was formally break with Kautskyism in order to create a healthy revolutionary party. There were in fact two groups of socialists who split from the SPD early in the war. One grew up in Berlin around Julian Borchardt’s newspaper, Lichtstrahlen. Borchardt attended the Zimmerwald international socialist conference during the war and supported Lenin’s revolutionary defeatist line against the centrist majority. Yet by the end of the war he had retreated into pure anarchism.
A more important group was based in Bremen. Outside of Scandinavia it maintained closer contact with the Bolsheviks than practically any other section in Europe. These ‘Left Radicals’ produced the Arbeiterpolitik newspaper and as early as March 1916 decided to establish an independent revolutionary party. This was achieved in 1917 and took the name of German International Socialist Party (ISPD). The ISPD was scathing in its criticism of Luxemburg’s refusal to leave the mass reformist parties. Its leaders, Johann Knief and Paul Frölich, were probably the people against whom Luxemburg was polemicising in the 1917 quote above.
Yet a split was no guarantee of the correct line. Although the ISPD had regular contact with Bolsheviks such as Radek, and carried up-to-date articles by Bukharin and Lenin on the ripening Russian revolution, Knief’s main explanation for the collapse of the Second International was that it laid too much stress on strong organisation: ‘Generally workers realise that the state is reactionary ... But at the same time not so many understand that the Party bureaucracy constitutes a much more dangerous reactionary force. As long as workers stick with the present organisations with their great bureaucratic machines they will be drawn even further into the bourgeois camp.’ [52] The alternative form proposed by Arbeiterpolitik was neither a party nor a union but a ‘unity organisation’ (Einheitsorganisation) – a hybrid combination of both. [53]
In 1918 Luxemburg’s Spartakist League and the ISPD merged to found the Communist Party. At the Congress Frölich argued for a policy of ‘workers out of the unions’, [54] and the ultra-left also out-voted the Spartakist leaders on the question of participation in parliamentary elections even for purely propagandist purposes. Indeed the early years of the Communist Party were marred by constant in-fighting between Paul Levi (who bore the mantle of Luxemburgism after the murder of Luxemburg) and groups supporting the old ‘Left Radical’ positions. The latter eventually split off to form the Communist Workers’ Party of Germany (KAPD), a group which fought Leninist leadership of the Communist International. Without the guiding light of a workplace political orientation, these German revolutionaries soon foundered on the rocks of sectarian impotence.
 
These numerous examples underline the point that the problem of the missing party could not be solved by a simple rejection of reformism, coupled with the will to build a new revolutionary organisation. The question of how to build a new party was still to be answered.
The chief difficulty was how could an independent revolutionary organisation related to the working class without sacrificing political principles in the immediate struggles. The answer lay in a recognition of the possibilities offered by the current phase of capitalist development with its creation of large factories and a new potential for collective political power founded on the point of production. Here was fertile ground for building a revolutionary party. But as long as the stable growth of capitalism sapped the roots of mass militancy in Western Europe, it was exceedingly difficult for revolutionaries to develop their theory to cope with this new situation.
The impetus for progress had to come from outside, and there was one country which, though partaking of the latest developments in capitalist industry, escaped the dampening of class struggle. That country was Russia.
 
(iv) The Russian revolutions as the solution to the problems of Luxemburgism
As we have seen, the Marxist understanding of the revolutionary process at the turn of the century came from the Paris Commune, which put no emphasis on workplace organisation. The advent of the Russian Soviet might have changed this. Although it began as a strike committee with the aim of winning immediate economic demands, the Tsarist state soon recognised it to be a direct political challenge to its survival and acted to smash it. The best Western analysis of the 1905 Russian revolution came from the pen of Rosa Luxemburg. However for reasons which we shall consider later, Luxemburg’s Mass Strike pamphlet completely ignored the Soviet. Nevertheless her brilliant account of the revolution and its relevance to socialists in the rest of Europe was a tremendous advance in Marxism. It began the urgent task of demolishing the many obstacles which the objective conditions of Western capitalism and the growing reformist bureaucracy of the SPD had placed in the way of revolutionary practice.
In particular it insisted on the relationship between politics and economics, between action as a class and sectional struggle. Here, was the connection of the maximum programme of the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the minimum programme of immediate struggle. But there was a basic weakness in her approach. She still viewed the revolution from an abstract viewpoint which overlooked the practical activity of human beings which shapes any great historical event. This is clear in the following description of a mass strike: ‘Every great political mass action, after it has attained its political highest point, breaks up into a mass of economic strikes. And that applies not only to each of the great mass strikes, but also to the revolution as a whole. With the spreading, clarifying and involution of the political struggle, the economic struggle not only does not recede, but extends, organises and becomes involved in equal measure. Between the two there is the most complete reciprocal action.’ [55] This is perfectly correct on paper, but it does not explain how economics and politics relate on the ground. The same problem appeared when Luxemburg talked about reformism in the Mass Strike pamphlet: ‘whether they stand aside or endeavour to resist the movement, the result of their attitude will only be that the trade-union leaders, like the party leaders in the analogous case, will simply be swept aside by the rush of events, and the economic and the political struggles of the masses will be fought out without them.’ [56]
In the Mass Strike Luxemburg showed the heights to which the workers’ movement could climb, and challenged the increasingly passive leadership of the SPD to rise to the occasion. Though it took Marxist theory many steps forward the pamphlet’s abstractness meant that its formulations could not serve as a guide to action. Still the key concept was missing – the point of production as the place where the economic power of the mobilised working class can be transformed into a political struggle. And as long as this was so, Luxemburg could not conceive of a party separating from the SPD, retaining its links with the workers’ movement, but without degenerating into a sect.
Observing workers’ struggle from the outside is not at all the same as actively participating in it. Although Luxemburg went to Poland to see events at first hand she never confronted the sort of immediate problems that the Bolsheviks in 1905 had to solve on a day to day level. Luxemburg always talked in terms of the masses on the one hand and the role of vanguard leadership on the other. But in a real conflict the relationship between the vanguard and the mass is extremely complex. The vanguard may be one or two socialists in an office or or factory, and the mass, the 10 workmates they see every day. In such a workplace, leadership in struggle is an art in which tactics and strategy, the development of a cadre, judgement of the weak points in the enemy camp and so on, are immediate practical concerns.
Without a workplace orientation, Luxemburg’s political practice did not take her beyond the framework of the SPD. Her political leadership consisted of brilliant articles published alongside mountains of reformist dross in SPD controlled newspapers. At such a level, her understanding of the unevenness of the class was not a guide to action. She never felt the need to identify the minority of workplace activists who played a leading role in the minor daily struggle of the class.
The 1905 revolution, through the work of Luxemburg, blew like a fresh wind through the stale corridors of German Social Democracy. But still criticism of the SPD was at the level of propaganda. Only after 1917, when the historical tasks begun in 1905 were finally completed, was the problem of party/class relations finally solved. The Soviet, as the highest form of politics in the workplace, was the concrete solution to all the problems that Luxemburg had only been able to solve in theory.
Where she had criticised parliamentarism in words, the Soviet itself established an alternative source of authority which challenged and ultimately overthrew its enemy. Where Luxemburg predicted that reformist leaders would simply be passed over, the Soviet, as an independent rank and file organisation, offered a popular leadership which overcame the restraining influence of the bureaucrats. Where she verbally attacked the formal separation of politics and economics, the Soviet, as a mass strike committee, raised the economic struggles of sections of workers into the concern of the whole class.
However the Soviet state is merely the end point of the revolutionary process. Long before the seizure of power becomes an issue, questions arise as to who is going to propose the establishment of independent rank and file organisation in the first place; and who is going to denounce reformist bureaucrats and argue for workers’ self-activity in opposition to parliamentary methods? In this way the Soviet poses the need for the party, just as the party cannot ultimately succeed without mass rank and file organisation of the sort represented by Soviets.
The way in which the two are connected can be demonstrated in every genuine workplace struggle. The first argument in any dispute must be that workers’ will win nothing by waiting for reformists either in parliament or union HQ to act for them but must fight on the basis of their own strength and the solidarity of other sections. Even a small strike can pose the question of state power in a much more radical way than even the best written article. A picket line may be broken by the courts and police or maintained by mass mobilisation – here is a microcosm of the struggle for power in society.
All these points were demonstrated with the greatest clarity by the Russian revolution of 1917. Though they had been obscured in Western Europe during the relatively quiet years before the First World War, events in Russia and within Germany itself soon helped to clear the path to a new understanding of class struggle and the means by which a revolutionary party could be built. It was a mark of Luxemburg’s intellectual honesty and thoroughness that in 1918 she broke free from her previous position. Until then she believed that revolutionaries had no choice but to relate to the masses through the Social Democratic parties because they must have links with the masses at all costs. As soon as an alternative means of relating to the class was discovered in the Russian Soviet and their German equivalent – the Workers’ and Soldiers’ Councils, Luxemburg broke to form her own independent party.
Granted that this was far too late, but still the theoretically liberating effect of the discovery of workplace politics shone out of her speech to the founding congress of the German Communist Party: ‘We have to seize power, and the problem of the seizure of power assumes this aspect; what, throughout Germany can each Workers’ and soldiers’ council achieve? ... the members of our own party and the proletarians in general must be schooled and disciplined. Even where workers’ and soldiers’ councils already exist, these councils are as yet far from understanding the purposes for which they exist ... We have, happily, advanced since the days when it was proposed to “educate” the proletariat socialistically. Marxists of Kautsky’s school are, it would seem, still living in those vanished days. To educate the proletarian masses socialistically meant to deliver lectures to them. But it is not by such means that the proletarians will be schooled. The workers, today will learn in the School of action.’ [57]
 
Part Two: Revolutionary Marxism in Russia
The European left was brought to a realisation of the importance of workplace politics through the mass struggles they witnessed during the war, but above all by the experience of the Russian revolution and in particular the close interaction between the Bolshevik party and the Soviets. However the particular course that events took in 1917 had been predicted by no-one. Although the Bolshevik party had been built upon a tradition of workplace activity that made it unique, even Lenin was unaware of this fact, for the development of the new orientation had been a virtually unconscious process. In 1913 Lenin, though critical of certain individuals in the German labour movement could still write: ‘German Social-Democracy has very great merits. It has a theory, strictly worked out owing to the fight waged by Marx ... It has a mass organisation, newspapers, trade unions, political unions – that same mass organisation which is becoming so clearly crystallised in our country in the form of the victory which the Marxist-Pravda-ists [ie Bolsheviks] are gaining everywhere ...’ [58] Strangely enough, the conscious realisation that Bolshevism was a radically new type of political party with its own practice centred on workplace politics, came to Russia’s revolutionaries by the same path through which it came to the West Europeans, by a discovery of the Soviet as the highest form of workplace political organisation.
 
(i) Bolshevism and the peculiarities of Russian historical development
Because Lenin and Luxemburg disagreed many times, some people have seen the differences between them as fundamental. The best known example of this was Bertram Wolfe’s renaming of Luxemburg’s Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy as Leninism or Marxism. What such people overlook is that these debates took place within a broad framework of agreement. On basic questions Lenin and Luxemburg shared similar positions (although in Lenin’s case they were usually expressed in a more extreme polemical form). In What is to be Done? he campaigned for a strong revolutionary party united by Marxist theory. Yet Lenin also had an understanding of the ability of mass struggle to transform history: ‘We are able to appreciate the importance of the slow, steady and often imperceptible work of political education which Social Democrats have always conducted and always will conduct. But we must not allow what in the present circumstances would be still more dangerous – a lack of faith in the powers of the people. We must remember what a tremendous education and organisational power the revolution has, when mighty historical events force the man in the street out of his remote garret or basement corner, and make a citizen of him. Months of revolution sometimes educate citizens more quickly and fully than decades of political stagnation.’ [59]
Yet in his case these ideas did not lead to the mass of contradictions that left Luxemburg isolated and helpless at the outbreak of war. By that time he had a vanguard revolutionary party tempered by the experience of 11 years of revolution and organised retreat, growth and consolidation. To understand the difference between Luxemburg and Lenin one must look at more than contrasting temperaments and consider the peculiarities of Russian historical development. [60]
Russia in the 1900s was a remarkable mixture of social formations. Peasants made up 80% of the population. Ruling over them was an autocratic monarchy little changed since the Middle Ages. At the same time the country had a capitalist class which was numerically tiny and politically dependent on Tsarism for its survival. But the most remarkable feature of Russia was its working class. Though only 3 million strong, many workers were employed in large-scale modern industry. This put them more in tune with developed Western conditions than the workers of Paris in 1871 during the Commune. Thus in 1902 39% of Russian workers were in factories over 1,000 strong. [61] The comparable figure for Britain today is 34%. [62] While Russian workers were comparable to those in pre-war Europe on one level, the unusual social conditions prevailing under Tsarism encouraged a level of militancy not seen elsewhere. In the 10 years preceding the 1905 revolution, for example, an average of 493,000 workers struck each year. The equivalent figures for Germany and Britain were 84,000 and 136,000 respectively. Yet the working classes of these two countries were over three and 4 times larger than the Russian.
This unusual combination of factors led Trotsky to argue that: ‘So far as its direct and indirect tasks are concerned, the Russian revolution is a “bourgeois” revolution because it sets out to liberate bourgeois society from the chains and fetters of absolutism and feudal ownership. But the principal driving force of the Russian revolution is the proletariat, and that is why, so far as its method is concerned, it is a proletarian revolution.’ [63] Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution was dramatically confirmed in 1917. In Russia the working class was affected by the political impotence of the bourgeoisie and the fact that the final enemy in every serious conflict was therefore an autocratic, rather than bourgeois state. This had a number of implications.
Firstly, the parliament (Duma) only came into existence in 1906. It clearly had very little influence over Tsarism and was itself the product of a revolution rather than (as in the West) an alternative to revolution. Although the demand for a genuine parliament – the Constituent Assembly – was popular right up until 1917, it was always an abstract slogan rather than a living institution. The real importance of the demand for a Constituent Assembly was, in the eyes of the proletariat, that it was the only alternative consciously posed to the Tsarist state.
It is no contradiction to affirm that the demand for the Assembly led directly away from parliamentarism. On 9 January 1905 thousands marched to present a petition to the Tsar. ‘At the head of everything, it placed the convening of a Constituent Assembly by universal and equal suffrage.’ [64] The murderous repression which met the marchers began a revolution from which the Soviet was born. When the Soviet appeared for a second time in 1917, the Bolsheviks had little difficulty in convincing the majority of workers that it was a much better system than the Assembly. Parliamentarism was shown to have very weak roots indeed.
Secondly the division between the sectional struggle and class struggle was much less wide than in Western Europe. This too was rooted in economic development. In Britain, industrial technology developed gradually over a long period. This meant that in the 1850s certain groups such as engineering workers were able to form ‘model unions’ based on exclusive control of craft knowledge. By carefully restricting entry into the trade they kept their skills at a premium and so extracted concessions from employers. Sectional organisation was thus of immediate advantage to those workers Engels called ‘the labour aristocracy’. The same pattern applied elsewhere in Europe. In Germany, for reasons similar to Britain, 500,000 engineers had union recognition by 1912. Despite its size, coal mining which had free entry into the trade, had only 77 miners who had won recognition. The extra bargaining power derived from the scarcity of skill was an important lever which some German workers used to raise organisation in the face of stiff employer resistance. But the result was often a sectional attitude and conservatism. This was much less the case in Russia where modem industry required less specialist skills and where, to all intents and purposes, all workers were barred from effective sectional organisation.
The contrast was greatest in printing. Because of its history, this industry has traditionally been one of the most sectionalist and labour aristocratic trades in Western Europe. Yet the Moscow printers’ strike of 1905 showed how things worked in Russia: ‘The typesetters at Sytin’s print-works in Moscow struck on 19 September. They demanded a shorter working day and higher piecework rate per 1,000 letters set, not excluding punctuation marks. This small event set off nothing more nor less than the all-Russian political strike – the strike which started over punctuation marks and ended by felling absolutism.’ [65]
In general, however, the connection between the section and the class, economics and politics, is rarely automatic. The two are joined by the combination of objective factors such as state intervention, and the subjective response of the class. In the West trade union and reformist party leaders make a sharp division between political and economic issues, seeking to put a brake on the development of solidarity whenever it threatens to burst out of established channels. In Russia economic reformism through trade unions faced the same difficulties as parliamentary reformism in gaining a foothold. Without the possibility of trade unions there could be no union bureaucracy. [66]
Finally these political and economic conditions obviously had an organisational effect weeding out many forms that took root in the West. This was clearly revealed by the fate of the Economists. This group rejected the political struggle and party organisation to concentrate solely on economic grievances. It came into existence around 1897 and had died out by 1903. Economism reflected the first phase of working class development which grew from isolated sectional struggles. But very soon Tsarist repression forced workers to go beyond this to take on broad, and therefore, political struggle. Elsewhere in Europe the Economists would have been assured places in the trade union bureaucracy, while the most radical might have become prominent syndicalists. As it was, economism was merely an infantile disorder of the Russian labour movement which it soon outgrew, helped not a little by a barrage of polemics from Lenin.
These factors meant that a party orientated on struggle in the workplace could arise without needing the Soviet to show the point of production as the basis of a workers’ state. This much was borne out in the earliest stages of Bolshevism. From the first this party was unique in the Second International though it was quite unconscious of this fact. Take for example the concept of the revolutionary party as the organisation of the vanguard. This was talked about in Germany, but was never used as a guide to action. Those revolutionaries who did try to separate the most advanced elements from the rest ended in sectarianism. This was not the case in Russia. Here the idea of a vanguard party provided the basis for a split between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks in 1903 but the result was not an impotent sect as elsewhere. The reason for this was the daily practice of the Bolsheviks, a practice which guaranteed that though the party maintained the highest level of principled politics it was always in contact with the masses.
In Western Europe party life was structured around the parliamentary constituency, hence it was geographical. For much of their history, the Bolsheviks never had to work for elections, and when they did the Duma voting system was on an industrial basis. Quoting an old Bolshevik, John Molyneux has shown that ‘during all periods the lower party organisation of the Bolsheviks existed at the place of work rather than at the place of residence.’ [67] This gave revolutionary work a basis, for it meant that the final goal of the revolution could be related to the immediate struggle in a real way. Bolshevik factory cells ‘utilised all the grievances in the factories; the gruffness of the foremen, deductions from wages, fines, the failure to provide medical aid in accidents, etc. for oral agitation at the bench, through leaflets, meetings at the factory gates or in the factory yards, and separate meetings of the more class-conscious and revolutionary workers. The Bolsheviks always showed the connection between the maltreatment of factories, and the rule of the autocracy.’ [68]
This structure was not adopted because Lenin saw that the germ of the Soviet state was found at the point of production (his theory of the development of the revolution put him far from this view); but the extreme conditions of struggle under the autocracy forced revolutionaries to build where the class felt its greatest strength: ‘Now about the factory circles. These are particularly important to us: the main strength of the movement lies in the organisation of the workers at the large factories, for the large factories (and mills) contain not only the predominant part of the working class as regards numbers, but even more as regards influence, development, and fighting capacity. Every factory must be our fortress.’ [69]
This concentration on the factory was not a sign of economism. for the Bolshevik’s industrial base was indissolubly tied to political struggle against the state. Compare Lenin’s words on party factory cells with a similarly expressed idea of Connolly’s: ‘In the light of ... industrial unionism every fresh shop or factory organised under its banner is a fort wrenched from the control of the capitalist class and manned with the soldiers of the revolution.’ [70] Bolshevik factory cells gave contact with the masses, but this was combined with a revolutionary political programme that led away from trade union sectionalism towards class action against the state. The Bolshevik party, unlike a union exercised ‘the greatest possible centralisation ... with regard to the ideological and practical leadership of the movement.’ [71] Thus Bolshevism kept an all-important contact with the masses without adapting to the class as it existed in its oppressed state. The party structure was the result of Lenin’s organisational skills and the political conditions of Russia. It had to be a movement based on the power inherent in the modern industrial process where collective production is paramount. Any other form would have been ineffectual against the Tsarist enemy, a force so repressive that even the reformist illusions of parliamentarism were excluded.
In such conditions leadership was only possible if combined with solid organisation. The necessary link of political and technical direction, which Luxemburg avoided for fear of delivering the masses into the hands of reformist bureaucrats, was also encouraged by conditions in Russia. This was shown in striking form when Bolsheviks and Mensheviks split at the 1903 Congress. The difference between Lenin’s definition of membership as ‘personal’ participation’ in party organisation or Martov’s looser ‘personal association under the direction’ of a party organisation may seem small. But for someone building a new party from scratch in terribly difficult conditions, it was enormous. As Lenin said, when discussing the split: ‘Unity on questions of programme and tactics is an essential but by no means sufficient condition for Party unity, for the centralisation of Party work ... [it] requires in addition, unity of organisation ... The fact that the organisation of our work lags behind its content is our weak point ... The lame and underdeveloped character of the form makes any serious step in the further development of the content impossible.’ [72]
What in Luxemburg had been abstract and general – the link between political leadership and mass action, becomes in Lenin concrete and precise – the indissoluble practical links between a revolutionary political organisation based around struggle at the point of production and the working class. In Russia a revolutionary party built on workplace intervention was possible without an understanding of the workers’ state to which it was leading. The workplace foundations of Bolshevism combined with a principled revolutionary leadership meant the party could be wrong about Kautskyism, the nature of the parliamentary state and the trajectory of the coming revolution, without being shipwrecked by sectarian isolation or reformist compromise.
However Bolshevik revolutionary practice was never easy to maintain. Quite apart from the threat of the secret police, it meant a struggle against the prevailing ideology. To achieve a method which made no concession to workers’ prevailing ideas and yet was tied indissolubly to the working class required a strict democratic centralism. Lenin’s party had roots in the masses, but also a centre removed (both by its centralism and its physical exile) from the pressures to adapt to society’s ideas. Democratic centralist organisation allowed for extremely sharp tactical turns that compensated for any mistaken theoretical positions. The personal importance of Lenin in 1917 derives from the need for brilliant leadership to overcome the gaping holes in the party’s theory and the fact that he alone was able to provide that. This was clearest in the period of March to April 1917 when the Bolsheviks entirely revised their programme to campaign for ‘all power to the Soviets’.
The development of Bolshevism was no simple progression from point A to point B. For much of the time Lenin was groping in the dark, elaborating methods whose true purposes were only understood much later. The party was built in struggle against what was regarded as the chief and only possible political adversary in Russian conditions – the Tsarist autocracy. It could grow with a constituent assembly as its chief demand and with confusion over the precise nature of a workers’ state. No western revolutionary party could have been built with such a lack of clarity. But because the party instrument was ready it could be manoeuvred from struggling for a parliament to a campaign for proletarian power which unexpectedly became possible during the months after February 1917. Trotsky’s belief that Russia’s exceptional development made it possible for his country to be the first rather than the last to achieve proletarian dictatorship proved just as true of the revolutionary party, which was the first rather than the last.
 
(ii) Lenin and Trotsky on the 1905 Soviets
Lessons drawn from Russia were the only solution to the problem of the missing party in the West, where low levels of militancy left the potential of workplace politics hidden. But there were obstacles in the way of anyone realising this fact. The greatest problem was that the Bolsheviks were unaware that their stress on workplace politics was a unique contribution to Marxism.
Consciousness of the special significance of their method was brought about only gradually and through the development of the Soviet. This body came to show that the point of production was the source of power in a workers’ state. As early as 1905 Lenin wrote: ‘I believe ... that politically the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies should be regarded as the embryo of a provisional revolutionary government.’ [73] Cliff sees in this evidence that for Lenin the Soviet ‘was not only a new form of organisation of the proletariat in struggle; it was the form of future workers’ power.’ [74]
This judgement needs some qualification. While Lenin certainly recognised the new institution was important, his insight was a partial one which only developed fully in 1917. In 1905 Lenin used the term ‘provisional revolutionary government’ in a very specific context. It was part of his formula for Russia’s revolutionary development which he saw as passing through a ‘democratic dictatorship of proletariat and peasantry’. Lenin’s view excluded both Trotsky’s arguments about permanent revolution and the Mensheviks’ theory. Lenin characterised the former as ‘the absurd, semi-anarchist idea that the maximum programme, the conquest of power for a socialist revolution, can be immediately achieved.’ [75] However he took a much harder line than the Mensheviks who believed: ‘the bourgeoisie must come to power, establish a bourgeois-democratic republic which will sweep away the remnants of pre-capitalist social relations ... The political role of the working class, is therefore, to push the bourgeoisie forward against Tsarism.’ [76]
Lenin said that the bourgeoisie suffered from such ‘instability, half-heartedness and treachery’ [77] that it could not seriously challenge the autocracy: ‘No, only the people, can constitute a force capable of gaining “a decisive victory over tsarism”, in other words, the proletariat and peasantry ... “A decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism” is the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry ... But of course it will be a democratic not a socialist dictatorship ... At best it may bring about a radical redistribution of the land to the advantage of the peasants, establish consistent and full democracy, including the republic ... and last but not least – carry the revolutionary conflagration into Europe.’ [78]
In this scheme the provisional revolutionary government had a definite but limited role. First of all it was provisional. Countering any idea that it might be a permanent workers’ institution replacing parliament Lenin said: ‘This cannot be, if we are to speak not of accidental transient episodes, but of a revolutionary dictatorship that will be at all durable and capable of leaving some trace in history.’ [79] The provisional revolutionary government was merely a necessary stage towards parliament, its task being to secure ‘complete freedom for electoral agitation and of convening, on the basis of universal, equal, direct suffrage and secret ballot a constituent assembly that will really express the will of the people.’ [80] So Lenin saw the Soviet’s role confined to the struggle for power and a short transitional period before the constituent assembly. He wrote at one point: ‘The Soviet of Workers’ Deputies is not a parliament of labour and not an organ of proletarian self-government. It is not an organ of government at all, but a fighting organisation for the achievement of definite aims.’ [81]
His position in 1905 certainly cleared the way for a new understanding of the Soviet and the workers’ state in 1917, but it went no further than that. Lenin still did not differentiate himself from Kautsky’s belief in parliament, nor did he feel the need to. If the immediate task is to win parliamentary rule in the first place, there is no need to worry unduly about the workers’ state or proletarian dictatorship which is to follow. Lenin felt that universal suffrage was an adequate method, if not for the provisional revolutionary government, but at least for the constituent assembly.
It was not that Lenin was a parliamentary cretinist as Kautsky proved to be, but simply that in Russia, unlike the West, a revolutionary was not measured by the degree to which he or she fought for workers’ self-activity in conscious opposition to the parliamentary straitjacket. Still, as long as the Bolshevik party conceived its task as achieving a democratic dictatorship of proletariat and peasantry through a geographically elected parliament, its use of workplace politics was seen as a purely local deviation from the norm of Marxism as defined by Karl Kautsky and the Second International.
Before passing to Trotsky, it should be noted that Luxemburg’s view of Russian development was somewhere between the idea of permanent revolution and Lenin’s democratic-dictatorship. [82] She ignored the Soviet for two reasons; firstly because like everyone else (with the partial exception of Trotsky) she saw it not as a form of the workers’ state but a means of struggle; and secondly because she regarded the technical direction furnished by the Soviet as unimportant in comparison to ‘politics’.
As President of the 1905 Petersburg Soviet, Trotsky might have been expected to recognise the significance of the Soviet and the role of politics in the workplace in building a revolutionary party. But if anything the Soviet led him away from building a serious organisation, and confirmed him in his role as a go-between for Bolshevik and Menshevik factions. His book 1905 overflows with praise for the new institution: ‘The Soviet was the axis of all events, every thread ran towards it, every call to action emanated from it ...’ [83] However it was not seen in relation to the revolutionary party but as a substitute for it: ‘The social-democratic organisation which welded together a few hundred Petersburg workers, and to which several thousand more were ideologically attached, was able to speak for the masses by illuminating their immediate experience with the lightning of political thought; but it was not able to create a living organisational link with these masses, if only because it had always done the principal part of its work in clandestinity, concealed from the eyes of the masses ... Internal friction between two equally powerful factions of the social democrats ... rendered the creation of a non-party organisation absolutely essential.’ [84] Thus the Soviet was seen as a means of re-uniting the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks at rank and file level.
Trotsky at times portrayed the Soviet as a form of future state on the lines of the Paris Commune: ‘With the Soviet we have the first appearance of democratic power in modern Russian history ... It constitutes authentic democracy, without a lower and an upper chamber, without a professional bureaucracy, but with the voters’ right to recall their deputies at any moment.’ [85] But there were areas of confusion in Trotsky’s account. His theory of permanent revolution was not wedded to a Marxist understanding of the state, but accepted the Kautskyite perversion of it. Although his theory led him to say that in revolution ‘victory ... must transfer power, to those who have led it, that is to say, to the social-democratic proletariat’ [86], rather than pinpointing the Soviet as the form this must take, he wrote: ‘revolution is first and foremost a problem of power – not of the political form (Constituent Assembly, republic, European federation), but of the social content of power.’ [87]
This abstract approach to the structure of workers’ power led Trotsky to overlook the Soviet as its form. In fact he accepted the Second International view that the state ‘is only a machine in the hands of the dominating social forces ... It can be a powerful level for revolution or a tool for organisational stagnation, depending on the hands that control it. Every political party worthy of the name strives to capture political power and thus place the State at the service of the class whose interests it expresses.’ [88] If this were true, then parliament could be as much an instrument of revolution as any other. That is why in his major discussion of permanent revolution in Results and Prospects of 1906, Trotsky barely mentions the Soviet.
In his case, therefore, an appreciation of the Soviet’s influence did not lead towards an understanding of workplace politics or the revolutionary party. The same was true in the case of many ultra-lefts such as Pannekoek and Gorter in the postwar period. To appreciate the potential of both party and Soviet, the interaction of both through politics in the workplace had to be understood. This was one of the achievements of the 1917 revolution, for it showed how the Bolsheviks worked through the Soviet, and how the Soviets were only able to succeed under Bolshevik leadership.
Before 1917 the significance of the Leninist party and the Soviets was obscured by two factors – the special nature of Russian development and confusion over the Marxist attitude to the parliamentary state. The experience of war and revolution began to break down these theoretical barriers. The three years, 1914 to 1917 were a period of feverish preparation, both theoretical and practical, for the internationalising of Russia’s ‘proletarian methods’ which alone could lay the basis for the mass revolutionary parties that were missing elsewhere.
 
(iii) Lenin, war and the state, 1914–1917
The outbreak of hostilities on 4th August 1914 was a turning point in the development of Marxism. On that day the major parties of the Second International renounced socialism in favour of supporting a capitalist war. As Bukharin put it: ‘The first period of the war has brought about, not a crisis of capitalism ... but a collapse of the “Socialist International”.’ [89] The death of this organisation revealed the internal decay of its ideology, whose arch-priest was Karl Kautsky.
Quickly overcoming his early disbelief in Kautsky’s treachery, Lenin broke with him over the immediate question of making concessions to imperialism. But the demise of the International forced Lenin to propose a Third International and ponder on what basis it should be created. The new organisation would need a very different armoury of weapons from that of the previous International. Clearly its political base would have to begin with the Bolsheviks, the only major party to resist the pressure of war in a revolutionary way. One pressing theoretical requirement was an understanding of the current war and its relation to the capitalist system as a whole. This was provided by Bukharin’s Imperialism and World Economy and Lenin’s short pamphlet Imperialism; the highest stage of capitalism.
A reevaluation of the Marxist attitude to the state was also an urgent necessity. Until 1914, Russia’s revolutionaries had not worried very much about the state in general, because it was thought that Russia’s situation was so unique as to make its political problems of mainly internal relevance. The war proved that the Russian state could no longer be seen in isolation, but was fully integrated into a world imperialist system. In the war each state had to mirror the policies of the other to survive. The total political and economic mobilisation employed in Germany. Britain or Russia differed only in their effectiveness. In essence they were the same. Therefore when Lenin posed the question of state his conclusions were significant for Russia and the West. The result was probably his best work – The State and Revolution.
The history of this pamphlet is interesting. It was written in August 1917, in the thick of the Russian revolution. However the basic research material had been collected into a notebook during 1916. Between the two formats lay the outbreak of the February revolution and the dramatic re-emergence of the Soviet. This time it was not a ‘Council of Workers’ Deputies’ but a ‘Council of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies’. As such it was evidently more than an organ of struggle. In the situation of dual power prevailing after February, it was an alternative state form.
A comparison of Lenin’s thinking on the state in late 1916, early 1917 and The State and Revolution (written August to September 1917) reveals a subtle but important shift. In December 1916 he presented the following two possible definitions: ‘Two trends in politics (politics is participation in the affairs of the state, directing the state, determining the forms, tasks and content of the state’s activities), opportunist and revolutionary or two trends in the attitude to “state organisation”?’ [90]
He was on the brink of a breakthrough. The essence of Lenin’s question was – do Marxists argue about how to win state power through the existing machinery or fight to create an entirely new one? The same fundamental question was contained in his next note: ‘Democracy of reformists and democracy of revolution. Two different contents: the minority and the mass. Pacification of the mass? assisting the struggle of the mass? Subordination of the mass to the authority of the leaders? revolt against leaders? ... Boils down to revolution versus opportunism.’ [91]
Here he distinguished between the content of revolutionary democracy assisting mass struggle, defeating opportunist leaders, and reformist methods – pacification and subordination of the mass to the reformist bureaucracy. From distinguishing the content it is a short step to discovering the organised form of the revolutionary alternative.
Just a year after making these notes Lenin began to give definite answers to what till then had been questions. In January 1917 he wrote that Marx’s statement that workers cannot ‘simply lay hold’ of the state machine had seemed unclear. Now he saw that it must be understood as follows: ‘the revolution must SMASH IT, this ready-made machinery, and replace it with a new one.’ [92] 10 pages later he answers the question of how the new state is to be held together: ‘By an alliance, an organisation of the armed workers (“Soviets of Workers’ Deputies”!).’ [93] It is not certain whether this passage was added before or after the February revolution, but it is the vital link between the questions of 1916 and the answers given in The State and Revolution.
By August 1917 Lenin is able to show that: ‘the characteristic thing about the process of the gradual growth of opportunism that led to the collapse of the Second International in 1914 is ... evasiveness over the question of the relation of the proletarian revolution to the state.’ [94] In contrast, revolutionaries are quite clear: ‘We, however, shall break with the opportunists ... not to “shift the balance of forces”, but to overthrow the bourgeoisie, to destroy bourgeois parliamentarism, for a democratic republic after the type of the Commune, or a republic of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies ...’ [95] A final chapter on the Russian experience of Soviets was planned for The State and Revolution [96] but as Lenin put it: ‘Apart from the title, however, I had no time to write a single line of the chapter ... It is more pleasant and useful to go through the “experience of the revolution” than to write about it.’ [97]
After 1917 the ‘two trends in politics’ of which Lenin spoke earlier could now be fully defined. One was centred on winning over parliament through geographically based elections. This form of politics accepted the conventional division of politics and economics in which the apparent free choice of parliamentary representative is totally undermined and deprived of significance by capitalist control of the means of production (economic power). The other trend in politics also aims at state power but in this case the aim is to replace the old power with a new one based on workers’ self-activity. Therefore any workers’ self-activity, however small the minority ready to move, becomes the focus for the party’s political work. And every step which raises sectional struggle to the level of broader class action becomes a political act. Politics here is ‘concentrated economics’.
Lenin never made a fetish of the Soviets’ form as such. When they seemed to be falling into a state of ‘prostitution ... by the SRs and Mensheviks’ [98] after July 1917, he had no hesitation in turning to the factory councils as an alternative organ of power. But the Soviets and factory councils shared a common basis in workplace election and wielded the collective power of the proletariat. At no time did Lenin envisage the Bolsheviks waiting to be elected into office at the constituent assembly (the reformist road); nor did he try to seize power without reference to the will of the mass of workers (the sectarian road).
As Trotsky put it: ‘The question, what mass organisations were to serve the party for leadership in the insurrection, did not permit an a-priori much less a categorical answer. The instruments of the insurrection might have been the factory committees and trade unions, already under the leadership of the Bolsheviks ... Just here lay the everlasting preoccupation of Lenin: to express with the utmost simplicity that which on the one hand flowed from the objective conditions, and on the other formulate the subjective experience of the masses.’ [99] As it turned out the Soviets did revive as organs of mass democratic power. The successful October insurrection, in which a Bolshevik majority in the Soviets served as springboard to the world’s first workers’ state, proved not only the necessity of both party and factory-based Soviets, but their necessary inter-connection.
In a historical sense the party had to precede the Soviets, for though both are essential, Soviets only arise at the peak of the revolutionary process. Parties, however, must be built by patient and consistent work in the quieter years that come before. The potential of the Soviets was only theoretically grasped because by 1917 the mass Bolshevik party had already been created. It was one of the dialectical contradictions through which history so often moves that in Western Europe the opposite process was observed. The Soviets, workers’ councils, came before the formation of the parties on whose existence their success depended.
When the Russian Constituent Assembly, that cherished goal of social democracy right up until 1917, came to meet, the Bolsheviks finally made the theoretical break with the past which their practice already suggested to them. As Lenin’s Theses stated: ‘For the transition from the bourgeois to the socialist system, for the dictatorship of the proletariat, the Republic of Soviets ... is not only a higher type of democratic institution (as compared with the usual bourgeois republic crowned by a Constituent Assembly) but is the only form capable of securing the most painless transition to socialism.’ [100]
It was obvious to the Bolsheviks that victory in October 1917 had to be the prelude to a world revolution. The lessons of Russia had to guide socialists everywhere, and the party had to become the spearhead of a world party. The mechanism for this was to be the Third International, or Comintern.
 
(iv) Comintern
The Communist International was founded in 1919. Its first task was to define the ground on which it stood. Lenin proposed a resolution around just three points: ‘First: One of the most important tasks confronting the West European comrades is to explain to the people the meaning, importance and necessity of the Soviet system ... Second: About the spread of the Soviet, system ... Third: We must say that winning a Communist majority in the Soviets is the principal task in all countries in which soviet government is not yet victorious’. [101] G.D.H. Cole, a sympathetic observer of the rise of the International, commented on Trotsky’s Comintern manifesto: ‘What is likely to stand out as most remarkable is the absence of any explicit reference to the role of the Communist Party.’ [102]
The overwhelming stress on the Soviet was not a mental aberration or the result of a momentary burst of enthusiasm (although the ease with which the revolution would be carried through outside Russia was exaggerated). It held the key to a new type of political activity and so was the dividing line between the Second and Third (Communist) Internationals. The concept of the party could not serve as a means of breaking revolutionaries away from the grip of reformism in the same way. As Trotsky explained to the Second Congress of Comintern: ‘It is self-evident that if we were dealing here with Messrs. Scheidemann, Kautsky or their English co-thinkers it would, of course, be unnecessary to convince these gentlemen that a party is indispensable to the working class. They have created a party of the working class and handed it over into the service of bourgeois and capitalist society.’ [103]
It was not the issue of the party which formed the basis of Comintern, but the question of revolution and its state form – the Soviet. Lenin put it Succinctly: ‘the entire socialist literature, not only Germany, but also English and French, proves that the leaders of the opportunist parties ... are in favour of the conquest of political power. They are all sincere socialists, joking apart, but they are against the dictatorship of the proletariat!’ [104] So Comintern determined its attitude to people by their stand on the Soviet rather than the party. This was clear from the Platform of the First Congress: ‘It is vital ... to form a bloc with members of the revolutionary workers’ movement – certain syndicalist elements, for example, who, in spite of the fact that they did not earlier belong to the socialist party, have more or less accepted the platform of the proletarian dictatorship through Soviets.’ [105]
The issue of Soviet versus parliament, whether you want to verbally oppose capitalism or ‘really want to tear its head off’, [106] the necessary starting point for overcoming the absence of a Leninist party in Western Europe. In practical terms that could be measured by one’s attitude to parliament and manifestations of workers’ self-activity.
But the formula of the Soviet or parliament was a very blunt instrument. Once the ground upon which the new Communist parties stood had been defined, a whole number of tactical and strategic problems arose. Centrists were quite willing to accept the Soviet in theory, as long as they were free to betray it in practice. Thus 21 very stiff conditions for admission to Comintern were introduced. Ultra-lefts also accepted the Soviet but denied the necessity of a Communist lead them. Therefore the Second Congress declared: ‘The rise of the Soviets as the main historically determined form of the the proletariat in no way detracts from the leading role of the Communist Party in the proletarian revolution ... A strong Communist Party is essential if the Soviets are to fulfil their historical mission. A party is needed that does not “adapt” itself to the Soviets but is able in a decisive way to influence their policies ... The stronger the Communist Parties we build in every country, the sooner “Soviet idea” will triumph.’ [107]
Only in the 1920s was the missing party solved and mass organisations of hundreds of thousands of revolutionaries created in several Western countries. But the revolutionary post-war wave was receding and with it came the rise of Stalinism in Comintern. When this was combined with the lack of developed and independent thinking cadre in the new parties, their degeneration became predictable. Even then their real problem was not a belief or otherwise in the Party (for Stalinists the party was everything), but of the relationship between revolutionary leadership and the self-activity of the working class. Once Communist Parties made party leadership a question of obedience to the directives of the Russian bureaucracy, rather than the relation of the immediate struggle to the final conquest of power, the disasters of ‘Third Period’ ultra-leftism and ‘Popular Front’ swings to the right became inevitable.
 
Conclusion
In The State and Revolution Lenin argued that Kautsky and others had deliberately distorted, forgotten and ignored Marx’s teachings on the state. Of course this was true; but it was also the fact that practically no-one outside Russia had been able to resist the distortion, remember the lessons and notice their most salient points. In The State and Revolution Pannekoek is the only contemporary who Lenin cites as someone who remembered, if rather vaguely, what Marx taught.
It was not that Marx’s teachings were insufficiently explicit about their revolutionary aim – far from it. But if a lesson is not learnt, one must look not only at the motives of the pupils, but question the clarity of the teachings. This is not a personal slight on Marx or Engels, but simply a reflection of the fact that Marxism is ‘a summing up of experience.’ [108] In relation to the state, the limits of Marxism in Marx’s time were set by the Paris Commune and the conclusions that could be drawn from it. These limits also had an effect on the building of the Second International. This organisation occasionally mentioned ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’ but moved further and further from it in reality. The dictatorship became a principle quite separate from daily practice which was increasingly reformist. It took the outbreak of war in 1914 to expose the hollowness of the International’s Marxism.
The theoretical and practical achievements of the 1917 revolution represented a quantum leap in working class experience. A critical re-examination of the state and its negation in the Soviet were vital steps in the emergence of Bolshevik workplace politics as a method of international validity for building revolutionary parties. That it took so long for this fact to be understood was due to the peculiar conditions in Russia, which allowed the Bolshevik party to be built without a fully worked-out attitude to the bourgeois state. The Russians could afford confusion in this area, because the Bolshevik party could be built in spite of the theoretical gap. But no-one else, not even revolutionaries as gifted as Luxemburg, could do the same.
Today, when history has revealed the process of revolution, the centrality of the party and its relation to the Soviet, we cannot make do with unconscious processes. In Britain today the forces of parliamentarism, reformism, Labour and union bureaucracies are immeasurably greater than was the case in Russia. This makes explicit concentration on the workplace essential, both in terms of building a revolutionary party and raising the self-activity of the working class.
A disregard for the point of production has led to the collapse of the entrists in the Labour left and the disintegration of the European revolutionary left in general. Many of these groups have claimed to be in the Leninist tradition (whether transmitted through orthodox Trotskyism or the Stalin/Mao perversion), but all of them have a tendency to see change coming about in some area other than through rank and file industrial struggle. Instead of basing the practice upon this foundation they tail mass reformist parties or lapse into movementism. Many, like the Second International leaders, declare an almost fanatical devotion to some kind of party, but fail to locate the building of a revolutionary party through relating to workers’ self-activity at whatever level that is possible.
I believe that the strength of the SWP in this difficult period lies in the fact that in its practice it recognises the importance of the Soviet, and all the forms of workers’ self-activity and organisation that lead towards it. This is not to make a fetish of one particular form. Trotsky in Lessons of October make the following point about revolutionary workplace organisation in the West: ‘It must not be forgotten that in our country the Soviets grew up in the “democratic” stage of the revolution, becoming legalised, as it were, at that stage, and subsequently inherited and utilised by us. This will not be repeated in the proletarian revolutions of the West. There, in most cases, the Soviets will be created in response to the call of the Communists ... only in the very last days ... either after the insurrection has passed its critical stage, or even in the closing stages ... All these variants must be kept in mind so as to safeguard us from falling into organisation fetishism; and so as not to transform the Soviets from what they ought to be – a flexible and living form of struggle ...’ [109]
In the present period of downturn, our work must be confined to the difficult but essential task of reviving workplace organisation and confidence wherever that is possible. This can only come through the self-activity of the rank and file. Only later will it be possible to talk in terms of independent rank and file organisations and eventually Soviets. But though the concepts of the Soviet, party and their interrelation may not appear very frequently in the pages of Socialist Worker, it guides the way we relate to any manifestation of struggle, whether it be through mass picketing, or just arguments and collections from workmates. The Bolshevik party developed on the basis of workplace politics, a form of politics totally different to that of the reformists who see parliament rather than the factory floor as the arena for socialist change. However much in a minority the active section might have been, the party always emphasised workers’ self-activity and tried to develop the class content of even the most sectional struggle. It is only our ability to act on such politics today that will enable us to say that the missing party of Luxemburg’s time will tomorrow be missing no longer.

Notes
1. L. Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol. 1, New York 1945, p. 1.
2. T. Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, Intro, by L. German. London 1983, p. 17.
3. K. Marx, The First International and After, Harmondsworth 1974, p. 212.
4. Ibid., p206.
5. Ibid. p209.
6. A. Cobban, History of Modern France, Vol. 2. Harmondsworth 1973, pp. 118–9.
7. Intro, to L. Trotsky. On the Paris Commune, New York 1972, p. 6.
8. P. Lissagray, History of the Paris Commune, London 1976, p. 131.
9. Ibid., p. 127.
10. Ibid., p. 130.
11. Marx, op.cit., p. 236.
12. Ibid., p. 336.
13. K. Marx, Marx on Economics (ed. R. Freedman), Harmondsworth 1973, p. 170.
14. Marx, First International and After, p. 338 (my emphasis).
15. F Engels, Intro, to K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850, Moscow 1975, pp. 16–17.
16. K. Kautsky, La via al potere, Bari 1974, pp. 65–70.
17. Quoted in V. Lenin, The State and Revolution, Moscow 1975, p. 17.
18. See J. Molyneux, [What is the Real Marxist Tradition?], International Socialism 2 : 20.
19. T. Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1968, p. 43.
20. T. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 1, London 1975, p. 267.
21. J. Molyneux, Marxism and the Party, London 1978, p. 113.
22. R. Luxemburg. Rosa Luxemburg Speaks (ed. M. Waters), New York 1970, p. 206.
23. Kautsky, ibid., p. 93.
24. Luxemburg, ibid., p. 199.
25. Ibid., p. 53.
26. Ibid., p. 57.
27. Ibid., pp. 81–2.
28. Ibid., p. 59.
29. Ibid., pp. 200.
30. Ibid., pp.  88–9.
31. Ibid., p. 129.
32. P. Frölich, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1972, p. 133.
33. Ibid., p. 175.
34. G. Lukács, History and Class Consciousness, London 1983, p. 299.
35. The former was deputy leader of the SPD and the latter leader of the German equivalent of the TUC.
36. R. Luxemburg, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. IV, Berlin 1974, p. 235.
37. Ibid., p. 119.
38. Ibid., p. 121.
39. Ibid., p. 108.
40. Ibid., p. 188.
41. Ibid., p. 200.
42. Minutes of Socialist Unity Conference, September 30th to October 1st, 1911, p.15.
43. Ibid., p. 12.
44. The Industrial Syndicalist, reprinted Nottingham 1974, p. 49.
45. Ibid., p. 45.
46. J. Connolly, Selected Writings, New York 1973, p. 152.
47. Ibid., p. 158.
48. Ibid., pp. 220–l.
49. J. Huige & S. Huybregts, Kleine Geschiedenis van de Nederlandse Arbeidersbeweging, Amsterdam 1978, p. 53.
50. A. Pannekoek, Massen Aktion und Revolution, Die Neue Zeit, Jahrg. 30, Vol. 2.2, p. 543.
51. Storia della sinistra comunista, Milan 1972, p. 63.
52. Quoted in H.M. Bock, Geschichte des ‘linken Radikalismus’ in Deutschland, Frankfurt am Main 1976, p. 85.
53. See issues from August 1917 to May 1918.
54. A. and D. Prudhommeaux (eds.), Spartacus et la Commune de Berlin, Paris n.d., p. 52.
55. Luxemburg, op. cit., p. 185.
56. Ibid., p. 207.
57. Ibid., pp. 425–6.
58. Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 4, p. 337.
59. Quoted in C Harman, Party and Class, International Socialism reprint No. 4, p. 9.
60. This is the title of the first chapter of Trotsky’s Results and Prospects of 1906.
61. L. Trotsky, 1905, Harmondsworth 1973, p. 39.
62. G.C. Allen, The Structure of Industry in Britain, London 1972, p. 252.
63. Trotsky, ibid., p. 66.
64. Ibid., p. 90.
65. Ibid., p. 102.
66. See Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 331.
67. Molyneux, Marxism and the Party, London 1978, p. 67.
68. Ibid. (my emphasis).
69. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 331.
70. Connolly, Selected Writings, p. 153.
71. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 91.
72. V. Lenin, Two Steps Forward, One Step Back (sic!), Moscow 1978, pp. 183–6.
73. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 164.
74. Ibid.
75. Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 3, p. 52.
76. D. Hallas, Trotsky’s Marxism, London 1979. p11.
77. Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 3, p. 40.
78. Ibid., p. 82.
79. Ibid., p. 35.
80. Ibid., p. 46.
81. Ibid., p. 343.
82. For a full discussion of this see N. Geras, The Legacy of Rosa Luxemburg, London 1976, pp. 43–111.
83. Trotsky, 1905, p. 122.
84. Ibid., pp. 112–3.
85. Ibid., p. 268.
86. Ibid., p. 340.
87. Ibid., pp. 340–1.
88. L Trotsky, The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects, London 1962, p. 194.
89. N. Bukharin, Imperialism and World Economy, London 1972, p. 161.
90. V. Lenin, Marxism on the State, Moscow 1976, p. 109.
91. Ibid.
92. Ibid., p. 8.
93. Ibid. p. 19.
94. Lenin, State and Revolution, pp. 97–8.
95. Ibid., p. 112.
96. See outline in Marxism on the State, pp. 94–5.
97. Lenin, State and Revolution, p. 114.
98. Lenin, Marxism on the State, p. 94.
99. L. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, London 1977, pp. 818–9.
100. V. Lenin, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, Moscow 1976, p. 94.
101. Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third International, London 1980, pp. 18–19.
102. G.D.H. Cole, Communism and Social Democracy, 1914–1931, London 1958, p. 305.
103. The Second Congress of the Communist International, Vol. 1, London 1977, p. 72.
104. Ibid., pp. 232–3.
105. Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos, p. 45.
106. Trotsky speaking at Second Congress of Communist International, Vol. 1, p. 72.
107. Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos, p. 72.
108. Lenin, State and Revolution, p. 30.
109. L. Trotsky, Lessons of October, London 1973, pp. 57–58.
 



In International Socialism 2 : 24 Alex Callinicos’s article Party and Class before 1917 appeared. This is a critique of my article called The Missing Party in IS 2 : 22. Alex criticised me for ‘an attempt to absolve Rosa Luxemburg for her failure to build a revolutionary party’. Actually Alex’s article should have been called Rosa Luxemburg and the missing party. He put on her shoulders practically the complete responsibility for the non-existence of a revolutionary party prior to the First World War in Germany, and by implication in the rest of western Europe.
This both honours and insults Luxemburg far too much. It seems one person alone, by holding wrong theoretical views on the party prevented the building of a revolutionary party not only in Germany – the country where she lived – but also in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Holland, Ireland, Italy, Norway and Sweden. Rosa Luxemburg must not only have been a genius, but omnipotent and omnipresent.
It is also an insult to her, because it does not take into account the fact that at the age of 16 she broke politically and organisationally with reformism. From that time she was associated with a Polish group called Proletariat, soon becoming its most important intellectual leader. Then in 1895 she led a split from the Polish Socialist Democratic Party of Russian Poland, which in 1900 merged with the Lithuanian Social Democrats to form, under the leadership of Luxemburg and Leo Jogisches, the Social Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania. This extremely disciplined party never fudged its differences with the PPS and played a distinguished role in the 1905 revolution.
The demarcation between Luxemburg’s Polish party and the reformist PPS took place earlier and was sharper than the demarcation of Bolsheviks from Mensheviks. The Bolsheviks split from the Mensheviks in 1903, eight years after Luxemburg split from the PPS. Lenin’s party merged again with the Mensheviks in 1906, split to all intents and purposes a year later, and formally broke relations in 1912. Still, as late as 1917, and even after the October revolution, a number of Bolshevik branches had not split from the Mensheviks.
The Bolsheviks in many cities were refusing ...to split from the Mensheviks. In many workers’ centres, such as Ekaterinburg, Perm, Tula, Orel, Baku, Kolomna, Yaroslav, Kiev and Voronezh, the Bolsheviks did not break away from the Mensheviks until the end of May.
In Minsk, Tiflis, Nizhni-Novgorod, Omsk, Tomsk, Odessa, Nikolaev, Zlatoust, Kostroma, Sevastopol and Vitebsk, the Bolsheviks split from the Mensheviks only in June. In many other centres they did so only in August or September. 351 party organisations remained joint Bolshevik-Menshevik organisations in many cases as late as September. In fact, in some centres the Bolsheviks separated from the Mensheviks only after the October revolution. [1]
It is true that before 1914 Luxemburg did not establish a revolutionary party in Germany, with detrimental results in the post-war revolution. Alex explains this entirely by reference to personal traits such as ‘excessive pessimism and optimism.’ [2] This explanation does not only fall far short of explaining the host of western European countries which lacked revolutionary parties, it cannot even make sense of Luxemburg’s own conduct in Poland. Still less does it show why before the war Lenin, who had developed the theory of the party furthest, was just as far from calling for splits in the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) as Luxemburg herself.
Yet it is a fact that until 1914 Lenin did not advocate a split in the German SPD, nor in any other section of the Second International in western Europe. He did not even suggest that revolutionaries there should organise themselves inside those parties as a separate grouping.
Of course Lenin was too busy leading the Russian party to participate personally in the affairs of the socialist movements elsewhere, but it would be a sheer insult to his internationalism to assume that his dozens of pre-war articles on socialist parties round Europe were written in total ignorance of their subject or concealed his real views. Lenin always saw the German socialist movement as the most important of the international working class movements, and followed its policies very meticulously. At this time his attitude to the tendencies in the Marxist parties of the West remained consistent. In December 1906 Lenin wrote in an article entitled The Crisis of Menshevism that: ‘Right up to the social revolution there will inevitably always be an opportunist and a revolutionary wing of Social Democracy’. [3] This was no passing phase in his thinking. At this time Lenin nowhere advocated an international split, believing optimistically that the western Social Democratic parties would not be diverted by the reformist currents within them.
In July 1912, in an article on the Italian Socialist Party Lenin says: ‘two basic trends (revolutionary and reformist – DG) exist in one form or another in all socialist parties ... The leaders of the working class are not angels, saints or heroes, but people like anyone else. They make mistakes. The Party puts them right.’ [4] A year later commenting on internal disputes in the British Socialist Party between the arch-patriot Hyndman and the left, Lenin repeats: ‘The Social Democrats do not regard themselves as saints; they know that now and again the proletariat becomes infected by some dirty disease from the bourgeoisie ... In Britain, too, they will certainly cure the disease.’ [5] Hyndman was in the BSP right into the war.
Finally, as late as April 1914, in an article entitled What should not be copied from the German Labour Movement Lenin noted that ‘At the International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart, half the German delegation turned out to be sham socialists.’ Still there is no hint of a call for a split. He concludes an attack on the German reformists saying: ‘But the merits of German Social-Democracy are merits ... despite them.’ [6]
Before 1914 no leading revolutionary proposed a split in western Europe. Yet, in sharp contrast, there were four countries in which revolutionaries were organised in parties of their own – Russia, Poland, Bulgaria and Serbia. We have mentioned the Russians and Poles. The Bulgarian Social Democratic Party split in 1903, the revolutionary left being led by Dmitri Blagoev. When the war broke out these eastern Marxist Parties – Lenin’s Bolsheviks, Luxemburg’s Polish organisation, Blagoev’s group and the Serbians – took a position of revolutionary opposition to imperialism. The Serbians’ stand was most impressive because the war had started as an attack by the Austro-Hungarian Empire on little Serbia. In that country, to appeal for internationalism required tough politics. In the west only individual Marxists adopted a position of revolutionary opposition to the war.
My article tried to grapple with the question of why there was no revolutionary party in any west European country, nor even a viable organisation of revolutionaries inside the Social Democratic Party. If it happened only in Germany, one could put the responsibility on Luxemburg (although the argument would have been flawed because she did after all build such a party in Poland). The fact that Lenin, too, built a revolutionary party in Eastern Europe but did not advocate building such organisations in the west appears as a puzzle, unless we assume both he and Rosa Luxemburg suffered from schizophrenia.
It is of course true that Luxemburg was not as sharp and clear on the nature of the party as Lenin. But she was still a genius. And if she was not a Lenin, certainly she was superior to Blagoev, not to speak of Zinoviev or Stalin. How can we explain that the last three understood the need for a revolutionary party while Luxemburg somehow failed to see it in relation to Germany? The evident variation of eastern revolutionaries from the Second International orthodoxy of Karl Kautsky was not seen in general terms. Right up until the war the Bolsheviks, for example, described their policy as a purely local adaptation necessitated by the conditions of Tsarism. [7] Furthermore, it was easier for Lenin to mould a politically homogeneous party almost from scratch, than it was for Luxemburg to split the mass party of the SPD. When Lenin spoke about splitting Russian Social Democracy he always insisted the Bolsheviks were the majority (as their name implies).
To build a serious revolutionary party it is necessary to show the connection between the struggle against the state for political power and the day-to-day industrial struggle of the workers. In Russia, Poland, Bulgaria and Serbia the relation between economics and politics was very close. A worker on strike came into headlong conflict with the police, if not the army. Even in those countries there was a tendency to separate the economic from the political – the phenomenon of ‘Economism’. But this was a very weak movement that failed to take root as it had in western Europe. Here in the west, however, conditions encouraged its growth. The capitalist economy had expanded steadily, keeping industrial struggle low for decades. Workers were organised in mass unions controlled by the bureaucracy and so it was incomparably more difficult to tie the economic struggle to the political. It was usually the trade union bureaucracy rather than the police who broke strikes. It was the same trade union bureaucracy that sectionalised workers’ struggle. This was at the heart of my article.
Rosa Luxemburg indeed wrote far and away the best essay on the relation between industrial and political struggle, The Mass Strike, but note that all her examples – the core of the work – are from the experience of Russia and Poland. The actual class struggle in Germany does not earn itself a mention. The aim of the essay was to bring the Russian and Polish spirit into the German movement. But the ‘mass strike debate’ Luxemburg initiated in Germany was always at the level of resolutions to SPD Congresses and negotiations between party leaders and union bureaucrats. By 1914 the combination of undeveloped theory on the party (Bolshevism was not yet raised into a general theory) plus reformist conditions meant that no powerful revolutionary current existed in western Europe.
The dialectical unity of industrial and political struggle on a large scale, and hence the breach in the wall of reformism in western Europe took place only after the October revolution. The unity expressed itself in a very advanced form of organisation of the working class as such – the Soviet. (Of course the revolutionary party expresses the unity of industrial and political struggle in a much higher form than the Soviet, but the party encompasses only a section of the class). It is an incontrovertible historical fact that in the west the growth of workers’ council (Soviet) movements came before the emergence of revolutionary parties. It was therefore on the question of Soviet power as opposed to parliamentarism that the Comintern defined the supporters of Communism.
Surveying this development in 1920 Lenin said: ‘Before the war it seemed that the main division in the working class movement was the division into socialists and anarchists ... Owing to the war ... the old issues are now reduced to one: for or against Soviet rule.’ [8]
Could history have taken another route? What would have happened if Luxemburg (and Lenin) had adopted a different attitude to the Second International and organised an international split from it long before the Comintern was established? Of course history always gives options – we are not fatalists. But the parameters within which you can build a revolutionary organisation are quite specific. They depend on objective conditions.
Thus Alex quite rightly described the limitations of Marx’ and Engels’ concept of the party as lagging far behind that of Lenin. He writes of their ‘fatalist attitude which treated the formation of revolutionary class consciousness as the inevitable outcome of a process of natural development.’ [9] Alex explains that the defects in their position resulted from the period in which they lived and the nature of their protagonists. To have judged them outside of their current circumstances and those ‘transmitted from the past’ would have been un-Marxist – like condemning Newton for not knowing Einstein’s theory of relativity.
Yet Alex uses precisely the same word – ‘fatalism’ – that he employed to criticise Marx and Engels, to attack Luxemburg. But in her case the explanation is entirely in terms of personal idiosyncrasy. For Luxemburg or any other revolutionary to have gone far beyond these inherited ideas, it would have required a major objective break with the past traditions of workers’ struggle. That break occurred in eastern Europe when Marxism had to be adapted to its peculiar conditions. But in the west it came after the outbreak of war and with the international impact of the Russian revolution, not before.
Until then all leading Marxists claimed to share a common general theory, Lenin included. There were East European variations from the norm set by German social democracy, but these were held to be exceptions. In terms of theory of the party the Second International claimed to follow concepts developed by Marx up to the time of his death. That some of this theory lagged behind what was needed, became apparent only with the outbreak of the world war. Until that time the splitting of the mass movement internationally was not seen as an option for Marxists.
Were there people who argued for splits in the western parties? Indeed there were, but all of them proved to be hopeless sectarians and ultimately more of a liability to socialism than an aid. In Italy Bordiga’s tight-knit faction campaigned around the idea that all reforms are dangerous diversions and the best tactic was to abstain from elections. Bordiga captured the leadership of the Italian Communist Party at its formation, costing thousands of members. It took several years before Gramsci (who did not split before 1914) was able to remove him, by which time the rule of fascism made party-building exceedingly hard. In Britain a group broke from the Second International to form the Socialist Labour Party. This tiny organisation called on people to leave the existing unions; they picketed Tom Mann and demanded people join their patent brand of pure revolutionary union. In 1920 the healthy minority of SLP activists had to leave the dyed-in-the-wool sectarian majority behind to join the British Communist Party. (Incidentally the majority of the British CP came from the British Socialist Party which did not split with the Second International before the war). Daniel de Leon in the USA was another who split with the Second International. He too remained outside the mass struggles which were to develop around the IWW.
To split was easy, to avoid the fate of a sect was not. What was required was an understanding of a revolutionary strategy by which links with the mass movement could be kept alive and a principled party built around that strategy. That too did not drop from the sky but developed historically, reaching fruition on an international scale only with the Third (Communist) International. As Trotsky puts it:
The First International ... succeeded in formulating these [basic principles of revolutionary strategy] properly speaking, only theoretically ... The epoch of the Second International led to the method and view according to which ... the strategical task disappeared. Only the Third International re-established the rights of revolutionary communism ... Thanks to the invaluable experience of the first two Internationals, upon whose shoulders the Third rests ... [its strategy] attained a full-blooded militancy and the widest historical scope. [10]
The absence of such a strategy explains the shipwreck of every western pre-war split – Pannekoek’s Dutch Party, the originators of the KAPD in Germany, the Italian Bordigists and so on. Formed in the sectarian tradition these groups became a serious obstacle to the building of mass revolutionary Communist Parties in the 1920s and had to be fought against by such pamphlets as Lenin’s Left-Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder.
Some comrades have argued that what Cliff did in the 1950s (the drawing together of a tiny core of revolutionaries out of which a party could ultimately be built) should have been done by revolutionaries at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century. Alas, the circumstances in which the Socialist Review Group (the precursor of the SWP) was built, were radically different from the circumstances faced eighty years ago. The Socialist Review Group was established as a tiny breakaway from a very small and weak Fourth International. A whole historical period had seen continued and catastrophic defeats of the working class – the rise of Stalin, defeat of the Chinese revolution, victory of Hitler, of Franco and so on. The task of the Socialist Review Group was to find a way through the labyrinth of Stalinism in the East and Social Democracy in the West. The task was to connect with the old traditions of the revolutionary movement, and in particular with the real spirit of the 1917 revolution. It was in these conditions that new concepts had to be introduced, such as orienting on the minority of workers ready to fight, recruiting ‘ones and twos’ etc. Though these had the achievements of Bolshevism and the early years of Comintern as their background they certainly could not be taken directly from the period of mass Second International parties nor mass Communist movements. In establishing the Socialist Review Group we did not have to split from a rising mass movement.
Alex Callinicos writes:
‘Luxemburg, increasingly aware as she was of the reformism of the SPD leadership, could have provided the nucleus of a revolutionary organisation capable of relating to the workers’ struggles which developed under the hammer of world war. It is easy to forget that What is to be Done? was preceded by two decades in which workers and students formed Marxist discussion circles and sought to relate to the sporadic bursts of class struggle which occurred.’ [11]
The Marxist circles in Russia preceded the organisation of a labour movement on any scale. It took place even before the first socialist newspaper was published. No revolutionary facing the one million members of the German SPD, especially when they believed at the time that this organisation was largely revolutionary, as Lenin, and to a lesser extent Luxemburg did, would have considered forming small Marxist circles. It was not on. Of course, if one abstracts from all the conditions including the limitation of views of all the participants, the number of options increases ad infinitum.
At any one time Marxists, based on their present situation and past experiences, will concentrate on the strategic links between their current circumstances and the ultimate goal of socialism. The focus inevitably changes. For Lenin in 1903 the key argument was party discipline and this led to a split with the Mensheviks. To have concentrated on this point in 1914 would have been insane sectarianism, for now the issue was revolutionary opposition to the War. Harping on about the war in 1919 would have been fatal when the prospect of Soviets seizing power was becoming visible. And so this became the key to splitting numbers of workers from the Second International to found new mass Communist Parties. In the 1950s the issue of whether Russia was socialist or not was important for orienting revolutionaries on workers’ self-activity in difficult conditions.
If we are to act as the memory of the class we must look at the actual development of history, the objective conditions in which people operated, their concrete activity, as well as the ideas they held. Only if we do all of these things can a realistic assessment be made. And it is a fact that it was only sometime after the outbreak of war and the successful October revolution that the Bolsheviks understood that the lessons of their party were crucial for revolutionaries on an international scale. Even this realisation was not uniform or immediate. As Trotsky put it:
It is unquestionable that in the era of the First Congress (1919) many of US reckoned ... that the spontaneous onset of the workers and in part of the peasant masses would overthrow the bourgeoisie in the near future. [12]
There is, thankfully, a difference between discussions about the past and the future. We can hypothesise as much as we like about what might have happened if such and such a course had been taken. The end result will not have changed one iota. But if we understand how and why history developed as it did, we can learn how to shape the future.
* * *
Notes
1. T. Cliff, Lenin, vol. 2 (London 1976), pp. 149–50
2. A. Callinicos, Party and Class before 1917, International Socialism 2 : 24, p. 80.
3. V. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 11, pp. 361–62.
4. V. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 18, pp. 170–72
5. V. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 19, pp. 94–95.
6. V. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 20, pp. 256–58.
7. Cf. V. Lenin’s article On Bolshevism in Collected Works, vol. 18, where the splits are explained in terms of different views of the development of the coming revolution against Tsarism as ‘bourgeois’ or ‘democratic’, etc.
8. V. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 30, pp. 420–21 (my emphasis).
9. A. Callinicos The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx (London 1983), p. 153.
10. L. Trotsky, The Third International after Lenin (London 1974), pp. 57–58.
11. A Callinicos, Party and class ..., op. cit., p. 85.
12. L. Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International (London 1974), vol. 2, p. 8.
 



Nikolai Bukharin
Socialism and Its Culture
Berg, 2007, £16.99
Under normal circumstances any reviewer for this journal would
take one look at Nikolai Bukharin’s Socialism and Is Culture
and consign it to the nearest dustbin. Written at the height of
Joseph Stalin’s repression, it argues his “leadership displays a
masterly application of Marxist-Leninist dialectics”, while any
criticism of the USSR is “nothing other than a fascist-Trotskyist
calumny”. So this book could easily be treated as just another
stone in that mountain of trash published by Russian state capitalism
in its heyday. However, it will be my difficult task to suggest that
you reserve judgement, as least for a while.
This manuscript is part of a series of works, including a novel
and philosophical treatise, which Bukharin wrote while awaiting trial
and inevitable execution at Moscow’s notorious Lubyanka prison. In
the hands of Stalin’s secret police he was lucky to have any
writing materials at all, and was subject to perpetual interrogation
and psychological torture. The fact that the book is an example of
prison writing is no indication of its quality, yet, if only on a
personal plane, it is of interest.
However, if you are expecting something like Antonio Gramsci’s
prison writings you will be disappointed. With some reason the
foreword claims that Socialism and Its Culture was written
“with only one reader in mind – the one on whom Bukharin’s life
depended, along with the lives of his family members, and the fate of
his manuscripts, their survival or destruction. The book, in effect,
was a long letter to Stalin without the usual salutation ‘Dear
Koba’.” We do not find the Italian Marxist praising Benito
Mussolini, his jailer, as Bukharin does Stalin: “a man who has a
magnificent expert knowledge of military literature, military
technology, military organisation, strategy and tactics”, etc, etc,
etc. To that extent much of this book is patent rubbish (although in
its 226 pages plaudits for Stalin are few and far between, a mere
scattering compared to the conventional eulogy per page of the time).
But rubbish can be very informative (archaeologists tell us), and
this book deserves careful attention. Consider its author. Whatever
he may have written in 1937, Bukharin’s background meant he was no
ordinary apparatchik. Lenin’s Testament of 1922 described
him as the Bolshevik’s “biggest theoretician” and the party’s
“favourite”. Bukharin wrote the first systematic treatment of
state capitalism, Imperialism and World Economy, and edited
the Bolshevik’s daily, Pravda, during the early years of the
Russian Revolution. He sided with Stalin against Leon Trotsky’s
Left Opposition in the faction fight following Lenin’s death in
1924, but by 1928–9 Bukharin’s Right Opposition disagreed with
Stalin’s forced collectivisation of agriculture. Thus Bukharin led
the last internal party opposition for half a century.
Given the circumstances of its composition, the words used in
Socialism and Its Culture cannot be taken at face value,
because the book operates on several levels simultaneously. On one
level it contains a mass of glaring untruths: “Is there a class
hierarchy in the USSR? No, there is no such hierarchy, because class
distinctions have been erased.” “In the USSR ... freedoms are
felt as fact every hour and every day, in all life experience.”
Although the book ignores the mass labour camps, the famines, the
exploitation and brutal oppression of Stalin’s regime, it is
important not to slip into Cold War judgements when confronting it.
The McCarthyite right castigated Russia for not imitating Western
capitalism. In complete contrast, Trotsky criticised Russia as an
obstacle to socialism. Ordinary Communists were misguided – not the enemy.
In Socialism and Its Culture Bukharin’s primary
literary aim was to uphold the idea of socialism against its critics.
In doing so, however, his argument is framed in the following way:
the Soviet Union is presented as the epitome of socialism. To modern
eyes this is a spectacularly peculiar style of argument. However, for
many years equating the USSR with “actually existing socialism”
was universal among Communists. In judging their beliefs the question
was what took priority – defence of the USSR (with socialism as the
spurious justification) or allegiance to socialism (with the USSR
falsely believed to be its embodiment). The answer depended on the
individual. Stalinist hacks fitted the former category, but there
were many real socialists who through ignorance or naivety belonged
in the latter category.
Bukharin was certainly not ignorant, though perhaps naive. If we
cannot answer certainly on which side of the divide he stood, his
book nevertheless gives an invaluable insight into the thinking of
the millions of people who, in the dark days of the 1930s with Nazism
in the ascendant, looked to Russia as a beacon of resistance.
There is still more to Socialism and Its Culture than that.
Many of its arguments are relevant in the struggle today. We live in
a world where the bosses want 24/7 working and everything
subordinated to the market. Against this, Bukharin makes a plea for humanism:
“The most important thing, which must be placed in the
forefront, is the development of the working people themselves ...
socialism is the abolition of exploitation, the fact that ‘hired
hands’ are turned into people, the collective creators and
organisers. People working for themselves, conscious makers of their
own ‘destiny’, who genuinely forge their own happiness.”
Bukharin discusses a number of contemporary issues such as
national cultures and the “clash of civilisations”. Today the
tendency is towards the globalising and flattening of culture through
multinational corporations and US superpower dominance. Socialism
and Its Culture makes a plea for preservation and strengthening
of the diversity of cultural life without descending into
parochialism or racism. Internationalism and human unity are achieved
not by suppressing national culture (as capitalism does), but by
creating freedom and real equality between people and cultures. Unity
comes through each person valuing the other’s difference – unity
through the expression of diversity.
There is a fascinating discussion of individuality. Bukharin is
answering those who say that under socialism individual difference is
obliterated in a monochrome world of state control. Bukharin shows
how the concept of individuality is historically determined. In
pre-class societies the individual might have existed as a separate
biological entity, but socially people were “bands or hordes; the
individual as such did not exist at all”. In ancient societies such
as Egypt it was meaningless to talk about “the individual in
general” because there was nothing in common between the
god-Pharoah, the high priest and the slave.
This would eventually change: “Capitalism unleashed the ‘free
individual’, under which was concealed the free commodity producer
... The individual leapt out upon the historical stage in an
extraordinarily vivid way. The very type of society, that is, this
capitalist society – anarchic, bound together only by the bonds of
exchange and characterised by the conflict of competition – brought
this ‘free individual’ to the forefront.”
Bukharin contrasts this with socialism where
“the growth of one individual brings with it the growth
of another. In capitalist society the bourgeois individual suppressed
the proletarian individual. In socialist society with the growth of
the individual the entire mass rises, that is, all individuals taken
together ... Therefore in capitalist society the growth of the
individual ... is bound up with ‘egoism’ and individualism, that
is with characteristics that divide people, that set one individual
apart from another, that oppose one individual to another in a
situation of more or less sharp conflict, psychological hostility and
fragmentation.
“In socialist society, on the contrary, the growth of
the individual causes an ever greater connection ... because this is
accompanied by an ever greater consciousness of the good of the
cause, the aim held in common, the general dependence of the overall
result on the degree of cooperation and harmony.”
Socialism and Its Culture has equally interesting
discussions on women’s rights, the environment, hierarchy and
equality, culture and much more. These are powerfully written and
show that the depth of imagination that led Lenin to call Bukharin a
“big” theorist was not misplaced.
Lenin criticised Bukharin for not properly understanding the
dialectic, and Bukharin’s biography showed how he found it
difficult to accept contradiction – the interpenetration of
opposites. At crucial moments he would grasp one side of a problem
but not the other. Thus in 1918 he was an ultra-left, emphasising the
need to spread the Russian Revolution internationally without taking
into account the pressing need for the Bolsheviks to consolidate
their fragile hold on power. So he called for revolutionary war when
there was no army to speak of.
In the 1920s, at the time of the New Economic Policy, he swung to
the right and argued that “socialism in one country was possible
... if we abstract from international factors”. Trotsky rightly
poked fun at this: “If we accomplish this ‘abstraction’, then,
of course, the rest is easy. But we cannot ... It is possible to walk
naked in the streets of Moscow in January, if we can abstract
ourselves from the weather and the police.” In a truly dialectical
twist, Bukharin’s lack of dialectics turned into a real strength.
The ability to grasp hold of one aspect and follow it through to its
logical conclusion without being troubled by contradictions
contributed to his pioneering Imperialism and World Economy,
and it re-emerges in Socialism and Its Culture.
Bukharin had witnessed tremendous forces unleashed in 1917, which
gave a vividness and concreteness to socialism which it had never
possessed before (except for a brief moment during the Paris Commune
of 1871). Russia’s isolation and subsequent counter-revolution
meant that in 1937 nothing remained of that upsurge. Yet Bukharin’s
lack of dialectics meant that behind the genuflections to the Great
Leader, he could abstract himself from the horrible reality he found
himself in and return to that original source of inspiration
untainted by subsequent events.
To conclude, Socialism and Its Culture is worth reading if
you can see beyond the mound of rubbish that first confronts you.
First, as a human document from a key Bolshevik figure it is high
tragedy; second, it gives an insight into the ideological world of
millions of Communists during the central decades of the 20th
century; finally, and most importantly, it provides a fascinating
defence of socialism which even today is fresh and stimulating.
 



John Molyneux’s generous review of A People’s History of the Second World War in Irish Marxist Review 4 raises an important question which goes beyond the remit of the book: ‘what was (and is) the correct political line for socialists to take in relation to the war?’. I agree with his conclusion on this, but in reaching it he rejects the notion of two wars – an interimperialist war from above, and a people’s war (fought by resistance movements, etc.) from below. John prefers the idea of a single war.
It is true that, as John writes, ‘the Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin governments and the ruling classes they represented ... fought the war for their own imperialist interests and not for democracy or anti-fascist principle,’ and ‘it was nevertheless in the interests of the working class internationally that Nazi Germany and its fascist allies were militarily defeated ... that revolutionary socialists should not have been neutral on D-Day or at Stalingrad.’
However, there are two problems with setting this formulation in a one-war framework. Writing of Churchill and co. that ‘objectively, whatever their motives, they were fighting fascist regimes’ and thus furthering ‘the interests of the working class internationally’ risks downplaying the imperialist nature of the Allies’ defence of their empires. The defeat of fascism as a system (as opposed to warding off the threats to empire of rival states), was patently not their aim. Churchill, for example, gave fascism enthusiastic support before and after the war. The record of Roosevelt and Stalin was little better. It is surely wrong to privilege the 350m Europeans conquered by Hitler over the 450m under the British heel.
A better way to encompass all the facts is to see D-Day or Stalingrad as a clash of imperialist blocs whose unintended side effect assisted the working class. In the same way that the ruling class uses divisions amongst the masses (racism, sexism, nationalism etc.), our class can benefit from splits among the ruling class. From this perspective we can celebrate the victory at Stalingrad without underplaying the imperialist nature of the Allied governments’ war effort, or ignoring their actions before and after 1939–45.
What of the resistance movements? They shared the same enemy as Allied governments, but if so, were they ‘objectively’ furthering the interests of that capitalist bloc? If there was only one war, that is the ineluctable conclusion. Again this approach does not fit the evidence. Apart from ending Axis rule, resistance movements had entirely different political, social and economic aims to both the Axis and Allies, and threatened both. That is why Allied governments used them for military advantage, but moved to crush or sideline them as soon as they had served their purpose.
Though this is expressly not his aim, John’s one-war position inadvertently concedes too much to the Allied governments and downplays the radical content of resistance. If my book has any merit at all it probably lies in its simultaneous appreciation of the unashamedly imperialist nature of the Allied governments, and the radical character of the movement from below (which hitherto tended to be seen as merely a military adjunct to the Allies). So 99.9% overall agreement, John, but I still think that the two wars formulation fits the facts better.
 

