


Priests, and others who owe their place in society to alleged miraculous powers, usually play safe.
They either pray for something which will happen anyway, like the sun rising, or which cannot easily be checked on, like God’s grace. In this respect, Howe, Brittan, and the other Tory economists have given hostages to fortune with their repeated predictions that a “recovery” in the economy is just ahead.
Recoveries do not just happen anyway, despite Tory belief in the miraculous recuperative powers of the free market. And it is extremely difficult to persuade people that the economy is moving on ahead as the dole queues grow. But has the economic trauma to which industry has been subjected prepared the economy for better things ahead?
 
Massive decline in profits
Between 1971 and 1981 total output of goods and services fell by 5½%, slightly more than in the Great Depression of the early ’30s. Whilst the service sectors were relatively unaffected, manufacturing industry was ferociously squeezed.
The government’s high interest rate policy attracted a flood of ‘hot money’ which helped push the value of the pound up against other currencies. Between 1979 and early 1981, UK manufacturers suffered an unprecedented decline in competitiveness.
Their exports fell in volume by about 8%. Then in 1981 increases in taxation and cuts in public spending had their maximum effect, taking a further 3% out of the economy.
The overall effect was a squeeze on profits. The Bank of England reports that in the first half of 1981 the rate of profit of industrial and commercial companies had fallen 2¼% from 5¼% in 1979. This was much the lowest level ever recorded.
The combination of profit and credit squeeze led manufacturers to cut their labour force and slash production. Instead of producing as much as they were selling, they massively ran down their stocks of goods.
During 1980 and early 1981, industrial production fell by 15%. Industrial employment continued falling throughout 1981 although production stabilised. By the first quarter of 1982 employment in industry was nearly 18% below the level of 1979 when the Tory government was elected.
The torrent of redundancies has undoubtedly forced workers into accepting some deterioration in wages and conditions. Until the end of 1980 earnings rose faster than price increases, so that workers were about 5% better off than when the government was elected.
But during 1981 and the first months of 1982 all this was lost as wages rose by about 5% less than tax and price increases; many workers in the manufacturing sector suffered bigger cuts than this and of course these made the unemployed bear the worst brunt.
Just as important from the employers’ point of view productivity in manufacturing industry rose by about 8½% in 1981. This was quite unprecedented in a recession year.
Firms were concentrating production onto their plants and piling the pressure on workers in those plants to increase output by faster and more flexible working methods. The most spectacular example was in the steel industry where productivity rose 34% in 1981; in motors the rise was 14% (see the article on BL in Militant, April 23rd), in electrical engineering 12% and in chemicals 10%.
Whilst most of the increase in productivity in 1981 reflected this process of rationalisation and labour intensification, some part was due to the introduction of labour-saving investment. Admittedly, between 1979 and the beginning of 1981 manufacturing investment fell by 22%, but this fall was less than might have been expected given the slide in production, high interest rates and very low profitability.
 
No return to ’60s growth
Surveys report that virtually all new investment is directed towards cutting costs rather than expanding capacity. In the service sectors, like retailing and finance, investment has actually increased steadily since 1979, again pointing efforts to cut costs (and employment) with new technology.
It should not be concluded from this that the competitiveness of UK industry has been transformed. In most industries the productivity rise in 1981 only made up for the decline in 1980.
In motors, for example, productivity was a little lower at the end of 1981 than when the Tory government was elected, and for manufacturing industry as a whole, the productivity increase was only 2% a year. This is about the same as that achieved in France and Germany, but only about half as fast as in Italy and Japan.
The rapid increase of productivity of the past year would have to continue for a number of years to make a major impact on the huge backlog of low productivity accumulated over the past twenty years. But the Bank of England believes productivity growth has slowed down to 4% a year.
An enormous investment drive would be required to sustain a major increase in productivity. But for the crucial manufacturing sector only a slight rise in investment is expected this year and next, which will not even bring it back to the level of 1979, let alone 1970.
The Economist (1 May, 1982) pointed out “The Thatcher strategy depends upon boosting profits – not just marginally and temporarily, as happened in the Heath boom in 1972–3, but massively and permanently.” Profits did increase by nearly one half in the second half of 1981; but only to 3¼% of capital employed.
There is no possibility that pressure on workers will allow the employers to get back to the profit rates of 10% or so which were made in the sixties. Without such a radical improvement in competitiveness there is no prospect of basing an expansion on an export boom.
In the last two years the UK share of export markets has declined from 10.4% to 8.3%, and even if world trade picks up next year it is most unlikely to grow even half as much as in the sixties. So investment and exports will hardly rise.
The government is committed to keep its expenditure down. Workers managed to keep their spending level last year and this by cutting down their savings, but there is no possibility of a ‘consumer-led’ boom with employment declining and living standards slipping.
No wonder the Financial Times reports (5 July 1982) that on average the economic forecasters expect 1% growth this year. Their forecast of 2% for next year looks distinctly optimistic, hoping like Mr Micawber, that something (the economy in this case) will turn up to improve the situation.
Even this growth would see unemployment continue to rise during 1983. The pessimistic, and therefore usually accurate, Cambridge Economic Policy Group predicts a further rise in unemployment of half a million by the end of 1983.
The latest CBI survey shows firms even gloomier about production than in recent months. Sam Brittan commented (Financial Times 5 July) “a fresh wave of destocking and manpower reductions may be occurring – not on the scale of 1980–81, but enough to turn modest recovery into a renewed unemployment crisis.” Not many people even noticed Sam Brittan’s last “modest recovery”; you have to be a real believer to expect another, less elusive, one.
 




Workers in their millions, including many who were ‘conned’
into voting Tory in 1979, have been made bitterly angry by Thatcher’s policies.
Cuts in living standards generally, in health, in education,
but above all the monstrous rise in unemployment have all added
greatly to the unpopularity of the government.
But to win mass support at the next election, the Labour Party
itself must have a convincing programme to deal with the economy and
especially with unemployment.
The focus on economic policy after the Budget provides an
excellent opportunity to explain Labour’s alternative. And compared
to Sir Geoffrey Howe’s studied complacency in the face of havoc his
policies are causing, the proposals put forward by Labour last week
at least have an encouraging optimism about them.
The policy gives priority to overcoming unemployment and creating
new growth in the economy, things that all workers would welcome
after years of Tory-induced recession. But in relation to the drastic
situation in the economy, the objectives of creating only 500,000
jobs a year and a 5 per cent growth rate are wholly inadequate, and,
given the whole logic of the policy, confining the strategy within a
capitalist framework, they are utopian in any case.
Labour’s modest target to reduce dole queues to 1 million in the
five years looks hopelessly inadequate when the hidden unemployed and
the increase in the workforce are taken into account.
Unemployment was only 235,000 in 1955 and only 70,000 in 1944.
Labour should set itself the goal of reducing unemployment to at
least these sort of levels. Between 1945 and 1948 three million
new jobs were created. The same rate of job expansion – a million a
year for five years – has to be the basis of Labour’s policy; and
bold socialist policies have to be adopted to make sure it is possible.
But far from securing the required 5 million extra jobs, it is
highly unlikely that the plans recently detailed by Peter Shore would
yield the 2½ million he hopes for.
Indeed in broad outline the plans bear an uncanny resemblance to
the last great Keynesian package, launched by Tory Chancellor Tony
Barber just 10 years ago in April 1972

Shore proposes to increase public spending by £4½
	billion; Barber increased spending by £4½ billion at today’s
	prices.
 
Shore proposes tax cust of £4½ billion; Barber cut taxes
	by £1.8 billion, equivalent to £7 billion now.
 
Shore calls for a “more realistic level of the exchange
	rate” (that is a fall in the value of the pound); Barber said that
	“an unrealistic exchange rate” would not be allowed to frustrate
	his determination to reduce unemployment.

After Barber’s package, production did actually grow at 6 per
cent a year, faster than Shore’s 5 per cent target. But the pace of
expansion could not be maintained despite a massive increase in the
budget deficit. Inflation rose in two years ’72 to ’74 from 6% to
24%.
Furthermore, instead of ploughing back their increased profits
into investment in manufacturing industry, which would maintain or
improve competitiveness on world markets, cash poured into office
blocks, stocks of commodities, indeed anything which promised a
faster return than producing real wealth. Little more than a year
after the ‘give-away’ budget the growth in production had ground
to a halt.
In the present situation, it is doubtful if the same pace of
expansion could be maintained even for as long as under Barber. The
first, and most crucial, point, is that the capitalist class were
wholly behind Barber’s policies but they are implacably opposed to
Labour’s.
Early in 1972 they had just received their first drubbing at the
hands of the miners. The attempt to hold down wages by means of mass
unemployment (at that time one million unemployed was regarded as
mass unemployment) had collapsed and capitalism sought salvation in a
reflationary boom.
The collapse of the boom, with the crisis in secondary banking,
caused a torrent of recrimination to be heaped on the head of the
luckless Barber.
It was precisely the experience of those years that explained the
wholesale conversion of the City and much of industry to hardline
monetarism. The City would now totally reject Labour’s plan.
Far from pursuing the Tory strategy of pulling public sector
borrowing down Peter Shore would push it up by £5½ billion in one
year, with presumably more to come the year after and the year after
that. But the strategy has not a word to say about how the big City
institutions will be persuaded to lend all this money to the government.
No one can have faith in the ‘negotiations’ mentioned in this
connection by the NEC’s statement The Socialist Alternative,
because it is not only the total size of Shore’s package, but its
shape which will antagonise the finances.
Peter Shore has correctly called for exchange controls “to keep
capital at home.” But keeping “capital at home” does not mean
that it will be lent to the government.
He also proposes to raise an extra £1 billion in taxation of top
incomes. But doctoring a growing PSBR in this way will only enrage
the City all the more and speed up the financial sabotage of
government plans.
Peter Shore’s plan includes chunks of the CBI’s programme; he
calls for the abolition of the National Insurance Surcharge, an
increase of government capital spending, as well as a lower interest
rate. But the CBI sees these as part of an overall package of reduced
government intervention.
Shore’s plan to offset some of the Tories’ cuts with £2½
billion extra current spending on restoring the social services and
the value of welfare benefits, is anathema to the CBI just as much as
to the City. The CBI in fact wants cuts in this area to the tune of
£1½ billion. With their rate of profit at only 2 per cent – a
quarter of the level at the time of Barber’s boom – the chances
of business being launch onto a substantial boom are negligible. They
will not invest in any case where so much capacity is unused –
about 20% in industry overall.
There is nothing in the reported statements of Peter Shore to
indicate what measures he would propose as Chancellor to force
employers to comply with Labour’s priorities.
Militant has consistently argued that Labour conference
policies themselves are not sufficiently strong in this respect and
that substantially further nationalisation is required. But there is
no mention of these policies at all in Labour’s strategy. The
logic of the policy is yet another attempt to push the socialist
content of Labour’s programme to one side, on the pretext that it
is necessary first to get the economy right.
Most alarming of all is what has now become a clear statement that
Shore and the other Labour leaders foresee involving the trade unions
once again in a new “Social Contract.” Despite all the
experiences of 1974–79 the Labour leaders are canvassing again for an
incomes policy.
The hope that economic expansion would not increase inflation by
any more than 2½%, is also distinctly optimistic if a major fall in
the exchange rate is contemplated. Peter Shore indicated his
“continuing strategy for cost restraint in the second and
subsequent years ... necessarily included a national economic
assessment, in which the trade union movement is closely involved
with government, on the use of resources and the share of the
nation’s income ... which would go to profits, earnings and other
forms of income.”
The pressure to restore profits from the CBI will be enormous. To
meet the CBI’s target of 10% for the rate of profit, the first 20%
increase of production would have to go to profits.
There is no way that a “national economic assessment” can
reconcile the demands of workers, enthused by Labour’s victory, to
restore their living standards and the welfare state, with the
dictates of capital for vastly higher profits.
Enormous pressure – in reality economic blackmail – would be
used by big business and the finance houses to push a Labour
government into seeing the ‘right priorities’ in their economic
assessment. Otherwise, they would sabotage the government through a
strike of investment, massive factory closures and capital movements.
If the basis of Labour’s appeal to workers in the next election
is the conquest of unemployment and other social ills – and that
without doubt is the feeling of Labour Party members – then bold
socialist policies would have to be adopted in the economic sphere.
Labour should explain that a Labour government would have to take
over the commanding heights of the economy – the 200 or so
industrial companies, banks, insurance and finance companies that
dominate the wealth of the country. A genuine National Plan for
economic recovery can only be based on genuine control of the wealth
and resources of the economy and their democratic management and
running in the interests of all.
Labour must fight for a clear alternative to the misery and chaos
of capitalism. But workers will not be inspired by the call for more
sacrifice – even if it is dressed up as a new Social Contract. The
call must go out for a fundamental change in society, as the only way
to give workers a future.
 




SINCE THE miners’ strike the NCB has announced its intention
to close 29 pits with a capacity of around 10 million tonnes and
employing some 23,000 men.
A further seven pits are being merged, with losses of much of the
1,500,000 tonnes of capacity and 4,500 jobs involved.
Already then, the NCB has gone way beyond its plan, just before
the strike, to axe four million tonnes of capacity.
But any hopes that this marks the end of what the NCB has in mind,
and that if only these closures are accepted things can get back to
normal, would be a severe mistake.
Ken Moses, technical director, has said that the board would
attempt to stabilise production at 90 million tonnes per year. The
closures already announced would bring colliery production down to
this level.
 
Demand
But this would leave out of account additions to capacity, at
Selby and elsewhere, which will average out at five million tonnes
per year over five years.
With production set at 90 million tonnes this would mean a further
five million tonnes of existing capacity would have to be closed each
year, at least double the rate at which mines will exhaust.
So closure on ‘economic’ grounds would have to run at around
three million tonnes per year.
By the beginning of 1987, the industry would have shed 40–45,000
jobs, involving the closure of as many as 60 pits.
The justification for this drastic cut in production is supposed
to be the ‘market’. The NCB’s most important market, the CEGB
expects to be using less coal as a result of nuclear reactors coming
on stream, and the buying of some ‘surplus’ electricity from France.
The Financial Times International Coal Report
suggested that CEGB purchases might fall by 15 million tonnes, a
figure disputed by the NCB. In any case the major reasons behind the
‘market’ problem is the stagnation of the economy.
If production was ten per cent higher, demand for electricity
would be higher and at least five million tonnes more coal would be burnt.
Added to this the CEGB is currently importing at a rate of some 10
million tonnes per year to build up its stocks.
It seems very unlikely that its imports (and those of BSC) will
continue at a high rate. Using the economy to full capacity, and
exploiting domestic coal resources, would soon remove the ‘market’ problem.
Even the massive closure programme outlined above would not
eradicate the NCB’s losses. To do this would require further cuts
of manpower in existing pits as work was speeded up and manning
levels cut.
Perhaps another 25,000 jobs would have to go, involving a
productivity increase of up to 20 per cent in two years (it has taken
more than 10 years for productivity to grow that much in the past).
 
Productivity
Adding these job losses to those caused by pit closures would mean
the industry being reduced from 180,000 miners before the strike to
around 115,000 by early 1987.
But the NCB’s ambitions evidently do not stop at breaking even.
MacGregor has boasted of increasing output to four tonnes per man
shift on every pit (an increase of about one third), with some
producing substantially more.
On this basis the number of miners required to produce 90 million
tonnes would be 100,000 or less. Ken Moses has backed this up by
saying that if pits are to have “secure futures, they must produce
coal at no higher than ... roughly £39 per tonne.”
At present only 75 pits are producing at £45 per tonne or less
(excluding interest). Even excluding all those presently scheduled
for closure, around 60 pits would have to increase productivity
massively to stay viable (including 10 in Nottinghamshire).
Since a number of highly productive pits would be well below the
£39 per tonne figure, hitting the target for the rest would mean
that the NCB would be earning a huge profit.
The average price received of £44 per tonne, would leave the NCB
more than enough to finance all its investment. Could the government
be thinking of privatisation on this basis?
As repeatedly argued during the strike, however, considerations of
profit and loss give no more justification for pit closures and
running down manpower than does the state of the market.
The NCB’s financial calculations totally fail to take into
account that the costs attributed to the pit include items, like HQ
expenses (including MacGregor’s salary), which will not be saved by
pit closure. As these costs, and surplus manpower, get pushed on to
other pits these become ‘unprofitable’ in turn.
 
Social costs
Further, they take no account of the costs of unemployment, in
terms of dole payments and taxes lost and which have to be borne by
taxpayers. To close 60 pits would cost the government some £900
million per year. Two and a half times the ‘subsidy’ required to
keep them open.
The NCB’s profit and loss take no account of the facts that
importing coal makes the balance of payments worse, which pushes down
the exchange rate, which cuts the living standards of all workers.
It takes no account of the fact that reserves of coal sterilised
by closure could only be mined by future generations at much higher cost.
All these considerations, which are thoroughly economic, and which
affect the rest of society as well as the miners and their families,
are sacrificed on the altar of profit and loss. Their profit, our
loss.
 




ONE ARGUMENT which the miners and their supporters often meet is that the NUM’s struggle against pit closures flies against the laws of economics. Labelling pits as ‘uneconomic’ suggests that to keep them open only benefits the miners who keep their jobs, with the rest of the country picking up the bill.
This view is quite wrong, it is far better for the rest of society, even from a narrow economic view, that miners be digging coal rather than drawing dole. ‘Unprofitable’ the higher cost pits may be, according to how the NCB does its accounts; ‘uneconomic’ they certainly are not.
In its drive for pit closures the NCB has harped on the fact that a small proportion of its pits are responsible for much of its losses. Last autumn it claimed that the highest cost 12% of colliery output occurred £275 million losses (about half the total loss in 1982–83).
These collieries employed about 40,000 miners. In addition a further 35,000 or so other jobs were dependent on these pits. Around a quarter of these were other NCB jobs (at pit, area or HQ levels). The rest were in industries such as electricity, steel and engineering, which supply fuel and materials needed by the pits.
If the pits were to be closed and their losses eliminated, all these 75,000 workers would lose their jobs. But the country would lose the coal. The coal produced in these pits was worth around £475 million in 1982–83 (more than £120 per week for every worker involved, both in pits and in the supplying industries).
Whilst part of the coal was stockpiled, this could have been avoided by substituting coal for the more expensive oil still being burnt at the power stations. So even in the depressed conditions created by the Thatcher government the coal would have been productively used.
Nor would the loss of the coal be balanced by extra production elsewhere in the economy made possible by the closures. With mass unemployment, miners would either not find a job, or, if they moved to another pit or found work in another industry, then someone else would remain on the dole queue. And the same is true of the other NCB staff and workers in supplying industries. The country would simply have less coal, and would have to use more imported fuel.
 
Country worse off
The miners and other workers losing a job obviously bear the brunt of the cost of the closure. They would be much worse off. The Department of Energy calculated (before the recent increases) that the average redundant miner would receive around £60 per week over a 10-year period under the redundancy scheme.
But some of this would replace other state benefits and of course by no means all of those who end up without work after a pit closure would be eligible. A young single person, living at home, who lost the chance of a job after a pit closure would receive in dole or supplementary benefits only a fraction of what they would get at work. On average those without work could be as much as £70 per week worse off.
But even this figure is hardly more than half the value of the coal lost by closure. The rest of the costs of not having the coal would be spread throughout the rest of society. Far from gaining from these pit closures the rest of the country would be more than £200 million worse off.
This would be felt in the government being that much more in the red after the pits were closed. Whilst it would ‘save’ the £275 million it pays to the NCB to cover its financial deficit on the pits, the government would lose £480 million in lost tax revenue and from having to pay out dole and redundancy money.
There is an irrefutable economic case for keeping open even the higher cost pits. The profits of the NCB, like the profits of any private firm, are no guide at all to what is in society’s economic interests.
 




A recent report by leading accountants which backed the NUM’s
arguments that the government’s calculations of the cost of pit
closures vastly underestimates the effect of redundancy pay, dole and
lost tax was banned from the pages of the Accountancy magazine
and severely embarrassed the government. Ironically one of its main
authors is Price Waterhouse professor of accountancy at UMIST. ANDREW
GLYN, a leading figures in this debate, returns to the attack:
OPERATING LOSSES certainly do not in themselves justify closure.
They do imply that the value of the coal produced is less than the
various costs attributed to the pit. But to conclude that the pits
should be closed presupposes that the resources which those costs
represent would have been used elsewhere to produce something of
greater value.
If on the contrary, those resources (both workers and equipment)
would otherwise be idle, there is no real cost to society from their
use in producing coal. Society as a whole gains the value of the
coal. The miners gain the difference between their take-home pay at
work and what they would receive if unemployed. If the value of the
coal they produce exceeds what they gain then the rest of society
benefits as well (since costs of closure exceed operating
subsidies).
 
Closure costs
Four pits, whose scheduled closure by the NCB precipitated the
strike, illustrate the case (the fifth was not producing during the
relevant period). Costs of closure can be estimated from the figures
for employment, costs and profits in the pits in 1983 prior to the
overtime ban (supplied to the NUM by the NCB). Assumptions can be
made about the costs to the government of the unemployment generated
amongst miners, other NCB employees, workers in supplying industries
and in industries affected by reduced spending.



Table 1: Losses to government from closure
Â£ per miner per week




 


If colliery was closed cost
to govt revenue would be:


Present level of subsidy
to keep pit open:


So to close pit means
net loss to govt of:




Herrington


281


  82


199




Cortonwood


295


  74


221




Bullcliffe Wood


467


251


216




Snowdown


260


232


  28




Note: The reason that the estimates of costs of closure in column (1) vary between pits
is that the higher are costs other than miners’ pay, the greater is the impact on other
industries and thus the greater the costs of closure
per miner affected.



They show that even Snowdown pit, burdened at the time with
development work which gave it the lowest sales revenue per miner of
all the NCB pits (Â£103 per week) would cost the government more to
close than to keep open. For the other ‘uneconomic’ pits the net
costs of closure are even greater, often much greater.
 
Economic
On this basis, not only are all the NCB’s pits ‘economic’
in the sense of making a contribution to production. They are all
actually so ‘economic’ that keeping them open benefits the rest
of society as well as the workers involved.
The broad conclusion is strengthened by alternative (unfavourable)
estimates about the cost of unemployment etc. The two crucial
assumptions which are required are that closure would lead to
long-term unemployment, and that the output produced by the higher
cost pits does in fact have a substantial value (as the NCB accounts
themselves assume).
If the unemployment effect of closure was temporary, then the
losses of coal output would soon be offset by traditional output in
the industries where new jobs are created. Equally if the coal was
really worth no more dug out of the ground than left in the pit
(because there was no prospective use) then keeping the pits open
would simply be a way of subsidising incomes of those involved
(requiring a different justification).
For the unemployment effect to be temporary, it is not enough for
those whose jobs are immediately lost by closure to find jobs
elsewhere (by transferring to nearby pits for example). If no
additional jobs are created such moves must be at the expense
of other workers who would otherwise have filled the vacancies. The
decisive question is what happens to total employment, not the fate
of particular individuals.
The only argument advanced for the idea that making workers
unemployed will of itself generate substitute jobs is the theory that
the increase in unemployment will drive down real wages and thereby
(somehow) increase employment. But the persistence of mass
unemployment discredits this theory. So it is wholly implausible that
pit closure will lead to increased production elsewhere to compensate
for less coal produced.
But is the coal from the ‘marginal’ pits really worth
anything, given the piling up of coal stocks in recent years? This
stockbuilding, however, just like rising unemployment, reflects the
government-induced contraction in the economy. If growth after 1979
had continued even at the slow rate achieved after the first ‘oil
shock’, then production in 1984 would have been some 7% higher and
coal use correspondingly increased.
Coal stocks in October last year before the overtime ban would
have been under 30 million tonnes, less than before the disputes of
1971 and 1973. So there is no shortage of valuable uses to which the
coal from the higher cost pits would be put, just as there is no
shortage of valuable jobs which the unemployed could do.
Labelling these pits as ‘uneconomic’ and casting them out of
the NCB’s accounts is just the same trick as redefining registered
unemployment to reduce reported numbers out of work. Neither can
disguise the damage that is being done to the economy by government policies.
 




ANDREW GLYN exposes Tory lies about the cost of producing coal
on the basis of the NCB’s own accounts (in table below). Below that he
indicates some of the costs of the strike which the government
conceals.



NCB’s own accounts




Accounting for subsidies
AS PART of its propaganda campaign against the NUM, the
			government has quoted huge figures for the amount of ‘subsidy’
			it pays to the coal industry. Peter Walker, the Energy Secretary,
			said that the taxpayer contributed £1.3 billion last year, or
			nearly £130 per week for each miner.
If the NCB really is “insolvent”, as he alleged, it is not
			surprising to hear Chancellor of the Exchequer Lawson claiming
			that the cost of the industry not
			working during the strike is “only” £300–£400 million.
In fact both these figures are entirely misleading. The NCB is
			not bankrupt and the cost of the strike is many time greater than
			the government admits.
The government “subsidy” for 1983 covered the NCB’s
			operating losses (£385 million), its interest payments (£467
			million) and around £500 million of “social costs”. The
			accounts for 1983–84 allow each of these items to be considered in turn.




‘Operating losses’
“Operating losses” sounds as though it means the excess of
			the costs of producing coal over the NCB’s revenue from sales.
			Yet included here are a number of items which are not costs of
			production at all.
The biggest of these is £245 of provision for payments of
			“surface damage”, the costs of meeting claims for subsidence
			in mining areas. The near doubling of this item in 1983/84
			reflects a rush of claims in the Mansfield area. But it does not
			reflect the estimated costs arising from this year’s mining;
			rather it is the historical legacy of past coal mining operations.
Another major item is £130 million of pensions and other
			payments to retired miners. In no sense can a pension paid to a
			retired miner, or compensation to people whose houses suffer
			subsidence damage, be regarded as costs of getting out coal now.
			Certainly they have to be paid but there is no reason why they
			should be met (via higher prices or worse wages) by those who now
			use coal or produce it. It is perfectly fair for the taxpayer (via
			government grants) to cover these payments; in no sense does this
			make them a subsidy to the production of coal.
These two items more than account for the NCB’s operating
			loss. If they are left out then the NCB made an operating profit
			in 1983/84. And, but for the £200 million or so effect of the
			strike and the overtime ban, the NCB would even have financed
			practically all of its £698 million investment programme out of
			its own revenue.




“Social costs”
“Social costs” is the next chunk of “subsidy”. These
			are “costs in respect of the closure of uneconomic capacity or
			redundancy of employees which are wholly or partially met by
			government grants”.
Again, they are not a cost of producing this year’s coal;
			indeed, they are a cost of not producing coal! The costs of
			maintaining workers who are put out of work by pit closures make
			up part of the economic argument for not closing pits in the first
			place (see my article in Militant, no. 705). They do
			not, as the NCB’s accounting suggests, represent an additional
			charge making the existing pits less economic, thus seeming to
			justify more closures.




Interest payments
Interest payments is the final item which has to be
			“subsidised” by the government. This represents £467 million
			(£400 million of which goes straight back to the government).
This huge figure directly reflects both the high interest rate
			policy of the government and the fact that so much of the NCB’s
			investment has been financed by fixed interest loans. It actually
			represents a return of 6.3% on the NCB’s capital employed. This
			is nearly double the corresponding rate of profit in private
			manufacturing industry in recent years. So this part of the
			“subsidy” is mainly paid by the government itself. It gives
			itself an inflated rate of profit and the NCB an inflated loss.



Extra costs of Tory attack
This analysis (above) shows that production of last year did not
require any government subsidy at all. The value of coal
produced, some £4,150 million, more than paid the miners and for the
cost of the inputs actually used in coal production.
It is the loss of coal production, put by the NCB at some 1.7
million tonnes per week, worth some £73 million, which is the
biggest cost of the strike. This is not the end of the story, for the
reduction in the take home pay of miners, and those in industries
supplying inputs into mining must amount to some £20 million per week.
Their reduced spending must lead to reduced production in
industries making the consumer goods they would otherwise be buying.
In addition the NCB is forced to postpone part of its investment
programme (which was running at £14 million per week) which again
means a fall in the output of the construction industry and others
involved. So leaving aside any effects on the production of steel,
from fuel and ore shortages, it is likely that the total cost of the
strike in terms of lost production is running at around £100 million
per week.
Finally the CEGB is using more expensive oil in its power
stations, reckoned by stockbrokers Simon and Coates to be costing an
additional £18 million per week as compared with using coal. This
cost too will eventually have to be borne, probably by electricity
users in higher prices, and this must be added to the loss in
production to reach the total cost. This total must be well over £100
million per week, and probably as much as £120 million.
 
Chancellor cooks the books
Considering all this how can Lawson possibly come up with a figure
of £20 million per week as the cost of the strike?
First of all he is concerned only with the cost to the government
(NCB and other nationalised industry losses, lost tax revenue from
miners, social security and costs of policing).
It is not surprising that he does not bother to count the cost of
the strike to miners and other workers, preferring not to see the
miners as part of society at all. But still his figure is only
one-third of that suggested by Simon and Coates.
Their explanation is that he has not counted the cost of running
down coal stocks as a cost at all. His ‘cash flow’ estimate of
the government’s real costs is no real guide to the true cost of
the government, let alone to the real cost to the country which is at
least five times his figure.
The government has been cooking the books on the balance of
payments as well. Whilst Tebbit told the House of Commons that the
effect of the strike was “minimal”, Simon and Coates reckon the
extra coal and oil imports as “at least £237 million per month,
without making any allowance for higher imports in other industries
such as steel. There appears no way that these estimates can be
squared with the government’s own indications of the strike’s losses”.
The government likes to pretend that the costs of the strike are a
modest investment required to reorganise an insolvent industry. In
fact it is imposing massive costs in lost production and higher
priced oil. These average out at around £2 per week for each person
in the country. Even looked at in narrow financial terms workers are
paying an enormous cost for the government’s attempt to smash the
NUM.
 




Andrew Glyn reviews Labour and Equality edited by Nick Bosanquet and Peter Townsend

Post mortems are a gruesome business. But they are necessary
There is a tendency among some Labour activists to argue that with the battle against the Thatcher government under way it would be divisive to rake over the experiences of the last Labour government.
This is mistaken, however, as there are vital lessons to be learnt and this book brings to the discussion a lot of information about different aspects of what happened under Labour, and a certain amount of analysis of why it happened.
A vital part of the “fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth in favour of working people and their families” promised by Labour’s 1974 Manifesto was to “eliminate poverty wherever it exists in Britain”, to “achieve far greater equality – in income, wealth and living standards” and to “increase social equality by giving far greater importance to full employment, housing, education and social benefits.”
These are the issues which this Fabian volume discusses in great detail. Pretty depressing it is too, of course, with the best that can be said being that the Labour government spread out the misery more equally (while presiding over an increase in the total amount).
Take the question of low pay. Between 1975 and 1977, the first two years of the Social Contract, the lowest paid did increase their pay a per cent or two in comparison with the average, but this was in the context of cuts in the average of 7–8%; so all the lower paid gained was a smaller cut! At the same time, the spending cuts reduced by one half the number of visits by wages inspectors checking on employers paying less then wages council minimums!
To its credit, the Labour government did increase the real value of pensions by 20%. This helped to reduce the number of pensioners on supplementary benefit. But nothing was done about improving the dole (which stayed at around 50% of average earnings) and the rise in unemployment helped to increase the number of people living below the official poverty line 1.4 million to 2.3 million between 1974 and 1976 (later figures are not yet available).
Although estate duty was replaced by a supposedly more effective capital transfer tax, it was still possible, as Michael Meacher shows, for parents to leave up to £150,000 to each child free of tax! In 1976 taxes on wealth contributed the princely sum of 3% of total tax revenue.
Nearly one thousand comprehensive schools were established between 1974 and 1979; but school building was cut by one half and current spending rose less than 10% in real terms so that many of these schools had inadequate facilities and staffing. The rent of the average council house fell in real terms by one quarter (in relation to average earnings); but the number of houses started by councils and housing associations fell by one third between 1975 and 1979 to a level below that achieved under the Tories.
And so it goes on. But post-mortems should explain as well as dissect. The Fabian book is particularly feeble in this respect. Peter Townsend says:
“In 1974 there was an unprecedented opportunity to develop the ‘social contract’ into a reasoned socialist manifesto. It really did seem that previous policies of wage restraint, masquerading as incomes policies, were going to be replaced by a plan to reconstruct wealth and incomes ... The collapse of the social contract ... remains one of the mysteries of recent Labour history.”
It is only a mystery, however, if you do not appreciate the depth of the economic crisis facing British capitalism, and the enormous pressure which this brought on the Labour government to abandon its policies (profits are not mentioned in the index to the book at all). Townsend’s favourite target is the Treasury, which he says bears an “enormous responsibility for the failure of the Labour government.
He goes on:
“It has adopted economic policies which have created more unemployment than was necessary. In particular its crabbed and irrational [our emphasis – AG] attitude to public expenditure has prevented the employment of thousands of people and stunted the services for the most vulnerable in society. In reducing real standards of living it failed even to confine them to those who could bear them easily ...”
But no tinkering with the machinery of government – for example his suggestion of importing more Labour supporters as advisers to ministers – will make any real difference while economic power stays in private hands. From the capitalists’ point of view, cuts in public spending are not irrational.
Paul Omerod points out that the City and business had forced the Labour government to plan for cuts in the share of government spending in the national income well before the IMF negotiations, and he calls these policies “politically motivated and misguided.”
“Misguided” they are from the point of view of the working class, of course, but that is hardly the point. At the LYPS Rally this February Tony Benn said that the 1976 spending cuts marked the end of the idea that public spending was a substitute for socialists policies. Unfortunately this traditional Fabian view obviously dies slowly in some circles.
 




Andrew Glyn examines the Thatcher government’s monetarist
strategy and its consequences for the labour movement
The Tory government’s recent Budget once again slashed public
expenditure and imposed a tight monetary squeeze of the economy. This
harsh deflationary package will cut deeply into workers’ living
standards, send unemployment soaring to unprecedented heights, and
throw millions of workers and their children into poverty.
These policies, however, are not simply the result of the
Tories’ hard-nosed arrogance and vicious hatred of the working
class. They are dictated by the catastrophic crisis of British
capitalism, and reflect a calculated economic strategy on the part of
the Tory government.
In a recent article in The Times, Professors Hahn and Nield
pointed out the fantastical nature of the theory of the
“self-regulating economy,” with which monetarism pretends to
bolster its policy prescriptions.
It would be mistaken, however, to conclude that monetarism is
simply an outdated and irrelevant dogma, with no real connection to
the problems faced by British capitalism. On the contrary, the
policies of the Thatcher government represent a systematic attempt to
deal with the catastrophic decline of British capital’s industrial base.
The decline is summed up in the collapse in profitability. Between
1964 and 1978 the rate of profit earned by industrial and commercial
companies declined from 12.5% to 4.7%. Any policy for the successful
regeneration of industry on a capitalist basis would depend on the
restoration of profitability, and the channelling of higher profits
into massive investment in modern capacity which are necessary to
restore British industry to a position of competitiveness with its
international rivals.
Paradoxical as it may sound, monetarism aims at restoring
profitability through precipitating a sustained slump. No sooner had
it been revealed that the government’s forecast for unemployment
next year was that it would exceed two million, than Chancellor Howe
pronounced that “even a decade might be needed before the economy
was really strong again.”
The most important way in which a slump is supposed to restore
profitability is by allowing the employers to drive up labour
productivity. The idea is simply that mass unemployment, and the
possibility of redundancy and bankruptcy, acts as a threat to help
force through wholesale rationalisation. Older plants are closed
down. The gains in working practices achieved by the trade unions can
be jettisoned and line speeds intensified if workers’ opposition is
weakened by fear of the dole.
The actual bankruptcy of weaker firms allows the concentration of
some of their resources in the hands of the more effective bosses and
managements. This is why the reduction of state aid to industry is an
integral part of monetarism. It is useless driving firms to the edge
of bankruptcy, and then stepping in to rescue them from the brink.
The distinctive monetary aspect of a sustained and heavy deflation
is aimed in precisely the same direction. Pushing down demand (by tax
increases and public spending cuts) would have less effect in
precipitating mass redundancies and bankruptcies if the firms most
affected could ride out the storm through relatively easy access to
additional credit.
The reduced real volume of credit available, and punitive interest
rates, inevitably tend to bear hardest on the weaker firms. So the
‘shake-out’ of labour will be more extreme.
The primary role of the deflation is to allow employers to drive
up labour productivity. Of course, if that higher productivity was
balanced by correspondingly higher wages, not much would be gained.
But mass unemployment is a powerful weapon in the hands of the
employers when it comes to wage negotiations.
Even with a severe monetary and credit squeeze and rigid cash
limits in the public sector, the relationship between wage increases
and rising unemployment is not so direct as the Thatcherites assume.
Nevertheless, they calculate that a period of sustained mass
unemployment at unprecedented levels will weaken the trade unions’
ability to achieve wage increases.
Of course, they are leaving out of account the anger that will be
provoked among trade unionists by mass unemployment, and the enormous
power of the labour movement once it is aroused into action.
It is nonsense to claim, as the Tories do, that the primary object
of monetarism is to reduce inflation. In a situation of low
profitability, price increases are required to restore profitability.
The problem is that, with strong trade unions determined to protect
and improve their members’ living standards, price increases are
rapidly cancelled out by higher money wages. The attraction of high
unemployment for the capitalists is that it offers the possibility of
breaking that link.
While mass unemployment is considered by the Tories to be
necessary to weaken the trade unions, they do not think it is enough.
So anti-trade union legislation to reduce their power over such
questions as the closed shop and ‘secondary’ picketing
complements “market pressures”, and can best be introduced when
these pressure may reduce trade union resistance.
After all, the monetarists look hopefully to some time in the
future when expansion will be possible. By that stage, shop-floor
organisation must be permanently weakened, or else the problems of
the past will just recur.
The public spending cuts, too, have both a short-term and
longer-term objective.
They form part of the deflationary package by cutting demand and
forcing up unemployment. The Tory package of cuts is distinguished
from those of the Labour government by its intended concentration on
state employment (as against state expenditure on goods bought from
private industry).
This is aimed at creating a pool on unemployed from among those
workers who, from the point of view of private capital, are even less
productive than those in weak firms in the private sector.
In the long run, however, (though that is somewhere in the 1990s),
the objective of the cuts is to ‘make room’ for the promised
investment boom. There is no point driving up profitability if the
profits are to be lent back to the government to finance an expansion
of public services.
Such expenditure does not add (at least in an immediate and direct
way) to the productivity of labour, and interest on the borrowing to
finance it just represents a further claim on the pool of profits.
The necessity, from the point of view of private industry, is to
ensure that the higher profits are ploughed back into “productive”
investment which will increase labour productivity, competitiveness,
and thus profitability in the future. Cuts in state spending are a
necessary part of such a package.
Whilst some of these processes are only just beginning on an
economy-wide scale, in one place they are already in full swing. The
policies implemented at BL represent monetarism in microcosm,
“monetarism in one company” as it were.
The government’s policy of limiting the finance available to
Leyland has been used by Michael Edwardes to push through a sweeping
programme of plant closures. Plants which have been kept open have
been demanned.
The threat of future mass redundancies has been used to attempt to
force on the Leyland workers a pay deal involving a 15% cut in their
real wages. Less well-known, perhaps, is that the proposed pay deal
includes acceptance of a 90-page document on working practices aimed
at drastically reducing the power of the shop floor.
Finally, the Leyland management has directly attacked the position
of the workers through a number of actions against leaders of the
shop-floor trade union organisation. The sacking of Derek Robinson is
just the latest and best known example.
In 1953 Japan’s Nissan Company (Datsun) began its meteoric rise
from a run-down truck producer to one of the world’s leading car
firms by importing technology from Austins.
The way was cleared for introducing the new work practices
involved by provoking a long and bitter strike during the course of
which one of the strongest shop-floor organisations of workers in
Japan was smashed and replaced by a company union. Now Michael
Edwardes is attempting to import not only Honda technology and
models, but also Japanese style unions.
However, the impeccable ‘logic’ of the Thatcher government’s
monetarist policies from the point of view of the central economic
problems faced by the employers is one thing. Whether they will
actually work in practice is quite another.
The first point is that the government has no means of knowing how
deep and how long the depression would have to be for the necessary
rationalisation to take place.
The depression, however, has thoroughly contradictory effects.
While it may help to pave the way for long-term profitability through
rationalisation and wage cuts, in the short term profits are hit as
sales fall, competition intensifies, and the weight of fixed costs
increases. This is bound to endanger not only the weakest firms but
relatively sound ones as well.
No wonder the mechanical engineering working party was reported in
The Times (18 February 1980) as believing that “the
government is unaware of the impact its economic policies are having
on the health of the manufacturing sector.” The employers, of
course, want the beneficial effects of the slump, in terms of
increasing their power over the shop floor, without its adverse
consequences.
As these adverse consequences build up, and especially if the
promised beneficial effects of policies fail to materialise, the
pressure for a U-turn in economic policy will be irresistible.
But such a U-turn could come too late. A heavy and sustained
deflation, especially if the monetary screws are turned tighter and
tighter, could break capitalist confidence and lead to a much more
precipitate decline than was intended.
If there is a collapse of major firms or even whole industries,
and a further weakening of British industries’ vis-à-vis their
international rivals, a reversal of the present monetarist policies
would be powerless to achieve a recovery at a later stage.
Even if the necessary rationalisation and weakening of the trade
unions did take place before such a point, this could only prepare
the way for an expansion. It cannot by any means guarantee it.
High productivity is of limited use if you cannot sell what is
produced. The world economic depression rules out the prospect of an
expansion being led by an export boom. It would almost certainly be
necessary for the government to “prime the pump” for expansion.
The West German and other capitalist governments, incidentally,
are maintaining high levels of state expenditure in an effort to
cushion their economies from the worst effects of recession.
Under the Thatcher government, it is only spending on armaments
and also on the forces of ‘law and order’ which is being
increased, clearly with the political repercussions of their current
economic policies in mind.
The “natural” rate of unemployment, an idea much beloved by
the monetarists, really means the rate at which the employers can
force on the workforce a sufficiently high level of productivity and
low level of real wages. If this ‘natural rate’ is to be reduced,
the power of the trade unions has to be smashed.
This is the nub of the question, for the most formidable obstacle
to monetarism is the labour and trade union movement.
Their opposition may seem rather slow in developing, particularly
in view of the drastic character of the Tories’ attack on
working-class living standards and trade union rights. But Thatcher’s
government has already aroused greater opposition in its first year
of office than the ill-fated Heath government of 1970 to 1974.
One crucial reason for the relative slowness is the lack of a bold
lead from the right-wing Labour leaders, who in the last Labour
government began many of the policies now being carried to much
greater lengths by the Tories.
The government, however, has already underestimated the
determination of one group of workers, in the steel industry, which
had been singled out beforehand as a relatively weak section. There
can be no doubt that this opposition will widen.
Mass pressure from the labour movement will be a key factor in
pushing the Tories into a U-turn on economic policies, or even
bringing down the government. The resistance of the organised
workers, who will not stand back while their living standards are
driven down to 19th Century levels and while the ‘welfare state’
is completely destroyed, will undermine the effectiveness of the
Tories’ monetarist policies, and this in turn will undermine the
employers support for Thatcherite policies.
Already, some representatives of big business, including leading
members of the Tory Party, have expressed grave misgivings about the
potentially explosive social consequences of the present policies.
This is evidently what Ian Gilmour had in mind when he recently
said that “it would be foolish to think we can forget the political
consequences of what we do.” For taking this line, Gilmour was
labelled by The Times as being among those in the cabinet “who
know little or no economics at all.” But clearly the critics of
narrow monetarist policies are those who have the clearest view of
the class relations in British society, and are fearful of the
enormous radicalisation and mass movements of the workers that will
be provoked by the Thatcher government’s harsh policies of
capitalist crisis.
 







In a previous issue of Militant [29 February] Andrew
Glyn reviewed a Fabian pamphlet on the 1974–79 Labour
government. In this article, he looks at the arguments contained
in What went wrong? edited by Ken Coates [Spokesman Books
£2.95]






The Fabian pamphlet provided a wealth of information on how the
Labour government, despite some achievements, failed completely to
bring about a fundamental shift in the balance of power and wealth in
favour of working people and their families as promised in the 1974 manifesto.
In fact as it showed, living standards for working people fell
over this period. The Fabian writers totally failed though to explain
why a Labour government should so diligently carry out the dictates
of the ruling class.
The Spokesman volume, representing generally a Tribunite position,
does not really advance the argument that much further.
Francis Cripps and Frances Morrell (Tony Benn’s advisers) make
the extraordinary statement that if only the Labour government had
been prepared to break with the EEC “they would then have been free
to implement Labour’s re-nationalisation programme, control excess
imports by trade agreements and maintain full employment.”
The absurdity of this obsession with the EEC should have been
clear from Tom Forrester’s article on industrial strategy, in which
he points out that even the top civil servant in the Department of
Trade admitted that Labour’s plans had to be modified “because of
intense hostility from industry.” (Readers of Forrester’s
notorious mole-baiting article in New Society will be
surprised to learn he can actually put together an article not
composed entirely of gossip.)
 
Low profitability
Michael Barratt Brown says the decline in British industry can be
attributed “directly to the outflow of industrial and finance
capital” which meant that “the wealth generated in Britain has
been siphoned out to the main centres of capital accumulation, above
all inside the EEC.” He ignores the fact that private investment
overseas, even at its peak of £3 billion in 1978, was actually less
than profits earned abroad, so in no sense represented a siphoning
off of wealth created in the UK.
As he himself emphasises it was low profitability and lack of a
docile labour force which explained low UK investment.
Michael Meacher points out the links between the civil servants
and industry (between 1974 and 1977 26 civil servants of Permanent
Secretary level were recruited by private firms), and explains how
civil servants can obstruct a minister attempting to implement party
policy (a theme also taken up by Tony Been recently).
But what good would more sympathetic civil servants have been to
Benn, when Wilson, as prime minister, had accepted that
“Private industry must have the necessary confidence to maintain and increase
investment. And confidence demands that a clear frontier be defined
between what is public and what is private industry”?
While the authors accept that it was pressure from the capitalists
that forced the government to retreat, the discussion of how a future
Labour government could defeat the pressure is quite inadequate. Of
course, control by the PLP is essential (and Geoff Bish gives a
graphic description of how the NEC was outmanoeuvred by Callaghan
over the 1979 Manifesto).
 
Labour’s programme
But there is very little analysis in the book of whether Labour’s
programme was adequate in the first place, of whether it is in fact
possible for a Labour government to control the economy while leaving
the overwhelming majority of the means of production in private hands.
Stuart Holland correctly emphasises that no serious attempt was
made to implement Labour’s programme but that does not mean that
all that is necessary is to repeat the demands of the Alternative
Economic Strategy without reassessing if they are feasible in the
light of the experience of the last Labour government.
It is also indicative of a narrow parliamentary view to say
“without the accountability of government to parliament and
parliament to the Party, there is little chance of reversing the
dominance of capital over labour in class relations.”
Holland does not appear to recognise that any attempt to break the
power of private capital could only be based on a mass mobilisation
of the labour movement, a condition a hundred times more important
than the views of civil servants, the integrity of parliamentary
leaders, or the rights of backbench MPs.
Whether the Alternative Economic Strategy put forward by the
parliamentary left is adequate, how to achieve the active support
necessary to carry through a socialist programme, these should be the
central questions raised in the minds of the activists by the
experience of the 1974–79 government.
 




The Socialist Challenge
by Stuart Holland
Quartet Books £5.95
This is an important book because it attempts to justify in detail the Strategy for Socialism contained in Labour’s 1973 programme and subsequent manifestos. Moreover, it carries some authority since Stuart Holland was involved in drawing up the programme and, as he says, his arguments found “extensive reflection in Labour Party policy.” The fact that the Labour Government has retreated further and further from the ideas of selective nationalisation and ‘planning’ contained in the programme-discussed in this book-does not diminish their relevance, for they remain the core of the platform of the ‘Tribune’ left.
Holland has no theory of the nature of the present crisis in the capitalist system. Certainly, he does discuss some aspects of Marxist theory, but in a superficial way. For example, he interprets the tendency of the rate of profit to fall in terms of insufficient demand for commodities as machines replace labour; this leaves out the fundamental aspect of the increasing difficulty of producing, rather than just realising, sufficient surplus value to maintain the profit rate. But in any case, his attempt to relate the crisis to the development of the conditions for producing (and accumulating) value is not only inadequate but is tacked on to the end of the book as an appendix. For almost the whole of the book, it is the trend towards increased monopolisation which is identified as the central cause of the crisis. The very first sentences of the book read:
“The current crisis of capitalism is not simply a matter of inflation. It reflects fundamental changes in the structure of power which have undermined conventional post-war orthodoxies on society, the state, and economic management. Recent acceleration in the trend to monopoly and multinational capital has eroded Keynesian economic policies and undermined the sovereignty of the nation state.” (page 9)
Now increasing centralisation is an important feature of recent capitalist accumulation. Holland quotes National Institute calculations that the top 100 manufacturing companies controlled one fifth of British production in 1950, one half in 1970 and are expected to control two thirds by 1985. But to blame the low industrial investment, which would be generally agreed to be a central aspect of British capital’s crisis, on this trend is quite unconvincing. He says that the management of the monopolies do not have confidence that the Keynesian methods of demand management (tax changes etc.) will ensure that demand will be high enough for their products over “the increasing length of time which it takes to payoff major projects which fully employ available technical progress and innovation”. (page 28) This is typical of his method of argumentation. No evidence is presented that major projects have increasingly long lives; in fact any tendency towards an acceleration in the rate of technical progress works in the opposite direction. Secondly, to the extent that managements do not foresee a sustained high level of demand, this is not the cause of the crisis, nor a result of the fact that the firms are monopolies. It is a reflection of the lack of competitiveness and the inflationary tendencies of British capitalism. Just the same confusion of cause of crisis with reflection applies to Holland’s other reason for low investment in the UK “easier (sic) investment opportunities in faster or lower wage-cost economies” (page 187) and the power of multinationals:
“There is a crucial contradiction between the facts that Britain ranks first in the European top 500 league with 140 firms, yet has an economic performance lower and worse than any of our European competitors. The reason (our emphasis) lies substantially in the extent to which such multinationals have written Britain off as the main location of their expansion and are shunting investment and jobs in modern industry abroad.” (page 77)
Holland never really tries to get below these reflections of the crisis and in fact he tries to deny that there are any fundamental problems for capital accumulation in Britain. For example he tries to play down the fall in the rate of profit by suggesting that:

It was substantially a short-term phenomenon. This is just incorrect, because the downward trend has persisted for a decade and was hardly checked by the ‘boomlet’ of 1973.
 
“There is surplus little doubt that not all firms in the upper half of British industry were in a profits crisis” (page 57). This is true, but in no sense implies that many of the major monopolies did not suffer a dramatic fall in their profit rate on their UK operations especially, as the string of major bankruptcies itself shows.
 
The multinational companies have the power to conceal the extent of their profits in the UK by transferring them abroad through the use of excessive ‘transfer’ prices charged when they import from their subsidiaries and too low prices charged on exports to subsidiaries abroad. No doubt this happens and may be reflected to a certain extent in the official aggregate profit figures. But Holland gives no reason for believing that this has increased in such a way as to explain away the apparent downward trend in profits.
 

Holland’s solution to British Capital’s “investment hesitation” is as follows: “What we need is to transform the private dominance of the mesoeconomic leaders who at the present command the rest of the economy. In the case of the top 100 manufacturing companies this is the case for twenty five new public enterprise leaders.” (page 179) Now the vital point in Holland’s analysis is that this group of nationalised manufacturing companies would not merely carry out expanded investment programmes of their own. They would also exert a “pull effect on other big firms,” based on “oligopoly leadership, or the situation in which one of the few firms at the top end of an industry breaks from the pack and pioneers a new product or technique on a major scale. While the remaining leading firms might otherwise have hung around and delayed introducing a similar project or process, they cannot any longer afford to do so without risk of losing sales, profits and market share to the pioneer firm.” (page 185)
Here we have the essence of Holland’s economic case for selective nationalisation-that the extra competition, which the nationalised firms with the expanded investment programmes would represent, would force a higher rate of investment on the majority of large firms left in private hands. But leaving the political implications of selective nationalisation aside for the moment, for the competitive pressure proposed by Holland to work, the private firms would have to have, or be able to get, sufficient cash to invest. But in the existing situation, with the long-term decline in profitability over the last decade, the stock market pressures which make it impossible to reduce dividends and interest, and the tremendous increase in borrowing (which has gone beyond viable limits in the case of many firms) the private monopolies would not be in a position to respond to competitive prodding by stepping up investment. Holland also wants the nationalised firms to be used to get more information on costs which would “increase government capacity to levy effective taxation on real profits” (page 201) and to act as price cutters themselves in order to reduce “excessive” profit margins.
Of course, nationalisation of the financial sector could help to provide extra finance but, as Holland says himself, the financial institutions cannot “actually start or run those things in the economy which are directly concerned with investment, trade, jobs”. (page 212) Simply nationalising the financial institutions will not generate productive investment. The idea that the industrial capitalists are just “hanging around” waiting for more competition to prod them into massive investment programmes is a grotesque misrepresentation of the true situation of British capital over the last decade. Far from there having been insufficient competition, British capitalists have been manifestly unable to meet the growing competition in home and export markets from foreign capitalists. Holland gives no reason why nationalised competitors should spur them on more successfully. A nationalised competitor pouring millions into new plant which is uneconomic because it is not used to full capacity or because it is too expensive, will not stimulate its private competitors to invest. If the techniques, the finance, the markets and the underlying profitability were present, then it would not take the leadership of nationalised firms to persuade the capitalists to invest; their own self interest and pressure from competitors overseas will be sufficient.
If the competitive pressure from nationalised firms could “withhold government financial assistance” and, in the planning agreements between government and private firms, which Holland sees as buttressing the “market mechanism”? The major firms would be required to reveal “main features of their corporate activity over the past four or five years, and their future programmes as already decided, or in the process of implementation”. (page 227) If the government reckoned the firm was failing the nation “through inadequate provision of investment, jobs or exports” (page 231), it could ‘withhold government financial assistance’ and, in the last resort, threaten to take it over. (page 234) This, of course, is the nub of the whole question. While Holland sometimes suggests that sufficient government prodding will chivvy the capitalist system in the direction of a socialist plan of production, even he concedes that this will not always be the case. The capitalists would have to be forced to act in a way which they considered to be unprofitable. All he says, however, about opposition from the capitalist class is that:
“Initially the framework in which progress can be achieved will be opposed by some sections of the capitalist class in the strict sense-the pressure groups of both business and private capital embodied in the Confederation of British Industry and such backwoods propagandists as Aims of Industry. But if it is properly presented in the framework of a positive transformation of society as a whole, there is no reason why executive management at large should be expected to oppose a socialist transformation.” (page 312)
This attitude reveal an almost unbelievable innocence about the likely reaction of the capitalist class to any attempt to nationalise profitable firms. It completely ignores the actual experience of recent years.
Even In the case of basic heavy industries, which had been ruined by ‘private enterprise’, but were essential to service the rest of private industry and therefore required state control even from a capitalist point of view, the capitalist class nevertheless resisted nationalisation because of the political implications involved. Thus, a Tory government reversed the steel nationalisation measures of the 1945-50 Labour government, though big business was later forced to allow a subsequent Labour government to take over the loss-making sectors of the industry because of the utter dilapidation of iron and steel production.
More recently, sections of big business and the Tories have vigorously resisted the nationalisation of the ports, shipbuilding, the aircraft industry, etc., in spite of the fact that they are not longer viable under ‘private enterprise’ and that Labour governments have always paid compensation, usually much greater than even the notional book value of the firms concerned.
Big business also intransigently opposed the attempts of the 1964–70 Labour government to “interfere” or introduce “creeping nationalisation” through the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, even though big companies unashamedly demanded state assistance with no strings attached. Later, the Tory government under Heath produced an Industry Act which allowed for unprecedented state intervention in the private sector. The Heath government also carried through the instant nationalisation of Rolls Royce. Big business hardly raised a word of protest. But what big business will accept from their class brothers, they would not tolerate from a Labour government. The recent, at times hysterical campaign, against Tony Benn’s proposals (contained in the election manifesto) for intervention in industry, access to books of big firms, and ‘planning agreements’ between big firms and the government, made this clear. Proposals for the nationalisation of profitable industries, such as pharmaceuticals, included in the Manifesto, have been completely dropped by the Labour leaders.
The economic policies of the post-war Labour governments have in some ways tended to favour big monopolies even more than those of the Tories, who have been influenced by doctrinaire ‘laissez faire’ ideas. Yet the capitalist class nevertheless fears the potential threat posed by a Labour government because of the pressure which the organised working class will exert on the Labour leaders at a time of sharpened conflict and mass radicalisation. They fear that the appetite of the working class for public ownership will grow with eating, especially as the effects of capitalist failure are felt in inflation, unemployment and cuts. It is for these fundamental political, class reasons that the Stuart Holland’s proposals are completely utopian.
Nationalisation of a couple of dozen firms would not provide adequate means of controlling and planning the economy. On the other hand, the “limited” nature of such measures would not for a moment placate the capitalist class, which would resist such moves with all the economic and political means at its disposal. Holland says his strategy is for “revolutionary reforms” but “within a democratic framework and not an undermining or overthrow of democratic processes” (page 158). The actual experience of Labour governments shows the limited room for even “reformist reforms” within the existing “democratic processes. Of In practice, the economy dictates to the government and the needs of big business will always, inevitably dictate to any government which accepts the existing framework of society.
In the very brief section entitled Against Violence, the only place in the book where he attempts to deal with the vital question of state power, Holland attempts to counterpose “revolutionary reforms” to violence. But when has the capitalist class ever hesitated to throw aside democratic forms when its vital interests were threatened? The real alternative from a socialist point of view is not violence, but the mobilisation of the Labour movement for the implementation of a socialist programme. If the Labour leaders gave a clear political lead and mobilised the enormous power of the movement, a socialist transformation could be carried through rapidly and peacefully. The experience of the Popular Unity government in Chile shows that hesitation and half measures are no insurance against reaction and violence. The ruling class of Chile and its military henchmen had no hesitation in crushing a democratically elected government when they feared it threatened their position. Yet the whole of the Labour Movement, which includes the great majority of producers and, including families, a majority of society, together with sympathetic sections of the middle class, could be won to socialism if presented with a credible prospect of social transformation. But only the nationalisation of all the 200 companies which Holland shows control half of the country’s output could provide adequate means of developing the productive forces in the interests of a majority of society.
 




Militant has explained many times that the basic reason
why the Confederation of British Industry has been demanding cuts in
public spending on social services is to reduce the share of total
production of goods and services which goes to the working class.
But with the Labour leaders constantly harping on the enormous
sums which the government is borrowing to finance the expenditure –
around £10 billion this year, or getting on for £1,000 for each
family in the economy – those who argue for a socialist alternative to
the cuts are constantly faced with the question of whether the
present level of public spending really can be afforded.
In answering this it is important to be clear how government
borrowing actually works. All government spending must be financed in
the sense that the government has to have the cash tp pay out as
wages for those who work in the public sector, as social benefits etc.
Most of the cash comes from taxation and the rest if the famous
“public sector deficit”. Part of this deficit is covered by the
government literally printing extra pound notes and spending them.
But to finance a massive deficit through printing more money would
result in a huge expansion of credit, leading to an inflationary
boom, speculation etc.
So most of the deficit is financed by the government borrowing
cash in return for government bonds. These bonds are in effect IOU’s
saying that the government will repay the money (with interest of
course) at a certain date in the future. The sum of all these IOUs
outstanding is the national debt (currently it is worth about £35–40
billion).
 
Fictitious capital
The public sector deficit does not mean that the country is
overspending by £10 billion per year. Rather if state spending is
greater than taxation of workers (and capitalists, such as it is),
the government has to go cap in hand to the capitalists to borrow the
rest. From the capitalists’ point of view, instead of ploughing
back their profits into investment in new plants they lend part to
the government.
The individual capitalist makes a killing out of doing this
(provided the interest he receives is not cancelled out by inflation
which reduces the amount of commodities he can buy when the
government pays back what he is owed).
But from the point of view of the capitalist class as a while the
accumulation of government bonds is no substitute for productive
investment. Investment in industry will, if successful, increase the
productivity in industry and thus the profits received by the
capitalist class. But government bonds are what Marx called
‘fictitious capital’ – they are IOUs which are not backed by
productive assets. Expenditure on the health service or the dole,
although socially essential, does not increase output like a new
factory does.
To use its profits to accumulate fictitious capital, to finance
social services rather than productive assets, spells ruin for the
capitalist class in a particular country. For it will be unable to
match its competitors on world markets as its machinery becomes more
and more ancient in comparison to its rivals.
The result will be loss of markets, industries decimated by import
competition, familiar features of the British scene. It is the
realisation of this by the capitalist class that has led to the
demand for cuts in “unproductive” state spending and thus the
government deficit.
 
Credit
This is not aimed at the immediate improvement of profit margins
(wages policy is directed at that), but at the long-term growth of
profits based on a massive investment boom to ‘regenerate’
British industry and recover lost markets at home and abroad.
But does that mean that the spokesmen of capital are right when
they claim that productive investment is low because the public
deficit is so high? In the present situation of recession it is
absurd to say that government borrowing automatically cuts the amount
of industrial investment undertaken by the capitalists by removing
funds from the banks.
As the financiers pointed out themselves, in their outcry against
Labour’s proposals for nationalising the banks, there is no
shortage of credit, despite huge government borrowing. What is
holding back investment from their point of view is the prospect of
an inadequate rate of profit.
In the short-term, cutting public spending, or increasing
taxation, would make prospects for investment even worse as the size
of the market was reduced. In fact, in the short-run, far from the
government deficit causing the low investment, it is more the case
that the low investment, and therefore employment and incomes,
actually accounts for much of the government deficit by reducing tax
revenues and increasing government expenditure on the dole etc.
But the capitalist class learned the lesson of “short-run”
thinking in the disastrous ‘Barber boom’ of 1972. Then an
expansion of the economy on the basis of an “inadequate” rate of
profit and “excessive” public spending, collapsed in a welter of
inflation and property speculation without a substantial increase in
productive investment. The capitalists realise that such a short-term
policy is no solution at all.
The latest figures from the Department of Trade and Industry show
the rate of profit in industry to have been 3.9% in 1975 as compared
with 11.2% in 1965. So the CBI is demanding a massive increase in the
rate of profit as an absolutely necessary precondition for an
expansion of investment, and this has been accepted by the Labour
leaders – very clearly by James Callaghan in his Blackpool speech
to Labour Party Conference.
But the capitalist also see that there is no future for them in
accumulating higher profits in the form of fictitious capital, as
would tend to happen if the government expanded social services. They
are relying on an export boom to provide the growing markets
necessary to justify their ploughing back their higher profits into investment.
When (or if) this happens they want as little government spending
as possible so that their boom will still maintain a pool of
unemployed. They hope this “reserve army” will play the
traditional role of maintaining profits through holding back workers’
efforts to improve their living standards.
Nor does the demand from the IMF to cut public spending arise from
some obscure connection between public spending and the mysteries of
international finance. An ex-IMF official recently pointed out in The
Guardian that the standard tactic of the IMF is to push the
policies of the most orthodox domestic financiers, and for just the
same reason of restoring the health of the economy in capitalist terms.
These policies can then, conveniently for the government, be
blamed on what one Labour Minister recently referred to as our
“friends” abroad.
The government has been forced to borrow abroad (a total of $14
billion by the middle of this year) because the capitalists are
incapable of selling sufficient exports to meet the import bill, But
the “country is failing to pay its way” not because public
spending is too high, but because production is so low. It is
precisely by expanding production, rather than reducing it, that the
balance of payments would be dealt with in a socialist plan.
To this miserable prospect of declining living standards and
services, socialist must counterpose the fundamental point that the
full utilisation of society’s idle resources would increase
production by anything up to 20%.
This would allow increased public services and take-home
pay as well as much needed exports and investment. This is leaving
aside all the possibilities opened up of eliminating the wastes of
capitalist competition, and of increasing productivity under a
socialist plan.
What the country can afford is what workers can produce, not
what the capitalists see fit to finance. Only by removing control
from capital can this potential by realised.
 




In 1974, 18.3% of the gross national product passed through the
local authorities [LAs]. This total covers a mixed bag of operations
– goods and services bought from the capitalists [e.g. council
houses built by private firms], wages paid to council employees [who
totalled 2.9 million in 1974 or 11.3% of those at work], grants made
to individuals [e.g. for house improvement] and interest paid on past
borrowing.
The relative importance of local authority spending has almost
doubled in the last 25 years – in 1950 they employed around 6% of
those at work. What has accounted for this terrific increase?
Education – the biggest item of expenditure – is a good example
of what has happened.
The number of children in school has risen from about 7 million in
1950 to 11 million now. This is partly due to population changes, but
also to the raising of school leaving age. There have also been
improvements in standards: between 1963 and 1973 for example the
number of pupils per teacher fell by about 10%.
Although much of the LA’s expenditure goes to the worse off
sections of society, education expenditure, for example, is not that
unevenly spread. In 1974 the average family with two children and
income of about £1,500 a year benefitted from educational expenditure
costing about £270 per year, whereas for families with incomes over
£5,500 the figure was £390. This is because a larger proportion of
children in higher income families stay on at school and in higher
education.
Even these figures play down the real differences, for they assume
that all children of a given age at school benefit from the same
amount of educational expenditure. This is notoriously not the case
as the local authorities in poorer areas do not have the money to
provide schools of the same standard. This can be seen when looking
even at broad regions; for example the proportion of children in
classes with more than 30 children ranges from 27% in London to 38%
in Wales.
Local authorities get the cash to finance their expenditures from
three sources. Firstly there are the rates.
Rates have declined in importance as a source of revenue – from
48% of LA current expenditure in 1950 to 32% now. Part of the reason
has been that new rateable property has grown slowly.
Rates have taken a slightly rising share of workers’ incomes,
and the rise would have been greater but for a special government
subsidy begun in 1966, to hold down the rates for householders. Even
taking account of rebates, rates are still a regressive tax, so that
in 1974 the average family with incomes around £1,600 paid 3.4% of
their income in rates, whereas for families with more than £5,500
the figure was 1.7%.
Secondly two thirds of current LA expenditure is financed
by the central government. The government fixes a total for planned
LA expenditure, decides what proportion it will finance by the grant
and then parcels this out to the authorities according to complex
formulae reflecting the ‘needs’ of the authority (e.g. number of
children in the area) and the ‘resources’ (i.e. rateable value as
an indicator of what the authority can raise in rates), and grants
for specific services like the police.
Thirdly around four fifths of LAs’ capital expenditure
(building council houses, schools, etc.) is financed by borrowing,
the level of which is strictly controlled by the government. The debt
of LAs rose from £9 billion in 1964 to about £25 billion by the
beginning of 1976 – representing about £2,000 for every family in
the country. The proportion of current expenditure of LAs eaten up by
interest rose from 11.6% in 1950 to 21.2% in 1970. Since then the
money value of interest payments has already doubled and its real
value increased by 28%.
 
Interest payments have been particularly important for the
provision of housing. In 1974 total loan charges constituted 68% of
current housing costs (the rest being maintenance, improvement and
administration). Leaving aside that part of loan charges which are
necessary to replace the housing stock it still leaves 48% of pure
interest. So subsidies at 39% of revenue do not even cover interest.
In fact, the so-called ‘subsidised’ rents actually pay more than
the real cost of the housing (depreciation and maintenance). Tax and
rate payers pay for the housing ‘subsidies’ all of which go to
those who lend to the local authorities!
This confirms clearly that if the banks and finance houses were
brought into public ownership and councils were given interest free
loans rents could be reduced by at least half immediately and there
would still be adequate finance for replacing housing stock and
maintaining it.
 
Fat Margins
Over the past five years the LAs have borrowed about £11 billion,
of which about 40% came from banks and other financial and industrial
firms, and just under half from the central government, (Which of
course in turn had to borrow equivalent sums).
Some part of interest on these loans is received by small savers,
but the big financial institutions make a fat margin on what they
borrow from savers and then lend on to local authorities. For example
in 1975 the average rate of interest paid by banks on deposit
accounts was 7% and if they lent this money to LAs they made almost 11½%.
Expenditure by local authorities certainly grew rapidly over three
years 1971 to 74 – in real terms by 26.4% for current expenditure
and 17.4% for capital expenditure compared with 8.9% for gross
national product.
The big increases were in housing (current expenditure on
subsidies rose almost 6 times and expenditure on housebuilding rose
51% in real terms), health and personal social services (59%),
current expenditure on roads (40%) and education (19%). Obviously
much of this represented real, and much needed, improvements on services.
 
Land Prices
But a major factor in the far greater increase in the current
cash cost of expenditure was the especially rapid increases in the
prices of what LAs buy. The most notorious example was the
explosion in the costs of construction and of acquiring land and
other assets. Over these three years 1971–74 the costs of public
expenditure on housing rose 37.6% faster than prices in general,
adding something like £1 billion to the LAs’ bills. Little wonder
that the profits of construction companies more than doubled between
1970 and 1973 and those of property companies rose by 140%. The gravy
went to Poulson et al.
Despite the government attempts to hold down the growth of local
authorities’ current expenditure it rose about 4% in real terms
between 1974 and 1975, while capital expenditure was slashed by more
than 12%. The January 1976 Public Expenditure White Paper
called for no real growth of LAs’ current expenditure up to 1979/80
and a further fall of 23.4% in capital expenditure.
Obviously constant total current expenditure would mean cuts in
many services if unavoidable increases in other services were to be
accommodated, and this is happening already. The cuts in capital
expenditure would mean that school building in 1979/80 was one third
of the 1973/74 level. Personal social service investment would be 37%
below that of the 1973/74 level, and housebuilding, while maintained
at the present level, would be 12% below that of 1970.
 
The only rapidly growing element of public expenditure is payment
of debt interest, which is expected to rise in real terms by one half
between 1975/76 and 1978/9 – as a result of the large government
borrowing requirement and the refinancing of maturing debt at high
interest rates.
The object of the holding back of public expenditure is of
course to allow private capital investment to grow – by at
least 50% between now and 1979 according to the White Paper
plans. Whilst Denis Healey originally justified public spending cuts
to ‘make room’ for his long-awaited export-led boom he now
threatens more cuts if exports do not materialise since the balance
of payments is so bad! (The Times, August 4).
The stranglehold which the central government exerts over the LAs’
finance gives Labour councils little room to manoeuvre. With the Rate
Support Grant fixed in real terms the government has set a maximum
additional sum of £400m to meet higher costs due to inflation. With
inflation certain to be greater than that covered by the £400
million this is a back-door way of cutting current expenditure in
real terms, while blaming inflation.
Borrowing is strictly controlled and to declare a block on paying
further debt interest (which would allow one fifth more of current
expenditure to be devoted to maintaining and improving services
rather than lining the pockets of the capitalists) would just lead to
a refusal of the government to permit the borrowing essential to
finance existing capital programmes.
 
Campaign
Formally the rates are still within the control of the LAs; but
the government has made it clear that any attempt to use the rates to
finance expenditure in excess of government targets of zero growth in
current expenditure and in LA employment, would lead to withdrawal of
the Support Grant and thus the collapse of the LAs’ finance. In any
case, with the rates only one third of current expenditure, to meet
all extra expenditure wholly from the rates would mean a
disproportionate increase in a tax that already hits the poor.
The only solution is for Labour councillors themselves to take the
lead in mobilising a campaign against the cuts. This should explain
in detail all the cuts that have been made locally, what the White
Paper Plans imply in terms of schools, housing etc., and how the
Tories would try to implement harsher cuts, increase charges, and
even try to hand over to private capital some of the services the LAs provide.
But obviously real solutions must be offered as well. The
monumental report of the Layfield Committee on LA finance contains
masses of useful information, but no attempt to relate the crisis
faced by the LAs to the crisis of the capitalist system as a whole.
So the best it can suggest is replacing part of the government grant
by a local income tax, merely a different route for workers to
finance local services.
 
Banks and Land
On the contrary socialists must counterpose to the cuts, not
different ways for workers to pay for the crisis, but a socialist
plan for expansion based on real control of the economy.
Control of finance requires ownership of the financial
institutions. Control of building programmes requires ownership of
the land and the building monopolies. The campaign of local Labour
councils should be one conducted in conjunction with the rest of the
labour movement to refuse to implement the cuts, and to propose a
thoroughgoing socialist plan of production through ownership of the
big monopolies who have sucked the local authorities dry. A campaign
to insist that our Labour government implement such a programme is
the only way to meet the manifesto commitments of local councillors
and the party as a whole, and avoid a devastating defeat at next
year’s local elections.
 




In 1909 the largest manufacturing firms produced 16% of UK
manufacturing output. In 1970 their share had grown to 46%, and the
compiler of these statistics speculated that the figure would be two
thirds by the mid-1980’s.
The fundamental factor behind this tremendous ‘centralisation’
of capital [to use Marx’s words] has been the pressure on the
individual capitalists to make the maximum profits from the
exploitation of their work force and to grow at least as fast as
their rivals. This is essential if they are to stay in the race for
technical efficiency, which is continually demanding larger and
larger scales of production.
In one quarter of the industries studied by one economist,
maximum technical efficiency could only be reached by a firm actually
producing more than that required to supply the total British market
[aircraft and diesel engines were two examples]. Large size also
allows advertising costs to be spread and better terms to be squeezed
out of suppliers of components or finance: these of course simply
constitute gains for the particular capitalists in relation to other
capitalists, rather than potential advantages of society in terms of
greater productivity. To fall behind in the race for size means,
therefore, that the firm has higher costs, lower profits, less to
plough back in more advanced equipment, yet higher costs, and so on
until it is swallowed up.
 
Competition?
Some of the giant firms are more or less monopolies in the literal
sense of the word – that is they dominate the market for a
particular product. Information on this is hard to come by, but the
list of monopolised markets (see chart A) includes a large
number of basic commodities. The more usual situation, however, is
that a small number of firms produce a particular type of product.
The car industry is a classic case of what bourgeois economists call
“oligopolistic” competition, in which none of the small group of
producers has an overwhelming advantage. To take another example,
government statistics split up the electrical industry into 24
sub-sectors (TV sets, electric motors etc.) and on average the
largest 5 firms in each sub-sector capture over three quarters of the
sales. This does not mean, however, that there are more than 100
important firms in the industry – a giant like GEC operates in
nearly every sub-sector, and in fact the largest five firms in the
industry as a whole produce around two thirds of the total output of
the industry.



CHART A
In answer to a parliamentary question on April 6th, 1970 Edmund
Dell stated that no comprehensive list was available of industries
in which more than one half of the market was controlled by one
company or group, but that it was believed to be true of a list of
156 commodities including:
Man-made fibres
Oxygen
Rubber contraceptive goods
Plate and sheet glass
Rayon yarn
Lawn mowers
China clay
Nitrogenous fertilisers
Wallpaper
Bicycles
Matches
Certain frozen foods
Soups
Cereal breakfast foods
Canned peas
Canned baked beans
Sugar
Margarine
Vinegar
Whisky
Gin
Cigarettes and tobacco
Refined petroleum goods
Soap
Synthetic detergents
Asbestos goods
Metal containers
Plasterboard
Cash registers
Sewing machines
Dish washers
Vacuum cleaners
Dry batteries
Electronic valves
Rubber footwear
Photographic film
Razor and razor blades
Linoleum
Cement
Unwrought nickel and zinc
Salt, industrial and rock
And many chemicals [e.g. chlorine], components for cars [e.g.
carburettors, electrical instruments], and types of machinery
[e.g. packaging machinery].



A pure monopolist can set as high a price as the market will bear,
but where there are a number of large firms competing, each one has
to take account of its rivals reactions. When times are good, and no
one firm has any particular advantage, there is tacit recognition
that they all gain by charging as high a price as possible. Of course
if they charge too much other firms will come into the industry and
undercut them. But even where there is little price competition, the
different firms will generally still fight for a bigger share of the
market through advertising, product changes etc. And as soon as one
of the firms gains a marked cost advantage, what was previously a
stable situation will be rapidly transformed as the firm tries to
exploit its technical advantage to drive out weaker rivals and
capture some of their market. Such ‘disruptive’ behaviour also
intensifies in slumps when it becomes a matter of survival for a firm
to increase its market share in order to maintain sales and meet
fixed costs.
Competition takes place increasingly on an international, rather
than domestic scale. The tremendous capital accumulation in Japan and
Continental Europe relative to Britain, has been reflected in the
disastrous erosion of the market shares of British firms in the home
and export markets. With lower costs, based on the most advanced
techniques and therefore more efficient exploitation of the workers,
foreign producers have been able to undercut their British rivals,
forcing down prices and profits, reinforcing the vicious cycles of
low investment and growth. Of course, on occasions, the stifling of
competition through cartels operates on an international level as well:
“Groups of cable manufacturers in at least 20 countries
have been collaborating through a Liechtenstein registered
organisation, with an operational headquarters in London, to restrict
their competition in world markets. Export contracts offered by
customers have been secretly shared out at agreed minimum price
levels.
Under the aegis of the neutrally titled International
Cable Development Corporation, some British companies have recently
played a leading role in strengthening the confidential arrangements
for controlling competition. Tenders received from developing
countries have been subject to particular market-sharing controls.
A large contract for the supply of cables to Iran is
known to have gone to British interests after rival German cable
makers ceded their own offer in order to avoid needless competition
between ICDC members. Machinery for allocating exports was used to
settle who won the business ...
... Arrangements to which they were parties include the
sharing out of export tenders, collective negotiations of guidelines
for price quotations, and agreed methods for undermining competitors
not belonging to the ICDC.
London appears to be the nerve centre of a complex
network of manufacturers who have been staging regular committee
meetings in top hotels around Europe. Executives travel from as far
as Japan ...
... Last year, nearly two thirds of all export business
monitored by the organisation was conducted at what are known as
“tolerance” price levels. A Guiding Price List has been
used by member companies to deal with customers’ orders.
Some 20 national groups of companies of companies are
expected to counter competition in their own home markets themselves.
But they can call in the international organisation if they require
help. Centrally determined procedures exist for stage-managing
competitive fights to undermine competition from outsiders...” (The
Times, 7/4/75)



The Top 15 Financial Institutions
[Excluding Insurance]




 


£ million




Barclays


14,198




National Westminster


13,586




Midland


  9,940




Lloyds


  8,954




Halifax Building Society


  3,767




National and Commercial Banking


  3,004




Abbey National


  3,006




Nationwide


  1,547




Bank of Scotland


  1,251




United Dominions Trust


  1,244




Leeds Permanent


  1,110




Hambros


  1,105




Samuel Montagu


  1,044




Woolwich Equitable


  1,048




Hill Samuel Group


  1,005




Source: Times 1000 1975/76, Tables
12, 13, 14, 15, 24.



Competition does not necessarily lead to the weaker firms being
bankrupted, through there have been spectacular examples in recent
years; the centralisation of capital has been enormously accelerated
by the merger boom. Since the mid fifties more than half the
companies whose shares were quoted on the London Stock Exchange have
been taken over through their shares being purchased by other, almost
invariably larger, firms. In the peak years for mergers, 1968, £1,530
million was spent by manufacturing companies in buying up other
firms, as compared with £1,590 [million] investment in new factories. Mergers
are also an important route for giant companies expanding into
different industries, when possibilities for growth in their own
markets are limited; in 1972, another year of intense merger
activity, more than half the mergers involved moves into another industry.
 
Ownership
The legal owners of the giant firms are the shareholders. Whilst
there are around two million people in Britain who own shares, half
of the shares are held by the wealthiest ¼% of the population,
according to the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Wealth
(Report 1, Table 31). Apologists for capitalism proclaim that there
has been a ‘managerial revolution’ – that a diminishing
proportion of the major companies are actually run on a day to day
basis by major shareholders and that in a growing number of companies
there are no longer identifiable groups of families with a
controlling interest. As a result of this, they say, managers are no
longer interested in profits for their own sake and can rule
benevolently with an eye to the interests of workers and consumers.
These trends have in fact often been exaggerated; Burmah Oil – the
sixth biggest company in Britain in 1974 – is a good example of a
company which despite appearances is controlled by a small group:



LARGE SHAREHOLDERS IN BURMAH OIL
Scottish Widows Funds and Life Assurance Society
Murray Johnstone managed investment trusts
Robert Fleming managed investment trusts
Save and Prosper unit trusts
Scotbits Securities unit trusts



“Scotbits Securities is a Scottish-based subsidiary of
Save and Prosper, the latter being jointly owned by Burmah’s two
merchant bankers – Robert Fleming’s and Barings – and by the
Bank of Scotland and Atlantic Assets Trust, the latter being managed
by Ivory and Sime. The Murray Johnstone trusts have had a long
association with Burmah – the company was founded by David Cargill
and developed under the chairmanship of his son, Sir John Cargill,
who was a chairman during the inter-war years of a number of trusts
managed by Brown, Fleming and Murray (the forerunner of the Murray
Johnstone group). The chairman of Burmah until 1974, now deputy
chairman, is also chairman of all the Murray Johnstone trusts.
Fleming’s Bank has long been associated with these same trusts
through the Fleming family’s association with the Murray family and
the large Scottish accountancy firm of Whinney, Murray, and the legal
firm of Maclay, Murray and Spens. Ivory and Sime manage the Scotbit
unit trusts, and through Atlantic Assets, have a large stake in Save
and Prosper. Scottish Widows Fund is interlocked through
directorships with the Murray Johnstone group (twice), the Fleming
trusts (twice), Save and Prosper (once) and Ivory and Sime (twice).
Finally, and strongest argument of all, Burmah’s board consists of
seven executive and six non-executive directors; of the latter, three
directors are also on Fleming’s trust, one is on Fleming’s bank,
one is on various Murray Johnstone trusts, one is on Scottish Widows,
and one is on the Bank of Scotland. Thus, the dominant proprietary
interests in Burmah are heavily interconnected through shareholdings,
directorships, management and other associations. The conclusion must
be that these groups do exercise influence over Burmah’s
operations ...” (Sociology, January 1976)
 
Coercive Laws
But in any case, capitalism throughout its history has been
dominated by pursuit of profit not because of the personal greed of
individual owners of firms, but because the competitive nature of the
system imposes this behaviour. As Marx pointed out:
“The development of capitalist production makes it
constantly necessary to keep increasing the amount of capital laid
out in a given industrial undertaking and competition makes the
immanent laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual
capitalist as external coercive laws. It compels him to keep
constantly extending his capital in order to preserve it, but extend
it he cannot except by means of progressive accumulation.”
(Capital, Vol. 1)
This is just as true for the chief executive of a present day
company as it was of the traditional capitalist owner-entrepreneur.
Even if the directors and managers hold a minute proportion of the
company’s shares, their jobs, salary and prestige all ultimately
depend on the success of the company, which in turn requires
sufficient profits and investment. Similarly the position of the
directors of the banks, insurance companies and pension funds, which
together hold more than half the shares of industrial firms depend on
the success of the firms in which they invest. These financial
institutions are definitely in a position to ensure that their
interests are taken care of; in 1970 out of the largest 50 industrial
companies, 22 had directors of the clearing banks on their boards, 15
had directors of merchant banks and 18 had directors of insurance
companies. There are also numerous links through joint directorships
between the different financial institutions (see chart B).
The cohesion of the industrial and financial sectors is further
increased by links with the state – the top 50 industrial firms had
(in 1960) 9 directors of the Bank of England and 5 other nationalised
industries on their boards, whilst the big financial institutions had
5 directors of the Bank of England and 7 of other nationalised
industries – No doubt highly useful as ‘channels of
information’.







This also refutes the idea of the ‘democratisation of capital’,
that nearly everyone now owns shares through their company pension or
TU pension fund or life insurance and that we live in a ‘property
owning’ democracy. On the contrary, the tremendous centralisation
of productive capital in larger and large plants has been paralleled
by the centralisation of control over these resources in the hands of
the group of directors, chief executives and major shareholders,
numbering a few thousand, who control the major companies.



The Top 50 Industrial, Commerical
and Property Companies




 


assets
£ million




BP


3,636




Shell


3,109




ICI


2,493




British-American Tobacco


1,443




Rio-Tinto Zinc


1,311




Burmah Oil


   978




Land Securities Investment Trust


   898




Courtaulds


   841




Unilever


   838




Imperial Group


   781




P&O Line


   750




Grand Metropolitan


   732




English Property Corporation


   787




Metropolitan Estates


   686




General Electric


   681




GKN


   626




Esso Petroleum


   621




Dunlop Holdings


   596




Shell Mex and BP


   593




Town & City Properties


   559




Bass Charington


   545




Bowater


   531




Allied Breweries


   522




British Leyland


   510




Distillers


   488




Reed International


   479




Ford Motor


   463




Rank Organisation


   460




Marks & Spencer


   413




Spears Holdings


   397




Capital and Countries Property


   393




Associated Portland Cement


   392




Great Universal Stores


   377




Rank Xerox


   376




British Oxygen


   370




British Insulated Calendar Cables


   357




Hawker Siddely


   332




Phillips Electrics


   326




Consolidated Gold Fields


   324




British Electric Traction


   323




Thorn Industries


   319




Coats Patons


   309




Tube Investments


   301




Cavenham


   300




Ocean Transport


   299




Trust House Fortes


   296




British Land


   288




Cadbury Schweppes


   287




J. Lyons


   287




George Weston Holdings


   279




Source: Times 1000 1975/6, Tables 1, 20



The activities of the Monopolies Commission, which occasionally
publicises the most extortionate uses of particular monopoly
power, as in the recent investigations of tranquilisers and
contraceptives, and even achieves some concessions, serve mainly to
divert attention from the general situation of monopoly
control which they never consider.



The 200 Monopolies and the Financial Institutions




Percentage of assets of the top 1000 industrial, commercial and
property companies held by top 200 companies:




Held by top


%




1


  5




10


26




25


39




50


52




100


67




200


80




Source: Times 1000 1975/6



Perhaps the figure of 80% control can be made more real by the
following list of firms in particular industries of immediate
everyday significance, which would be included in the top 200 (in
descending order of sales and including lists of major brand names
and subsidiaries).



SHOPS
Marks and Spencer
Great Universal Stores: Tunes, Furnsburg, J&F Stone, Scotch House, Burbarry’s, Hector Powe, John Temple.
Sears Holdings: Freeman, Hardy
& Willis, Manfield, Saxone, Lilley and Skinner, True Form, Dolcis, Selfridges.
F.W. Woolworth
J. Sainsbury
Tesco Stores
House of Fraser: Harrods, Binns, John Barker, Army and Navy, Chanelle.
UDS Group: John Collior, Grange, Richard Shops, Sivcars and Wells.
Debenhams: Hardie Amies, Lotus, Caters.
John Lewis: Pratts, Jones Brothers.
W.H. Smiths
British Home Stores
Burton Group: Peter Robinson, Jacksons, Evans Outsizes, Ryman.
FOOD COMPANIES
Unilever: Mac Fisheries, Birds Eye, Walls, Batchelors, Vesta, Blue Band, Stork, Flora.
George Weston: Wagon Wheels, Fine Fare, Twining Tea, Ryvita.
Cavenham: Slimcea, Marmite, Bovril, Ambrosia.
Ranks, Hovis & McDougall: Mothers Pride, Nimble, Hovis, Mr Kipling, Cerebos, Bisto, Scott’s Oats.
Tate & Lyle
Cadbury Schweppes: Hartley’s, Kia Ora, Rose’s, Typhoo, Kenco, Fry’s, Chivers.
Spillers: Homepride, Wonderloaf.
J. Lyons: Tetley, Telfors.
Brook Bond: Fray Bentos, Oxo, PG Tips.
United Biscuits: MacVities, Crawfords, Meredith and Dear, KP, Carr’s. Kemps.
Reckitt & Coleman: Robinson’s, OK Sauce, Gale’s.
Rowntree Mackintosh: Fox’s, Sun Pat.
Mars
Associated Dairies
British Sugar
H.J. Heinz
Nestlé: Findus.
BUILDING MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION FIRMS
George Wimpey
Ready Mix Concrete, Associated Portland Cement
John Laing
Turner and Newall: Asbestos Insulation.
Pilkington
Taylor Woodrow
Richard Constain
Redland
Marley
Rugby Portland Cement
British Plasterboard Industries
Montague L Meyer (timber)
Hepworth Ceramic Holdings
International Timber Corporation



These figures do overestimate the dominance of the largest
companies over the total of all companies, in that the top 1000
excludes a host of ‘small’ firms (turnover less than £13½
million); the only estimate available suggests that the largest 200
manufacturing companies produce about 60% of total manufacturing
output, as compared with the higher figures quoted above. Yet the 80%
figure is more indicative of the power of the giant companies, and
the extent of control that nationalisation of them would give. In
fact it may well understate the degree of control even for industries
where small firms predominate. For many of the smaller firms, both
these included in the 1,000, and the smaller ones, as well, are
basically component suppliers to, or retailers for, the firms
included in the top 200. They are completely dependent upon them for
markets. The large firms may well find it more profitable to use
their monopoly power to force down their suppliers’ prices rather
than produce the same goods themselves.
Control of the motor industry (all of which is effectively
included in the top 200) would enable planning to be extended
immediately to the smaller engineering firms supplying components
(the larger firms like Dunlops, Lucas, Smiths, GKN are included in
the top 200), and also would allow control to be extended to the
smaller car distributors. Similarly ownership of the great chain
stores would allow effective government control of numerous small
producers of consumer goods (Marks and Spencers already has the
reputation for doing this in the case of many textile suppliers) even
without their immediate nationalisation. Again nationalisation of the
top 200, plus those industries already nationalised, would give
control over virtually all the major inputs of fuel, metal, chemicals
etc, and this could be used to bring smaller firms into conformity
with the requirements of a socialist plan of production.
 
Finance
Finally there is control of finance; at the end of 1974 there
were 25 financial institutions [excluding insurance companies] each
with capital in excess of £500 million and in total they controlled
£72 billion or more than 87¾% of the assets of the top 100
financial institutions. Nationalisation of these 25, plus the
biggest 10 insurance companies which compromise around two thirds of
the insurance industry, would give the government effective control
over the credit system. This could also be used to direct the firms
which would not immediately be taken over.
 
Potential
Obviously, however, it would be absurd to simply nationalise the
top 200 in a mechanical fashion; the London Brick Company which lies
just outside the 200 is obviously of more central importance to a
socialist plan than is the Nestlé company or Consolidated Gold
Fields (which operates mainly in South Africa). The list of priority
companies to be nationalised would have to be drawn up on the basis
of detailed information on the different industries.
The biggest 65 overseas investors, almost all of which are in the
top 200, owned almost two-thirds of UK foreign investment, worth
about £4,000 [million] at the end of 1971 (even excluding the oil companies
assets). The way in which these assets would be used, and the 26 of
the 200 companies owned overseas (mostly the USA) would be
controlled, would obviously depend on the international circumstances
surrounding the socialist transformation of Britain. But it is clear
that nationalisation of 200 top companies, plus the 35 leading
financial institutions, would give a workers’ government the
control over the economic system. Only then would the tremendous
centralisation of production which the dominance of the monopolies
under capitalism has developed, be used for the benefit of society.
 




The White Paper on Public Expenditure up to 1978–79
gives the clearest indication so far of thoroughly capitalist
economic perspective offered by the Labour Government.
The most dramatic figure is the Treasury’s estimate that, even
if the economy grows at 2½% per year between 1973 and 1979, then the
living standards of employed workers can only be allowed to grow at
less than ½% per year.
If growth in production is less than 2½% p.a., and even the
Treasury (though they “hope” growth will be faster) admits the
possibility of this given “world conditions”, then a sustained
fall in living standards would be necessary.
But what are the other claims on production which require living
standards to grow so much slower than output as a whole? First there
is the “balance of payments”. The White Paper budgets for almost
one fifth of extra production to be devoted to plugging the deficit
through higher exports.
Even though this would barely eliminate the “non-oil” deficit,
still leaving the extra cost of oil to be dealt with later, the
necessary increase in exports would certainly require further devaluation.
Capitalists hope that the extra profits from higher prices for
exports, and for production sold at home will finance the 5% p.a.
increase in private investment in factories, machine tools etc. which
the White Paper regards as essential.
But given workers’ resistance to having their living standards
eroded much of the extra cash would probably have to come through
higher taxation on workers, which is then funnelled to the
capitalists, through more lavish investment incentives or via the NEB.
In actual fact, nothing is included in the estimates for
Labour’s nationalisation proposals on the grounds that the policies
have not yet been fully worked out! While pointing out (quite
correctly) that nationalising existing assets does not cost anything
in terms of current production used up, the Treasury mutters darkly
that the speed at which such policies can be developed “must pay
full regard to general financial conditions in the country” (page 126).
Labour is, in effect, being warned by the Treasury mandarins,
orthodox servants of Big Business to a man, of possible chaos in the
financial markets if it carries out its programme! But the way to
avoid such chaos is not to hold back on nationalisation but to extend
it to the financial system itself, and to limit compensation to cases
of need (for, ironically, it is extra governmental bonds issued to
compensate the capitalists which are supposed to cause the
chaos which the Treasury imagines would result from nationalisation!)
Set beside the planned expansion in exports and investment, at
least the 2.8% p.a. growth of public expenditure on the surface looks
hopeful. Obviously every socialist would welcome the fact that
pensions are budgeted to rise in real terms by about 3% p.a. up to
1978. (But there is a ready made excuse for going back on this later,
since the commitment is to keep pensions growing in line with real
earnings which are supposed to stay nearly constant.)
But in any case, there is virtually nothing in the programme for
the average employed worker. Investment in new housing and
improvements are expected to fall by Â£230 million between 1974 and
1978; school building to fall to less than half the 1972 level, and
hospital building to only three-quarters the 1972 level.
Contrast this with the rise of nearly Â£300m between 1974 and 1978
in defence expenditure (even after cuts); of Â£160m in spending on
“Law, Order and Protective Services”, another Â£160 million in
extra “incentives” to capitalists for investment in the regions,
and with the tenfold increase to Â£310 million in the net
contribution to the EEC housing budget. Even the Â£300 million
increases in housing subsidies will be more than offset by the
reduction of subsidies on food and on the huge increase in cost of
products and services which workers buy from nationalised industries.
All this shows the hollowness of Len Murray’s plea that unions
should not compensate for higher taxation which is “needed to
pay for essential spending ... and is part of our collective living
standards.” (Times, 22/1/75)
In fact, the Government has produced a thoroughly capitalist plan
for the economy with take home pay and public services held down, and
in many cases cut, in order to (hopefully!) permit an increase of one
third in the capitalist’s rate of investment.
Only with the Labour movement in control of the economy can the
real problem of sorting out priorities for future spending, between
take-home pay, public services and investment be tackled in the
interests of the mass of the people.
 




The prestigious Cambridge Economic Policy Group wrote in its February Review the “Restriction of imports by quotas or high tariffs now appears to be the only way in which the trade deficit can be reduced without either very high unemployment or very large falls in the exchange rate.” But support for the ideas is not confined to academic economists.
In its Statement on the Economy Tribune (January 31) says that “import controls will be needed to see that the whole plan is not frustrated by excessive import bills and to maintain full employment.” Other aspects of Tribune’s proposals, like the NEB and planning agreements, have been discussed in previous articles in Militant, but the question of import controls deserves to be considered.
Superficially the idea may seem attractive. Imports of commodities which can be produced at home are reduced, the balance of payments is immediately improved and unemployment cut as consumers switch to home produced commodities. The great advantage claimed for controls is that, unlike devaluation, the cost of the imports is not automatically forced up.
But it would be wrong to suppose that living standards would not be hit. Foreign capitalists would certainly tend to charge higher prices if they were prevented from expanding their sales in Britain. Also British workers would be forced to switch to buying the more expensive British goods.
Finally British capitalists would take every advantage of the reduced foreign competition to push up their prices in the home market to restore their profit margins (now only one half of the 1964 level). So to a considerable extent ‘import controls’ are just a variation on the theme of ‘buying’ more jobs at the cost of lower living standards.
At no point when discussing this does Tribune approach the problem from the standpoint of breaking from the capitalist system.
 
Retaliation
Apart from this, Tribune brushes aside the question of retaliation. If other capitalist countries took similar action against British exports the whole scheme would be ruined as employment and the balance of payments would be hit. Foreign capitalists might accept a deflationary policy aimed at cutting consumption and thus imports, as the orthodox response to a situation of crisis where in their terms, the UK was consuming more than it was producing. But import controls would be seen as an attempt to deal with Britain’s problems at their expense.
The reaction would be all the fiercer since import restrictions would have to be concentrated and a relatively narrow range of manufactured commodities for more fuel and raw materials would be needed to sustain a higher level of production. To eliminate even the present deficit, manufactured imports would have to be cut by more than one half. Since some manufactured goods, especially machinery, could not be produced at home with the present capacity etc., in the short run the impact on other manufactured imports, such as cars, would have to be sharper still.
(Of the manufactured goods sold in Britain, about one half are imported. Last month showed a record 38% of new car registrations were imports.)
Such imports come of course from the major capitalist countries, the EEC, Japan and the USA – which are precisely those in the best position to take the most damaging retaliatory action.
It is no use the Cambridge Group saying that “those countries have most to fear from a trade war.” They would use their control of the international monetary institutions like the IMF, on which a capitalist Britain depends, to do all in their power to prevent the introduction of the controls in the first place.
 
Production Falls
Anybody who discounts the opposition to import controls has forgotten the outcry which greeted the last Labour Government’s 15% Temporary Import Surcharge. Wilson was forced to remove it within two years despite the fact that it reduced imports by only a fraction (estimated at about £100 million per year) of what would be necessary now. Moreover it was implemented in a period of booming world trade, quite unlike the present situation of stagnant exports and falling output (In the capitalist world industrial production fell by about 6% in 1974). With markets shrinking competition has intensified and each government would be under overwhelming pressure from big exporting industries to prevent British capitalists getting away with import controls.
 
Internationalism
Moreover the jobs of workers in industries exporting to Britain would be threatened by import controls so that pressure for retaliation would not come just from the capitalists. Workers in those industries could be pushed in to the arms of the capitalists on this issue as both would be calling for the same measures of retaliation to protect themselves. Of course genuine socialist measures carried out in Britain would face enormous disruption from foreign capitalists. But on the basis of a socialist programme this could be countered by a class appeal to the workers, rather than an appeal to foreign capitalists, to support the measures in favour of the British working class by stepping up solidarity action and the fight against their own capitalists.
The demand for ‘import controls’ is another variation of the nationalist approach of much of the left, exemplified in the EEC debate. Fundamentally it stems from a belief that, on a capitalist basis, the growing economic and social problems of the British working class can be solved.
On the contrary, the crisis should demonstrate that only socialist measures, and international socialist co-operation can answer the workers’ needs.
 




Labour’s Programme for Britain [1972] pointed to the
“gross mal-distribution of wealth in Britain today” [page 21] and
said “we shall therefore introduce a wealth tax, consisting of an
annual levy on the large concentrations of private wealth.” As the
Government’s Green Paper explained it [in August 1974] “the
fundamental purpose of the wealth tax is to make the distribution of
the tax burden accord more closely with taxable capacity and thereby
contribute to the creation of a more equitable society in which
social divisions characterised by differences of wealth are reduced
and in which social and economic power created by the possession of
wealth is less concentrated than at present.” [page 20]
Up to date figures provided by the Royal Commission on the
distribution of income and wealth give some indication of present
degrees of inequality. In 1972 the top 1% of income receivers got 6%
of total pre-tax income and the top 5% got 17% (1st Report,
Table 15). Nor does taxation at the present do much to reduce the
share of the best off; as the report says (paragraph 150) “the
effect of all taxes on the distribution is small, with the
progressive effect of direct taxes (income tax, national insurance
contributions) ... largely offset by the regressive nature of
indirect taxes (on commodities).” Since so many people have
virtually no wealth at all the degree of inequality in this respect
is even greater than for incomes. The Royal Commission calculated
that in 1974 the top 1% and 5% of the population held roughly one
quarter and one half respectively of total personal wealth (Table
49).
Of course the apologists of capitalism point to the fact that
there has been some reduction in the degree of inequality (for
example the richest 5% probably held around two thirds of total
wealth in 1960 – Table 45). But this has been largely due to the
spread of ownership of consumer durables, like cars and houses, as
workers secured some improvement in their living standards [by 1973
these items accounted for more than one half of personal wealth].
The rise in house prices, and fall in share prices, have reduced the
value of ordinary shares, which represent control over the key
sections of British capital, to not much more than 5% of total
personal wealth – a sure indicator of the declining fortunes of
industrial capital. But of course it is this section which is
decisive for controlling the whole economic system and ordinary
shares are unequally distributed as ever – the top 0.6% of wealth
owners held 54% of privately held ordinary shares in 1973 (Table 31)
and the proportion of land they hold is greater still.
The Green Paper of 1974 proposed a wealth tax with rates beginning
at 1% on wealth in excess of Â£100,000 rising to either 2½% or 5% on
wealth in excess of Â£5 million. (Labour’s Programme had talked of
Â£50,000 being the lower limit and inflation could not justify
doubling the exemption level). The question was referred to a Select
Committee of the Commons to “hear the views of those directly
affected and of anybody else.”
 
CBI pressure
The views of those ‘directly affected’ came in thick and fast,
taking up well over one thousand pages. The CBI described the
proposals as “confiscatory” because “the combined burden of
income and wealth tax could, after allowing a reasonable margin (!)
for living expenses, exceed the net income of the tax payer in a
single year, forcing a sale of assets.” (As though this was not
precisely what a tax aimed at reducing private holding of wealth
would have to do). The CBI proposed that income plus wealth tax
should not take more than 70% of income. They tried to frighten the
Committee with a horror story of how the owner of a business worth Â£½
million could find himself after 35 years owing more in deferred
wealth tax than his business was worth. The Inland Revenue pointed
out, that with less ludicrous assumptions than the CBI’s, he would
have Â£900,000 left. The City Tax Committee warned that without a
ceiling “the flow of money and able executives out of the country
will continue.” The Institute of Directors called it an “oppressive
and inequitable tax.” The Stock Exchange thought that “abiding
damage could be inflicted on the delicate balance of the mixed
economy ... The Government seeks to increase investment in industry,
but it is effectively prohibiting the flow of capital through the
Stock Market by the existing and proposed taxation policies.”
Perhaps it is not surprising that the Committee wilted under this
pressure. The Chairman’s draft, meant to represent some kind of
balance between the views of the Committee, but not adopted due to
the absences of two Labour members, proposed a string of
concessions as compared with the Green Paper – on forestry, works
of art, aggregation of husbands’ and wives’ incomes, limiting tax
for owners of businesses, the starting rate (½% was suggested). It
was even argued that the revenue should be used “for the reduction
of the high rates of tax on earned income.” (So that effectively
some wealth owners would pay more tax while directors and managers
with ‘earned’ income would pay less). The Labour members’
own report contained many of these concessions in less extreme form,
while Maurice MacMillan’s followed even more closely the promptings
of big business, and only Jeremy Bray stuck out for more or less the
Green Paper proposals.
The Financial Times reported (December 11th) that “it now
seems unlikely that the Government will take early action to
introduce the tax in any form,” mentioning “the small sum at
stake (Â£100–Â£200 million on Douglas Jay’s draft as compared
with Â£300–Â£400 million on the stiffer Green Paper set of rates)
the possible effect on business confidence and the administrative
problems involved.”
Obviously this is a particularly transparent case of the Labour
Government yielding to the pressure of big business, and the Labour
Movement should demand that the Government implements a wealth tax
along with the other measures in its programme. But it would be
wrong, now that the prospect of early action has receded, to foster
any illusion that the implementation of the Green Paper proposals
would have fundamentally changed British society.
The Labour Party has not been contemplating a wealth tax
sufficiently sweeping to force the capitalist class to hand over its
shares to the Government, and if it did their response to the modest
Green Paper proposals would be as nothing to what would follow. In
any case if the objective is, as it should be, to remove power from
the owners of industry there is nothing to be said for even a
punitive wealth tax, which would take many years to have this effect.
A programme of nationalisation with compensation according to need
would give much less time for opposition to be mounted and the
economy to be disrupted and is therefore a much more effective alternative.
 




Faced with mass unemployment, support is growing in sections of the Labour Movement for import controls to deal with the immediate situation of protecting jobs, and for various schemes to create more productive employment for the future by stimulating investment. [For example, Tribune has consistently campaigned for import controls and different ideas for increasing investment have been proposed by Tony Benn and Jack Jones.]
In support of Militant’s position that only a socialist programme, which breaks with the capitalist basis of the economy, offers a solution to the crisis, it is essential to deal with these proposals in some detail.
The basic idea of import controls is that they protect jobs by limiting the import of commodities which could be made in Britain, with the added bonus of improving the balance of payments. The first point to be clear about is that British workers would be faced with higher prices. With their sales limited, foreign capitalists would no longer have any incentive to undercut British firms. And not only would be forced to buy already dearer British goods, but these would also increase in price as British capitalists would no longer fear foreign competition. To a substantial extent then import controls are just a variant on the old capitalist theme of the necessity for workers to pay, with a wage cut, for the privilege of keeping a job.
 
Experience of 1964
The plan assumes that other capitalist countries would not take retaliatory action against British imports. Tribune suggests they should not worry about whether imports are held down by deflation, which cuts spending, as at present or by import controls. But this ignores the fact that whereas deflation holds down all imports, an expansionary policy buttressed by import controls would require more raw materials so that the controls would have to bite on manufactured goods. These of course are produced primarily by the major capitalist countries with the economic power to obstruct a policy which they would see as aiming to export Britain’s unemployment to them.
The experience of the 1964 Labour Government’s Temporary Import Surcharge is interesting in this respect. Harold Wilson’s memoirs (page 35) records the situation less than one month after it was introduced:
“On the night of Thursday 19th November I had an emergency, almost panic, call from Patrick Gordon Walker in Geneva. He needed my clearance for a firm assurance that the 15% import surcharge would be reduced in a matter of months. Otherwise the discussions (with EFTA) would break down and country after country would be likely to retaliate against our trade.”
Within two years Wilson was forced, first to reduce and then to remove a much milder measure than what would be required now, and this was at a time when the rest of the capitalist world was still enjoying unprecedented boom. It is not difficult to imagine what kind of response Peter Shore would get in the present situation of mass unemployment and shrinking markets all over the capitalist world if he told the EEC and the USA that a really effective set of import controls were going on. And of course the capitalist class abroad would be able to play on the fears of workers in their exporting industries in their campaign against controls. There would be no chance to counter this by a class appeal to the Labour Movement overseas for solidarity action, for the Labour Government would be seen to act on a nationalistic, not a class basis.
It is reported (Economist, August 2nd) that the Government is seriously considering the TUC’s call for ‘selective’ import controls. These would be limited to industries particularly affected by rising imports such as cars (import volume up 27% in the first half of 1975 as compared with 1974) motorcycles and clothing. Basically the selective controls are open to exactly the same objections as the more comprehensive plans. Even if exporters of clothing like Hong Kong do not have the economic muscle to retaliate as effectively as the EEC, they do import quantities of British goods; and many of them keep foreign exchange reserves in London which they could threaten to withdraw with disastrous results for the pound. But in any case the fundamental point is that such measures would just delay the re-organisation of these industries which can only be effectively carried out by nationalisation within the context of a socialist plan of production and which provides the only possibility of long-term security for those who work in the industry.
The low rate of investment in Britain has been documented many times in Militant; another sharp indicator comes from gathering together the international data for the rate of growth (per cent per year) from the early fifties to early seventies, of the stock of industrial means of production (buildings and plant):



USA


 


  3.3




UK


  4.2




Japan


12.5




France


  5.8




Germany


  6.9




Italy


  6.6



Currently the National Institute for Economic Research forecasts that manufacturing investment will have fallen by more than one quarter between 1974 and 1976.
Obviously massive investment is required to replace the archaic plant in many factories and to install new capacity. Jack Jones’ plan (Economist, September 6th) is in two parts. The larger calls for the creation of a new fund worth about £1.3 billion per year which companies could only use to finance investment projects approved under the proposed planning agreements. Two thirds of the fund would be financed by the companies from their profits and one third by the Government contributing part of the corporation tax it receives. What is never explained is how the Department of Trade is to identify whether the projects proposed by the companies for finance by the fund would be in any sense additional to what they would have done anyway.
Apart from the minor element of further subsidy through another disguised cut in corporation tax, the whole thing boils down to an elaborate charade where companies pay money into the fund and receive permission to draw it out to finance investment they would have undertaken anyway! This may deceive Tribune which wrote on September 5th of “this crucially important investment scheme” and fulminated against the Treasury’s negative attitude and the “appalling lethargy of the Chancellor of the Exchequer himself” in pursuing the matter, but it certainly won’t make much impression in the boardrooms.
 
Bosses’ indignation
The other element of Jack Jones’ plan is reported by The Sunday Times as follows: “The Government would bring together big pension funds and other institutional investors in a consortium to channel money in to new investment, in co-operation with the NEB. A ‘modest initial target’ of £5,000 million is proposed, plus a share of all new institutional funds for the next two year.” The first point is that “bring together” is ambiguous. Tony Benn’s proposal earlier in the (The Times, April 23rd) talked of forcing the financial institutions to supply an extra £1500 million each year to manufacturing industry; their indignation at his daring to interfere with the way they run their businesses resulted in an immediate disclaimer from Wilson and contributed to Benn’s removal.
But even if they would be forced to contribute the money to the planned consortium how would they be prevented from cutting down the finance they provide to industry already by their holdings of shares? Suppose the government could actually force them to offer more money to industry, for example by threatening to nationalise them, or actually doing so as the Tribune Group’s Statement on the Economy of January 31st demands, would this actually push the industrial capitalists to invest more? The answer is quite obviously not, unless they see a satisfactory profit margin on, and a market for, the things they will produce with the investment.
And if these conditions did hold they would go ahead with the investment anyway, with the financial institutions willingly providing the necessary extra finance. Merely controlling one sector, even as central a sector as finance, would not give a Labour Government effective control of the economy while most of industry remained in private hands.
 
Profit motive
Although they partially recognise the role of profit the proponents of these schemes try to evade the issue. Thus Tony Benn said (The Times, May 8th) that “political and public opinion about inflation meant that it would be a long time – perhaps indefinitely – before the private sector could expect to attain the kind of profits to enable it to generate the kind of investment programme needed to combat the contraction of manufacturing and to protest employment.” But it is not just a question of finance, for steering funds from the financial institutions.
The increased taxation, which Benn proposed would provide the other half of his £300 million programme, would tend even to discourage investment by reducing the amount which workers could buy. Even the totally capitalist solution of increasing profitability through cutting real wages directly is subject to the same difficulty, though the capitalist class would hope to be able to more than make up for a reduction in home consumption by increasing exports on the basis of lower costs (essentially another way of exporting unemployment).
So however they may look at first sight, the various schemes for import controls and investment finance do not offer a way out of the economic crisis. The socialist programme of nationalisation and planning, far from being some long term objective to be delayed until ‘the economy’ is ‘put right’ forms the only basis on which investment can be increased with resources paid for out of increased production. This would not be at the expense of the living standards of ordinary workers, but in order to produce the goods which these workers urgently need, not on the basis of cut-throat competition with workers abroad but of socialist internationalism.
 




WITH GREAT sadness we report the death of Andrew Glyn, an internationally renowned socialist economist and a former supporter of the Militant, the Socialist Party’s precursor. Andrew died on 22 December, aged 64, only a few months after being diagnosed with inoperable brain cancer.
Over three decades, Andrew’s books, together with many articles, provided socialist activists with vital analysis and factual ammunition for the fight against contemporary capitalism. British Capitalism, Workers and the Profit Squeeze (written with Bob Sutcliffe in 1972) analysed the deep malaise of British capitalism at the end of the world post-war upswing and, at the same time, stirred up controversy among Marxists over the fundamental causes of capitalist crisis.
Capitalism Since 1945 (written with Phil Armstrong and the late John Harrison, 1984, second ed. 1991) quickly became an indispensable handbook for anyone seeking to understand the rise and fall of the post-war capitalist order, from Keynesianism to neo-liberalism.
Andrew was a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, for 38 years. He came from a wealthy banking family and went to Eton. But from his early years he rejected the inequality and privilege of the existing system, actively supporting workers’ struggles and working for a socialist change of society. His research and writing was always focussed on issues that, in some way, would provide useful material for the labour movement.
During the 1970s and early 1980s, Andrew was an active supporter of the Militant, helping to build a strong group in Oxford. In 1978, Andrew wrote a Militant pamphlet, Capitalist Crisis or Socialist Plan, a critique of the ‘Alternative Economic Strategy’ put forward by the Tribune group of left Labour MPs.
Andrew later left our ranks, while continuing to participate in many struggles, notably the 1984–85 miners’ strike and the battle to defeat Thatcher’s poll tax. He was very willingly enlisted by the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) as an expert advisor, and quickly researched and wrote The Economic Case Against Pit Closures (NUM, 1984), which exposed Thatcher’s energy policy as a politically motivated vendetta against the miners.
Later, Andrew elaborated on the devastating effects of the miners’ defeat in clearing the way for the implementation of ultra-free-market (neo-liberal) policies by Thatcher and then New Labour. In 2006, he published an illuminating analysis of the system’s latest phase, Capitalism Unleashed (reviewed in Socialism Today, No. 105, November 2006). This latest book shows the links between accelerated globalisation and the international neo-liberal offensive against the working class. It also highlights the growing domination of finance capital, driven by the short-term drive for maximum profits.
Andrew spoke at a well-attended session on globalisation at the Socialist Party’s Socialism 2006 event.
Andrew’s enthusiasm for ideas was undiminished until the end. He would have made many more valuable contributions on the latest developments in capitalism, and they will be greatly missed.
Andrew’s work as an economist has been widely admired, even by many who do not share his socialist outlook. Yet he was a very modest person, with a great sense of humour and a generous gift for friendship. Conversations with Andrew were always immensely stimulating and a lot of fun. He loved jazz, playing the double bass and recently learning the piano. He should not have died so soon.
 




The Bank of England has just published [Quarterly Bulletin,
March 1979] a most revealing table [1] showing how the recent
performance of the major capitalist countries compared with the
golden years of the ’Sixties and early ’Seventies.
For all the major economies, 1973/78 shows a dramatic fall from
the growth-rate of 1960/73.
If manufacturing production had continued to grow in Japan at the
same rate as it did during 1960–73 it would now be 70% higher than
it is; in the European countries (including the UK) the shortfall was
20–25%, in North America 12–15%.
Productivity growth, the basic indicator of the extent to which
capitalism is developing the productive system, slowed to about one
half or less of the earlier rate.
This reflects the low rate of investment in new machinery, the
inefficiencies involved in low levels of capacity utilisation
(estimated by OECD Economic Outlook, December 1978, as varying from
73% (Italy) to 83% (Japan) of the 1973 levels), and the difficulties
the capitalists have in rationalising production through plant closures.
Unemployment in the OECD countries has stuck around 5½% – only
Japan (2½%) and Germany (3¾%) are below 5%, but in those countries
the real extent of the problem is concealed behind underemployment in
small scale industry in Japan and repatriation of immigrant workers
in Germany.
After the boom of the early seventies the capitalist world
achieved no growth at all in 1974 and 1975. A slight upswing followed
in 1976 when growth was about 5%, since when there have been two
years of semi-stagnation, slow growth of world trade, substantial
inflation and a high level of unemployment.
What is in store for 1979? The capitalist economists are all
agreed that the prospect is for somewhat slower growth and the same
level of inflation and unemployment as during the last two years.
Indeed, the December OECD forecast shown in the table was
denounced by the Midland Bank Review (March 1979) as showing
“insecure optimism in view of the expect of OPEC price increases
and the fact that we have yet to see the major acceleration of growth
in West Germany that the government there has been promising for more
than a year.” All even the OECD could find to congratulate itself
about was that the pattern of growth between the major countries is
likely to be even more even.
Mildly expansionary policies in Germany and Japan will boost
growth while the US economy slows sown. The National Institute
forecasts falls from about $16 billion to $10 billion in both the US
balance of payments deficit and the Japanese surplus.
But this really amounts to sharing out the misery more evenly,
rather than any overall improvement. The fundamental factor behind
the sluggish growth is the refusal of the capitalists to increase
their investment sufficiently.
OECD forecasts for 1979 that investment will rise virtually not at
all in Britain, about 3% in the USA and 4.7% in the main European
countries and Japan. But as the following table [3] shows this leaves
it at maximum only 10% above the level of 1973, and well below that
level in Japan.
The main factors behind this refusal to accumulate rapidly are the
fall in the rate of profit which underlines the crisis and the low
level of capacity utilisation which has resulted.
The capitalist governments are prepared to give only feeble boosts
to these economies for fear that inflation will accelerate as the
capitalists attempt to rebuild their profit margins, making it harder
to hold down wages. Of course, investment does not cease completely;
even with spare capacity, in some sections new methods of production
are being developed which will allow costs to be cut giving an
advantage in the competitive struggle for shrinking markets.
But in relation to the growth achieved in the sixties, let alone
the possible growth of production under a planned economy, the
creeping growth of the capitalist economies represents a monstrous
waste of resources and every year of semi-stagnation undermines the
confidence of the capitalists; it makes even a temporary boom more
difficult to achieve and a lurch into deeper stagnation more likely.




TABLE 1
Output and Productivity Growth in
Manufacturing Industry
Per cent per annum




 


Output


Productivity [a]




1960–73


1973–78


1960–73


1973–78




United Kingdom


  3.0


−0.9 


3.6


0.6




United States


  4.9


  2.5


3.4


2.2




Canada


  5.9


  2.8


4.0


3.2




Japan


12.0


  0.8


8.8


3.7




Western Germany


  5.3


  0.8


5.0


3.3




France


  5.9


  1.4


5.6


2.7




Italy


  6.1


  2.2


5.2


1.4




[a] Defined as output per man not output per hour








TABLE 2
Capitalist Growth




 


1962–73


1973–75


1975–76


1976–78


Forecast
1979




Production % growth


5   


  −½


  5¼


3½


  3   




Exports % growth


8½


  1½


10½


5   


  5   




Consumer prices % growth


4   


12   


  8   


7¼


7–8




Unemployment level %


3   


  4½


  5½


5½


  5½




Source: Midland Bank Review, Spring 1978; OECD Economic Outlook, December 1978; National Institute Economic Review, February 1979








TABLE 3
Capitalists’ Investment
[1973 = 100]




 


1978


1979
[forecast]




USA


102


105




UK


109


110




Japan


  86


  91




Germany


105


110




France


  98


102




Italy


  99


104




Source: OECD Economic Outlooks



 




For Japan’s Prime Minister Ohira, and his cronies in the
ruling [and mis-named] Liberal Democratic Party, this autumn seemed
the ideal time for a general election.
The Japanese economy, geared to investing for ‘high-speed
growth’, suffered a bigger decline than any other major capitalist
country in the 1974–75 recession. Rapid inflation, the end of the
‘economic miracle’ and a particularly damaging scandal cost the
LDP the absolute majority in the Diet [Parliament] in 1976, though
they have had few problems subsequently in getting the support of the
minor parties.
Since then an intensive export drive, together with Keynesian
policies of expansion by the government, have generated a modest
upswing with growth at 5–6% a year; inflation has eased from more
than 20% to around 3%.
What made this October especially suitable was that the relatively
favourable economic situation will not last. The recent fall in the
value of the Yen, together with oil price increases, have recently
pushed wholesale prices up to a rate of 10% a year; this will soon
show up in faster price rises in the shops.
Faced with a government deficit which has been running at about
4–5% of GNP, the big capitalists’ have declared a virtual
‘financing strike’, demanding that the deficit be cut to make way
for financing their own investment. Ohira himself favoured the
introduction of a consumption tax which would raise prices, and cut
workers’ spending power by 3%.
The budget has been pruned to prevent real increases in spending.
Monetary policy has been tightened with interest rates pushed up by
the Bank of Japan. The prospects for export have deteriorated with
the slowdown, and possible fall, in world trade.
All this adds up to the prospect of a renewed bout of stagnation
in the Japanese economy; no wonder Ohira decided to strike while the
iron was hot.
In view of these relatively favourable circumstances, the fact
that the LDP actually lost a seat was labelled as a ‘catastrophe’
by the press. In fact overconfidence, and factional rivalry led to
the LDP standing more candidates in the multi-member constituencies,
so splitting the vote.
But even their 20% recovery in their share of the poll is less
impressive than it looks as much of it was gained at the expense of
the ‘independents’, who are mainly loyal LDP hacks who have been
disgraced in some scandal and who are tactfully left off the LDP ticket.
The press has blamed the failure of the LDP to improve their
position on Ohira’s gaffe early in the campaign when he more or
less admitted he would introduce the consumption tax. But in reality
such a tax would underline the fact that the recovery has been at the
expense of the working class.
Productivity has increased very sharply since 1975 – by 27%
between 1975 and 1978 in manufacturing industry as a whole; by 61% in
electrical engineering for example. This increase in productivity has
not been the result mainly of investment in new technology.
Capital accumulated is in fact only running at half the rate of
the boom years of the late sixties. Rather the Japanese capitalists,
especially in the major export industries and firms, have carried out
a savage process of rationalisation.
Between 1974 and 1978 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries cut employment
by nearly 12,000 (15%), Hitachi by 10,000 (12%), Toyota by 7,000
(20%), Toyo Spinning by 7,000 (30%). Taking all the manufacturing
firms employing more than 1,000 workers, the average cut in
employment was 10% between 1974 and 1977.
Older workers have been especially hit because they cost more –
in the big firms workers aged 50–55 are paid double the wages of
20–25 year olds. Unemployment amongst the older age groups has
doubled since 1973; young workers, because of their cheapness can
more easily get a job – for a time. More and more workers are taken
on a temporary rather than ‘regular’ basis. They are paid as
little as a third of the regular rate.
Women workers, typically paid two-thirds of the male rate, have
been taken on in huge numbers. More and more male workers have been
forced to attempt to scratch a living by becoming self-employed,
particularly in the service industries, or by getting a worse paid
job in the small scale firms.
Japanese workers work long hours – an average of four hours a
week more than German workers (taking account of fewer holidays);
less than a quarter of them work a five day week. Their real wages
have risen by only 2–3% a year in the last few years, far slower than productivity.
A recent comparison of the purchasing power of wages in Japan put
them at about half those of the USA and under two-thirds of the rate
in Germany. Japanese workers are famous for their high savings –
the average workers’ family saves around one-fifth of their income.
These have been savagely eroded by inflation. They are forced to
save so much for old age (pensions are around £8 a week), for
education (a family with one child in primary school and another in
secondary school will be paying at least £300 a year), for medical
expenses (most beds in the big university attached hospitals require
steep extra charges not covered by insurance and these can mount up
to several hundred pounds) and most importantly to try and buy a house.
Against this background the real question has to be, not why the
LDP did a bit better or a bit worse at this or that election, but,
how have they maintained their unbroken reign of more than 30 years?
The rural social basis of the LDP has been eroded by the massive wave
of industrialisation and urbanisation.
Between 1955 and 1975 the proportion of the rural population
living in rural areas fell from 40% to 12%, whilst the LDP’s share
of the vote declined from nearly 60% to less than 45%. The LDP keeps
this rural vote loyal by generous support to rice farmers, leaving
the industrial workers to buy rice at way over the market rate.
Moreover, the leverage of the rice subsidy is much greater than it
appears for many industrial workers commute from the countryside
whilst one member of the family tills the land; others leave the
country intending to return to the land at some later stage. Very few
farming families have sold their plots.
The election boundaries based on 1940s’ population figures, also
hugely favour the LDP which gets many more seats than their share of
the votes justifies. In 1976 an LDP candidate was elected with 37,000
votes in a rural area whilst a Communist was defeated with 147,000
votes in an urban seat.



October Election Results



Parties


% of vote


Change
since ’76


Seats


Change
since ’76




Liberal Democrats


  44.6


+2.8%


248


−  1




Socialists


  19.7


−1.0%


107


−16




Komeito


    9.8


−1.1%


  57


+  2




Communists


  10.4


Nil


  39


+22




Democratic Socialists


    6.8


+0.5%


  35


+  6




Independents and others


    8.7


−1.2%


  25


−13




Total


100.0


 


511


 



Bribing of the electorate is also carried out in quite blatant
ways. Although campaign spending is legally restricted to £30,000 a
candidate nobody pays attention to the rules. The Japan Times
(August 11) reported that “an estimate currently circulating in LDP
quarters is that a Diet seat might cost as much as 200 million Yen” (£400,000).
“A candidate with £100,000 to spend won’t stand a chance.”
As well as being used for free meals and other benefits for
supporters, outright bribery is common. The Financial Times
reported that “It is an open secret that in one Tokyo suburban
constituency votes are ‘worth’ about 5,000 Yen (£10) apiece.”
Many constituencies are handed down from father to son like
‘rotten boroughs’ in Britain at the beginning of the last
century. At this election more than 100 LDP candidates were sons,
nephews etc. of former Diet members.
The politicians get the money from big business of course. The
methodical drafters of the election law have even imposed a means
test for the capitalist – there is a sliding scale of maximum
permitted donations increasing with the size of the firm and with a
maximum for the biggest firms of 150 million Yen (around £100,000)!
But as one LDP official told the Japan Times: “We can
even solicit campaign funds from companies affiliated with the big
corporations as well as personal contributions from the business
bosses.”
Sometimes, of course, the payments require very specific services
to be rendered by the politicians concerned. Summarising the case of
former Prime Minister Tanaka, charged with taking a million pound
bribe to make sure that All Nippon Airways bought the Lockheed
Tri-Star the Japan Times said: “there seems to be little
dispute about the transfer of cash – prepared by Lockheed’s Japan
office, transported in a Marubeni car (the trading firm acting as
go-between), transferred to the trunk of a car driven by Tanaka’s
chauffeur (who committed suicide after giving details to the
prosecution), received by Tanaka’s secretary and placed in Tanaka’s
mansion” (August 11).
One Marubeni executive described how his boss came out of the
meeting with Tanaka and simply showed him the five fingers of his
hand, saying ‘this is it’!
The Japan Times reported:
“Recent revelations concerning the Defence Agency’s
purchase of the F-4E fighter have suggested that 500 million Yen was
standard figure as a bribe for fixing a deal of this kind. It was the
same amount that Nissho-Awai (another trading company) had given
Raizo Matsuno, a former Minister of Defence, for presumably
facilitating the government purchases of the US-made military
aircraft.”
 
‘Centre’ Parties
Tanaka but not Matsuno was a successful candidate in the election.
Neither stood as official LDP candidates, but as “Independents”
who, of course, co-operate 100% with the LDP. Tanaka, in fact, is
still the boss of one of the strongest LDP factions, and the power
behind Ohira.
Another argument for an October election was that further
revelations in the Tanaka trial might be even more embarrassing.
The ruling class also makes use of the ‘centre parties’ to
maintain the LDP in power. Nearly half the voters live in the three
major urban areas around Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya. There the LDP gets
less than a third of the vote. While the right-wing candidates swept
the board in the April elections, this was the result of the LDP
supporting ‘moderate’ candidates which were also backed by the
right-wing Democratic Socialists and the Komeito (the Buddhist ‘clean
government’ party supported by a section of the petty bourgeois and
most oppressed layers of the population).
These parties have seen that, with the workers’ parties
floundering, their best chance of sharing in the spoils of office is
to act as the urban prop of the LDP.
The leadership of the unions helps the ruling class immeasurably
in its task of ensuring the burdens of the economic crisis fall on
the workers.
Large scale industry is quite extensively unionised. Two-thirds of
workers in firms employing more than 500 workers are in unions while
one-third of all employed are unionised. These unions operate on an
‘enterprise’ basis, covering just one firm and excluding the
miserably-paid temporary employees because they are not ‘regular employees’.
But many really are company unions, in the sense of tools of the
management. In Nissan (Datsun) for example, the industrial relations
department and the trade union, together, form one well-trodden
promotion system. A worker will be promoted from full-time trade
union work into the industrial relations department.
This is not unknown in Britain, of course, but in Japan he may
well move back to the union on a further promotion.

Next week Andrew Glyn explains the character of trade unions,
the position of the workers’ parties, and looks at prospects for
the working class in Japan.
 




ANDREW GLYN, recently in Japan, analyses the workers’ movements
Trade unions re-established themselves in Japan after 1945 in the course of a long struggle.
It stretched from the Red purges of the 1940s to the 1960 defeat of the Miike coalminers, who had the strongest grassroots organisation in Japan.
After World War Two, with a chaotic situation and the total discrediting of the Japanese ruling class, trade unionism swept across Japan.
Many factories were taken over by the workers in what were termed ‘production control’ struggles – one, for example, dislodged the editor of an arch-reactionary Tokyo newspaper. In some areas embryonic soviets took over the distribution of food.
Unfortunately, the Communist Party, which was leading the trade unions, welcomed the American Occupation as guaranteeing the ‘democratic revolution’ against the war-time militaristic regime.
The capitalists, supported by the Americans, gradually consolidated their position and gathered strength for an all-out assault on the labour movement. This took the form of a vicious deflationary policy, with hundreds of thousands of workers sacked and trade union militants dismissed wherever possible.
The plants where a militant organisation survived were picked off over the course of the next ten years. In Datsun a high degree of workers’ control over questions like promotion was smashed after a long strike in 1953, and the second, scab union, based initially on the white collar workers, was installed.
Ironically, the necessity for Datsun to act at that time flowed from the fact that they were about to re-organise their production process based on technology imported from Austin!
Now Thatcher is attempting to provide suitable conditions for Edwardes to do the same thing at the BL plant in Cowley – so they can produce Honda cars more cheaply!
The grinding down of the trade union movement in the large-scale private sector was an indispensable pre-condition for the superboom in the Japanese economy in the late fifties and early sixties. In the public sector, notably the railways and post office, a militant tradition and effective shop-floor organisation survived. Not that the management did not do its best.
It should be quite clear that this situation in the trade union movement is an exceptionally unfavourable one for the workers’ parties. The CP now has a very weak base in the trade union movement, with the exception of the teachers’ union and a few others.
Its position was destroyed partly by the ‘Red purges’ of the early fifties, but also by their zig-zagging tactics, including a call to their members no to join a general strike in 1964. Nor is its ‘Eurocommunist’ and indeed, nationalistic line likely to reverse this weakness.
The CP frequently argues against militant action on the grounds it will damage the interests of the general public (in the case of public employees), or the employers (in the case of employees of small businesses).
The Communist Party’s electoral strength is based on an effective local organisation. It has around 400,000 members, and a higher (declared) income than even the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. It builds up a loyalty throughout its network of welfare-type organisations for the unemployed, sick, small businessmen and working mothers. The Guardian reported that one CP crèche in Tokyo stays open until midnight to cater for the thousands of bar hostesses living in the area.
The Communists gain in number of seats in this election was entirely due to their concentrating their forces more effectively, rather than an increased share of the poll.
A CP rally I attended in Tokyo this summer was impressively organised with more than 100,000 people there – though many more were taking advantage of the different CP districts’ stalls selling local goods than took the opportunity to hear Secretary General Myamoto!
One CP organiser told The Economist that in his rural areas the majority of CP voters “either cannot understand or are not interested in the party’s slogans” (October 5). The CP stresses the ‘national democratic’ nature of struggle in Japan, and pictures US imperialism as the major enemy, rather than the Japanese bosses. They have recently conceded that Japan is only ‘semi-occupied’ rather than an occupied colony of the USA.
Their reformism makes them incapable of leading the workers’ movement forward.
The Socialist Party is much weaker organisationally than the CP, with only 50,000 members, but it is firmly based in the trade union movement and many of the militants support it actively. Its organisation relies very heavily on that of the Sohyo Trade Union Confederation which is mainly organised in public sector unions.
In theory at least it is a Marxist party. Attempts by the right-wing to explicitly deny the need for workers’ democracy (i.e. dictatorship of the proletariat) have been defeated, while the CP has removed the concept from its programme. But the SP has failed to propose a credible set of policies to meet the problems posed by the economic crisis.
Their Action Programme for 1979 called for a huge range of reforms – government spending to provide 700,000 more jobs (unemployment is 1.2 million at present), improvements in medical care, pensions, housing, transport, aid to recession-hit industries, urban redevelopment, help for farmers and small businessmen.
While such a programme of reforms was quite practicable in the boom years of the sixties, it provides no answer to the propaganda that the “economy” (in reality capitalism of course) cannot afford it. The left of the party, organised around the Socialist Association, whilst stressing the role of class struggle has a strategy of building up an anti-monopoly alliance, similar to that of the British CP.
Internationally, though, it supports the Soviet Union line through and through, in contrast to the CP which is just re-establishing links with Moscow after a 15-year break. The election results will definitely reinforce the sense of crisis in the SP, which has lost one third of its share of the vote since 1963.
Its failure to capitalise in any way on the problems faced by Japanese capitalism in the past decade, in fact its share of the vote has continued to decline, shows quite clearly the needs to break with the slogans of the past and develop a socialist programme adequate to the needs of the Japanese workers. The pressure from the moves in Sohyo, unfortunately, is towards the opposite tack of moderating the line into a straight social democratic one. The coming period is obviously one of crisis for the SP.
It should be clear that the Japanese workers have a tremendous struggle ahead. They face an aggressive and confident ruling class, which will be quite prepared to use the repressive forces of the state at the slightest sign of trouble, as the struggles in Narity Airport near Tokyo have shown. Many people in Japan saw the enormous police mobilisation at the time of the Tokyo Summit as a convenient testing out of emergency procedures (similar to the Heathrow manoeuvres here a few years ago), ‘justified’ by the antics of the ultra-left groups.
The mechanisms of control the capitalists have built up in the factories, based on the foreman system, will require a tremendous battle to overcome. The right-wing trade union bureaucracy had its power enormously consolidated by the ‘success’ of its policy of co-operation with the management which did yield real wage increases of up to 10% a year, in the years of massive accumulation and huge productivity increases.
The zealously inculcated ideology of loyalty to the firm and ‘life-time employment’ will not crumble overnight, despite the fact that ‘lifetime’ increasingly means 45–50 years old as more workers are thrown on the scrap heap. It will take time for the militants, isolated for years and harassed physically and mentally by the vile alliance of bosses and trade union officials, to convince the mass of the workers of the need for policies of class struggle.
One very slight sign that some pressure is beginning is that the bureaucrats are now frequently forced to put in for bigger wage increases than are finally conceded – an admission that there is a difference between what the workers are pressing for and what would allow a restoration of profitability.
The argument you hear, even amongst some ‘left-wingers’, that the Japanese workers are middle class, have become bourgeoisified (just as some academics described the British workers in the early sixties), is in reality a total capitulation to the propaganda of the ruling class.
It shows no understanding of the fighting traditions of the Japanese workers, demonstrated in the widespread struggles of the later forties and early fifties, and carried on subsequently by the public sector workers and most recently by the workers in the small scale firms where the trade union bureaucrats do not have such a stranglehold (see Militant 16 March about the Tanaka machinery workers who are still the focal point of the struggles in the engineering industry in South Osaka).
The ‘economic miracle’ in Japan did have the ‘miraculous’ consequence for the capitalists of pushing workers’ struggles into the background. But there can be no question that in the course of the next few years the pressure will build up inside the trade union movement. The capitalists, without any doubt, have the upper hand at present, but the bureaucracy will inevitably find it harder to hold back the workers.
In turn industrial struggles will have an electrifying effect on the political plane, causing explosions in the workers’ parties, especially the SP. The essential task is the development in the course of this turmoil in the labour movement of a Marxist leadership which will be able to take the struggle forward.
 




Andrew Glyn shows the increasing control of the British economy by a few large firms
Two articles published in the government magazine Trade and Industry (17 November 1978) present much new information on the extent to which the British economy is dominated by the monopolies.
One entitled How Many and How Big should really be subtitled Few and Huge. From an analysis of company accounts it shows that in 1975 the biggest 20 companies controlled 33%; the biggest 50 controlled 48%; the biggest 100 controlled 62%; and the biggest 250 controlled 79% of the assets of the biggest 1,500 UK companies.
Another table shows how these companies dominate the various sectors of the economy. (see below)



 


Share of the assets by sector
of the top 1,500 controlled
by the top 250 companies


Number of
companies in
top 250




Food, drink and tobacco


89%


  28




Chemicals


81%


  19




Metal manufacture


73%


  10




Engineering


70%


  53




Textiles, leather, clothing


60%


    5




Total manufacturing


76%


142




Mining


98%


    4




Construction


39%


    6




Transport and communication


77%


  13




Distribution


72%


  36




Property


80%


  23




Services


58%


    8




Oil and gas


99%


    8



These figures do leave out the 15% or so of the assets of companies which are held by companies smaller than the top 1,500 and in this way slightly exaggerates the dominance of the top 1,500. These smaller companies are especially important in such sectors as engineering, construction and distribution, but it is impossible to adjust the figures to take proper account of this.
Another point is that many of the giants have very extensive overseas assets. Forty-two of the top 250 are said to operate “wholly or mainly overseas” which means they have at least half their assets abroad. These include huge oil, mining and plantation companies, as well as a few manufacturing companies whose overseas subsidiaries are now more important than their home operations.
In fact, of the top 250 only 63 are estimated by the Department to have less than 10% of their assets overseas. The article does not provide detailed estimates, but it can be deduced from their figures that around 30% of the total assets of the top 1,500 companies registered in Britain are held overseas.
As far as the top 20 are concerned, however, the figure could be as high as one half – a staggering indication of the extent to which big capital in the UK has expanded overseas.
Whilst many of the operations overseas of UK companies do directly affect the functioning of the UK economy (through supplying fuel and raw materials or assembling components made in the UK), it is also useful to have an indication of how far the major monopolies actually dominate the controls of assets inside the UK.
 
Indirect control
Based on the information in the article we can make the following rough estimates for 1975: the biggest 20 companies controlled about 21%; the top 50 controlled 33%; the biggest 100 about 44%; and the top 250 firms about 59% of the total UK assets of all companies operating in the UK.
Even these figures enormously underestimate the influence these companies really have since they take no account of their indirect control over a host of smaller companies which rely on them as buyers of their output or as suppliers of their basic inputs of materials, machinery etc.
In terms of research and development, too, the top 106 manufacturing companies account for 72% of research on all manufacturing products, and half of manufactured exports (Economic Trends, August 1976).
 
Concentration
A second article, called How Much by How Few, looks at another aspect of the centralisation and concentration of capital – the extent to which the supply of individual products is dominated by a few suppliers. It reports on the findings of a highly detailed study of 4,000 products, ranging from margarine to aircraft.
It found that the top 5 producers supplied at least 90% of the market in the case of 602 products: 80–90% in the case of 470 products; 60–80% in the case of 613; less than 60% in the case of 396.
In comparing these results for 1975 with 1963 the Department found that there was a rise of 7% in the proportion of product groups in which 80–90% was supplied by the biggest 5 firms, and a corresponding fall in the proportion where less than 60% was supplied by the biggest 5.
But their detailed results only cover slightly over one half of the nearly 4,000 commodities surveyed. In the other cases information could not be published because “fewer than 5 enterprises contribute to the heading, or there exists the possibility of disclosing data about one or more of the enterprises producing the product concerned”.
What a farce! The capitalists will only supply information to the government about sales figures for particular commodities on the understanding that they will not be published if they give too much away! What is more, there is no information published on the name of the big 5 firms in each market, which would show just how many products each monopoly is involved in.
The labour movement should demand that all this information be published so that it would be possible to construct an accurate picture of precisely how the tentacles of the major monopolies range over all the different products and industries.
 
Open the books
Such a complete opening of the books will require the action of all the trade union branches and shop stewards committees in the giant firms, including of course the white collar workers whose everyday work involves collecting the facts and figures. Such information on the detailed activities of the monopolies will be indispensable for the construction and implementation of a real socialist plan of production.
One thing which comes out clearly even from the inadequate data in these articles is that they have been misnamed. They should have been called How Few by How Many – how few firms need to be taken over by the millions strong labour movement as a basis for eliminating the chaos of monopoly capitalism.
 







Recently, Labour Activist, produced by the Labour Co-ordinating Group, published its criticisms of Labour’s draft Election Manifesto and offered its own alternative. Andrew Glyn, in an article first published in the New Statesman (16 March), takes up their arguments.




Labour Activist quite correctly criticises the Labour Party’s draft manifesto for not providing a ‘socialist analysis of the international crisis and of Britain’s problems’ and for ‘failing to analyse the obstacle to democracy, socialism and prosperity formed by the class system, the structure of government and management.’
But does its own Manifesto for a socialist Britain do better?
LA’s own analysis of the crisis in the world economy is hopelessly inadequate. It says that the recession has been caused by ‘the mistaken response (my emphasis) of governments to the end of the post-war boom and the breakdown in western financial and trading arrangements.’
But ‘mistaken’ in whose terms? High unemployment is intended to hold down wages and pave the way for rationalisation of industry. Capitalists throughout the world fear that any attempt at reflation and expansion would soon collapse amidst accelerating inflation as happened during the last attempt at expansion in 1972–73.
With profitability even lower than it was then, with memories of rapid inflation fresh and the prospect of booming markets fading, it is probable that the collapse would be even quicker this time round. It is ludicrous to say, as LA does, that ‘as each country in turn faces the threat or reality of a currency crisis, its government deflates in order to protect itself against speculation.’
But what about Germany and Japan, whose currencies are strong? Calling the world slump ‘the moral and practical responsibility of western industrialised countries’ is quite absurd when the interests of the capitalist class and not ‘mistakes’ dictate the policies now being followed.
LA says that the next Labour government must ‘re-assert control over the British economy lost as a consequence of the growth of multinational banking and trade and our entry into the EEC.’ But did the Labour government really have that much more control in 1964, before Britain was in the EEC and when internationalisation of the British economy was less advanced? Or in 1931?
Not at all. The ‘lack of control’ of the Labour government reflects the fact that the overwhelming proportion of the means of production and the financial system are under the control of the capitalist class. Blaming internationalisation is looking to a symptom rather than the cause.
In dealing with import controls, LA brushes away the objection that they would mean trade retaliation by arguing that ‘we cannot reasonably be expected to do more than allow imports and exports as a whole to rise together.’
But there is nothing ‘reasonable’ about competition in world markets. If exporting industries in the advanced capitalist countries find themselves deprived of full access to a rapidly growing market in the UK they will exert maximum pressure for retaliation, which would lead to jobs lost in UK export industries.
Saying imports were not below what they would have been anyway will cut no ice with workers abroad who would see import controls as directed against them and will join their bosses in demanding retaliatory action. This is not to support free trade: neither capitalist protection nor capitalist free trade offers a solution.
LA says quite correctly that ‘Full employment should be named as the first priority of the next Labour government,’ and calls for ‘an explicit plan for reflation and the return to full employment including increases of public spending of £3,000 million a year.’
Such increases would certainly make possible many of the improvements in health, welfare, etc., which the draft manifesto calls for. But how would they be financed? LA says ‘not by tax increases but largely by saving on unemployment benefit and higher tax yields from economic growth.’
But this would not cover all the extra expenditure. There is no explanation of how the financial institutions could be forced to finance a greater level of public borrowing.
The Labour Party’s draft manifesto itself shamefully waters down the 1977 Conference demand for nationalisation of the banks and major insurance companies into a pathetic scheme to unite the Giro and National Savings Bank and to give ‘serious consideration as to how best to create a further substantial public stake.’
LA does not comment on this and so presumably does not accept the necessity of nationalisation of the finance sector to free the government from the dictates of the City.
LA also ignores the inflation which would result from reflation, as business tried to restore profitability – still less than one third of the level of the early ’Sixties. Does LA, like some other proponents of the Alternative Economic Strategy, want stringent price controls? If so, how far could such an expansion go without seizing up from lack of profitability, given that the overwhelming proportion of industry would be in private hands and thus operating according to the capitalist criterion of profitability?
Or does LA propose an incomes policy to guarantee profitable, and thus capitalistically sustainable, expansion? Given capitalism’s need to increase profitability, an attempt to expand on a capitalist basis can only mean holding back the growth of real wages. LA fails to analyse such contradictions of capitalist reflation.
The draft Labour Party manifesto calls for £1,000 million a year for the NEB and specifically for ‘a major public stake in pharmaceuticals, building materials and construction.’ The idea of a commitment to a 10-year housing plan has been dropped; buttressed by a nationalisation of the industries concerned, including finance, this could have been the basis of a real socialist plan for housing.
LA itself has no more specific programme of nationalisation than the draft, just calling for the NEB to have the ‘power to acquire big companies wherever necessary for reindustrialisation.’ LA puts much weight on forcing businessmen in ‘key manufacturing industries’ to implement the government’s ‘investment, production and employment targets’ through compulsory planning agreements.
But it would be absurd to imagine that businessmen will give up their most basic prerogative – control over where they accumulate capital. The authority of a parliamentary majority will never make the business and financial community accept the directives of a Labour government.
The labour movement already has experience of their scornful treatment of planning agreements. Bob Cryer, one of LA’s steering committee, said recently in the House of Commons: ‘In view of the amounts of aid to industry which this government has been giving… it seems that industry could develop a more co-operative attitude to planning agreements.’ But LA is silent on how to ensure a ‘more co-operative attitude’.
Only the nationalisation of the 200 or so companies which control 60 per cent or more of the assets in the UK would be the indispensable minimum for securing real control over, and thus the ability to plan, the economy.
This should be on the basis not only of ‘workers’ control at the plant level’ as LA advocates; but also with workers’ management of the industries carried out by workers from the unions in the industry concerned, from the TUC to represent other workers’ interests as consumers, and with government representatives to ensure that the plans of the individual industry and enterprise mesh in with the needs of society as a whole.
LA’s suggestion of ‘joint worker-management and services’ is just a recipe for workers taking responsibility for management decisions.
Rather than LA’s call for a wealth tax, which, though obviously a welcome measure, would never affect the huge holdings of shares which give control over British business, nationalisation compensation should be on the basis of proven need.
Neither the Labour Party draft, nor the LA manifesto adds up to an adequate basis on which to secure real control over the economy. I believe that the absolutely necessary advances of a decent minimum wage, a real expansion of housebuilding, full employment and so on can only be secured and guaranteed by a socialist plan of production based on the far-reaching socialist programme I have just outlined.

[The Labour Co-ordinating Committee is supported, among others, by Michael Meacher, Brian Sedgemore, Stuart Holland, Audrey Wise, Jeff Rooker, and Francis Morrell.]
 




Introduction

I. Capitalist Crisis

II. The Alternative Strategy of the Left

III. A Socialist Plan of Production


Introduction
The boom in the capitalist world during the 1950s and 1960s
represented the fastest growth of production in human history. But
even this could conceal only to a degree British capital’s headlong
plunge into oblivion as a world economic power. While continuing to
invest much less than their rivals, the British capitalists blamed
their decline on the improvements in living standards and social
services they were forced to concede to the workers. Their
humiliation was sealed by the defeat of the Tory Government after the
miners’ strike of 1974.
Against this background there is an element of grim satisfaction
amongst the bosses in presenting as an inevitable scaling down of the
pretensions of the mass of workers the developments of the last two
or three years. The million rise of unemployment is said to be the
inevitable “natural” result of “too high” employment in the
past, the cut in public expenditure is presented as a cut in
“unproductive” spending which “cannot be afforded”, the cut
in living standards is explained as a facing up to “economic
reality”. The real hardship involved in long periods of
unemployment, in hospital wards being closed down, in school children
inadequately fed, in housing waiting lists growing must be endured as
“facts of life”.
Revenge is all the sweeter because these “sacrifices” are
being imposed by a Labour Government, forced also shelve its plans to
curb the power of capital – the wealth tax, land nationalisation,
planning agreements, nationalisation of profitable firms. This
pamphlet examines first the depth of the crisis and the policy of the
capitalists which they have forced on the Labour Government. This is
essential in order to take up in a detailed fashion the Alternative
Economic Strategy proposed as an alternative to capitalist
policies by many on the Left of the Labour movement. Given our
assessment of the inadequacy of this strategy in the final section we
consider the basic elements of a socialist plan of production capable
of surmounting the crisis and mobilising society’s resources.


I. Capitalist Crisis
Unemployed Resources and Social Needs
As well as the incalculable cost of the demoralisation and misery
of the unemployed and their families, unemployment represents a
monstrous waste of society’s resources in terms of what those
workers could produce.
There are at present around one and a half million workers
registered as unemployed. Many more people want a job but are not
registered because they are not entitled to benefit or live in areas
where there is no chance of finding work. The Cambridge Economic
Policy Group has estimated that these unregistered unemployed total
nearly one million, bringing total unemployment to around 2½ million
or 10% of the labour force.
10% lost production would be bad enough. But in fact, if all these
workers were employed, production would rise much more than 10%. Not
because t hose out of work are much more energetic than those in
jobs. Nor because they would be working with better equipment –
firms will obviously try to keep their most efficient plant operating
in a recession.
But the reality is that in many industries unused capacity also
means low productivity. A good proportion of jobs are not tied
directly to the level of production – the capitalists have to keep
on most office and sales staff even during a fall in production. Also
a growing number of direct production jobs cannot be cut out by the
capitalists as soon as sales fall. Most nineteenth century factories
consisted of large numbers of workers doing a small range of jobs,
and it was simple to layoff a proportion as soon as output fell. But
now many industries involve integrated processes with each worker
like a cog which cannot be removed without the machine grinding to a
halt. And even where there is the technical possibility of culling
employment as output sags, the capitalists’ freedom of action
curtailed by the opposition of the workers.
These technical and ‘labour relations’ difficulties explain
why so many redundancies now take the form of the bosses trying to
find an opportune moment to close down a whole plant or section of a
plant, particularly if it is old and inefficient, or one with a high
level of militancy. But they also explain why a low level of
production means low productivity. And conversely that an expansion
of production sufficient to provide jobs for the unemployed would
involve a very substantial increase in productivity as well. The
economists’ calculations are that to increase employment by 10%
(and thus eliminate unemployment) would require increased production
of about 20%. Or to put it in another way, the unemployment of
10% of the labour force involves underproduction of 20%.
Confirmation of this figure, and for the really enormous increase in
production which could be achieved without any increase in employment
at all, comes from a survey of spare capacity in industry.



Potential increases in output




 


With
present
hours


 


With
additional
overtime


 


With
additional
labour




Food, drink and tobacco 



  6.3


11.0


15.5




Chemicals


16.9


18.2


19.5




Mechanical engineering 



13.6


21.5


35.0




Motors


  1.4


  6.7


33.6




Metals


  6.0


10.6


11.5




Textiles


  7.4


13.0


18.8




Clothing and footwear


15.0


20.8


24.5




Paper and printing


13.4


22.4


28.3




Construction


14.9


22.2


36.0




Total


  7.6


12.4


21.5




National Institute Economic Review, February 1977



20% lost production means that around £20,000 million (in 1975
prices) worth of goods and services which could be produced are not
£20,000 million squandered through unemployment compares with the
production required to provide the following essential improvements:



50% Increase in pensions and other benefits


 


£3,500 million (1975 prices)




Minimum earnings of £70 per week (men and women)


  5,000 million




Doubling of housebuilding


  4,000 million




Increase of 25% in government expenditure on health and education


  3,000 million




10% increase in workers’ living standards


  4,000 million



Why Has Unemployment Risen?
This immediately raises the question of why all these resources
are left unused. If it was true that the unemployed were scroungers
it would certainly be a magnificent testimony to capitalism, that it
turned a large section of society into parasites. Parasites there are
of course, who live on the labour of others, but out of choice and in
great comfort derived from their stocks and shares. The vicious and
reactionary theory that the unemployed are there from choice has no
basis. One of the reforms of the 1964–70 Labour Government was to
raise the level of unemployment and supplementary benefit relative to
earnings. Bearing in mind that unemployment is concentrated amongst
low-wage sections it has been calculated that the average dole for a
married worker relative to earnings in their most recent job rose
from about 50% in the early sixties to around 60% since the late
sixties; those receiving earnings-related benefit get 75–80% of
their ‘probable earnings’ in work, but only for 6 months
(Cambridge Economic Policy Review 1978). It is possible to
find individual cases where these ‘improved’ rates have caused
workers to quit a lousy job a bit earlier or to stay on the dole a
week or two longer before being forced into some sweatshop on
starvation wages. But there is no evidence whatsoever that this
applies to very many workers on the unemployment register. And even
if it did, it just means that their place in a particular job is
being taken by somebody else. The Tories and the gutter press never
explain how cutting down workers’ capacity to hold out on the dole
while looking for a job will increase total employment. It would do
nothing of the sort since production is not low because there are not
enough workers but because there are not enough profitable markets.
The campaign against scroungers and in favour of making the dole less
“generous” has got nothing to do with reducing unemployment. What
the capitalists are after is making unemployment even more
intolerable, so that fear of the sack is a more potent weapon for
‘disciplining’ the workers.
 
Technological Unemployment
A hundred years ago the Church told people to accept their fate as
the will of God. In 1978 a TV pundit mutters darkly about technology
and presses a button which makes “2 to 4 million unemployed in the
1980s” appear in computer-readable lettering on the TV screen
beside him. He is also conjuring up the idea of a process beyond the
control of man. But this new technological fatalism is just as much
of a smoke-screen as its religious counterpart.
For the idea that the mass unemployment of recent years is due to
a sudden acceleration in technical progress has no basis. Certainly
the tendency to replace men by machines (the increase in what Marx
called the technical composition of capital) has been a feature of
capitalist development in recent years. But this is always the case.
It was just as true of the boom of the fifties and early sixties when
there was more or less ‘full’ employment. There is absolutely no
evidence that there has been an acceleration in this process in
recent years. Certainly there now seems to be the possibility of a
leap forward in automation opened up by the use of micro-processors –
the tiny silicon chips with the power of a computer. But this process
has hardly begun and has no connection with present mass unemployment.
And, even if the possibilities for the replacement of human labour
in the direct production process are speeding up, this would only
spell unemployment in the context of stagnant production.
The reason for the rise in unemployment over recent years has not
been a sudden acceleration of productivity – in fact it has
stagnated. Rather it is explained mainly by the slower provision of
new jobs rather than the faster destruction of old jobs. No more male
workers are joining the dole each year than was case 10 years ago.
The rise in unemployment reflects the fact that each worker put out
of a job, or leaving for some other reason, is finding it much more
difficult to find a new one – the average unemployed worker had
been looking for a job for 17 weeks in 1977.
But isn’t there an insoluble contradiction? If investment does
not rise British industries are driven out of world markets and
unemployment rises. If investment does increase it means more and
more workers replaced by machines and unemployment rises. But the
fundamental point is that investment in new equipment does not itself
cause loss of jobs. Certainly in the context of a stagnant market
investment will tend to have that effect, as new capacity, which can
produce more cheaply and which employs fewer workers, displaces older
plant. But in the context of an expanding market, higher investment
would increase employment immediately in the industries producing the
investment goods. And in the longer run extra workers could be taken
on to work with the new plant to supply the growing market, without
requiring the scrapping of old plant. To see investment and technical
progress as destroying jobs is to see just one side of the two-fold
relation between the accumulation of capital and employment. As Marx
explained, on the one side accumulation of capital means more jobs on
the new capacity. On the other hand accumulation ‘repels’ workers
as competition from the new capacity drives out old. In Japan for
example in the 1950s and 1960s the industrial capital stock grew at
12.5% a year, three times as fast as the British capitalists managed.
But far from meaning that employment grew slower, it grew at 3.7% a
year in Japan and not at all in Britain. This, despite the fact that
industrial productivity in Japan also grew three times as fast. The
crucial difference is that Japanese capitalists were able to expand
their share of world markets on the basis of this tremendous rise in
productivity, and that their home market was propelled forward by the
massive growth of investment. So the basic reason for the rise in
unemployment faced by British workers over the past ten years is not
too high investment, it is too low a growth of production. In
capitalist terms this means just one thing. Too slow growth of a
profitable market.
 
The Market
If the immediate factor behind the rise in unemployment is the
slow growth of the market perhaps the whole problem is due to the
crisis in the world economy. Dennis Healey might be right when he
said in his 1978 Budget speech that “If we are to solve this
country’s problems we need to take action on a world scale”.
However, the idea that the rise in UK unemployment can be blamed
simply on the stagnation in the world economy is completely false.
The following table shows that it is not exports which have slowed
down and account for the slow growth of the last four years. The
stagnation has come predominantly from workers’ living standards
(private consumption), public investment and investment by the
capitalists.



Growth of Expenditure, % per year




 


1961–73


1973–77




Exports


5.6


   4.1




Private Consumption


2.8


−1.2




Government Investment


4.9


−3.4




Capitalists’ Investment


4.3


−3.4




Source: Cambridge Economic Policy Review 1978, Appendix Table 4



These cuts cannot be blamed primarily on the world economy. The
basic factor behind these developments was the catastrophic fall in
the rate of profit sustained by British capitalism – from 13.5% in
1960 to 3.5% in 1975 according to the Bank of England’s figures for
the pre-tax rate of profit of industrial and commercial companies.
 
The Cuts
In response to this decline in profits the British capitalists
have reduced Investment and demanded reductions in living standards
which the Labour Government has implemented through the various
stages of the Social Contract. Moreover they have insisted that the
government cuts its expenditure. There seems at first sight to be
something very contradictory about big business demanding these cuts.
For public expenditure provides markets for private industry directly
(building council houses etc.) or indirectly (through the spending by
teachers of their wages etc.). Moreover, lending to the government to
finance its deficit (the excess of its spending over taxation) has
been (for many capitalists) a more lucrative avenue for investment
than buying more machines, factories etc. So cuts in public spending
mean less markets and less opportunity for lending to the government,
at a time when other markets and investment opportunities are scarce.
In 1975, in fact, interest paid out by the government on the national
debt (which represents the deficits of past years) was actually
greater (at £4,500 million) than the net profits of industrial and
commercial companies. Isn’t the CBI cutting off its nose to spite
its face when it calls for further cuts?
But the capitalist class in Britain, even the financiers of the
City who have reaped the immediate profits, have seen the ultimate
futility of lending to the government at the expense of neglecting
reinvestment in industry. For it is only investment in industry which
would allow British capitalism to compete with its rivals on world
markets on the basis of the latest technique of production and halt
the decline of its share of world trade. Only the ploughing back of
profits into new factories and plants, will increase the productivity
of labour in the future and enable concessions to be granted to the
labour movement in terms of wage increases and improved social
services. By contrast, investing profits in government bonds does not
lead to greater productivity in the future. Except in the most
indirect and long-term fashion (via improved health or educational
standards), expenditure on the social services financed by borrowing
from the capitalists is not productive as far as the capitalist
system is concerned. Although the capitalists who lend to the
government receive interest they are in effect sharing in the surplus
value produced, without increasing it. Most government investment, in
schools or hospitals for example, does not lead to cheaper public
services in the future and thus savings for the capitalist class.
Rather it tends to lead to improved services (better hospitals
allowing more sophisticated treatment) and thus more expenses in the
future. The capitalist class in Britain has seen that continuing on
the road of accumulating 10% or more of the national product in the
form of government bonds spells ultimate ruin. The offensive against
public spending, the CBI’s message that “it is good to create
wealth” and that “wealth has to be created before it is
distributed” reflect the realisation that lending to the government
to provide concessions for the working class in the form of improved
social services cannot be a long-term strategy. Only driving down
living standards to increase profits, and ensuring they are ploughed
back into investment which improves its competitive position can
restore the position of British capital.
 
Catch 22
The phases of the Social Contract have held down living standards
whilst profits doubled between the summer of 1976 and early 1978. The
massive planned cuts in spending of £2½ billion per year have been
supplemented by “unplanned” cuts of £4 billion through the
operation of the vicious cash limits system. Still investment is
stagnating. The explanation is that to justify new investment
capitalists do not only require to be earning an ‘acceptable’
rate of profit on their existing investments.
An adequate market in which to sell the extra products turned out
by the new factories is necessary as well. And the attempt to improve
profitability by cutting wages and pushing up unemployment reduces
the level of spending which workers can afford. Sales fall and excess
capacity develops in the consumer goods industries. Cuts in public
spending compound the problem. It seems as though the capitalists are
caught in a “Catch 22” situation. If they don’t succeed in
driving down living standards, profitability is too low to justify
investment. If they do, then there is no market for the goods which
would be produced with the extra plant and equipment.
An individual capitalist can avoid this logic if he can find a
market at the expense of his rivals by driving down his costs (the
living standards of the workers he employs) to a sufficient extent.
Capitalists tend automatically adopt this attitude when confronted
with an overall decline in profitability; the profit margin can be
restored by driving down real wages so that is the first priority.
And, for the capitalist class in an individual country, the strategy
of driving down living standards would work if it could expand its
sales at the expense of its rivals; that is by increasing the share
of its exports in world trade and reducing imports. In the crisis
each country relies on an export boom cutting into the others’
markets to provide the growing market needed to justify investment.
This is why the CBI announces boldly:
“The aim must be to increase the penetration of
world markets including our own domestic market. All other strategic
objectives, notably high employment, depend on this.” (The
Road to Recovery)
So it is not that the stagnation in the world economy is the
immediate cause of the crisis in Britain; it is rather that it makes
a way out from the crisis much more difficult.
 
The World Crisis
To hope to secure an export boom on the basis solely of cutting
into other capitalists’ markets is a pipe dream, especially because
capitalists abroad are attempting just the same policies of wage cuts
and rationalisation. Any chance of an export boom depends crucially
on the growth of the world market. If there was rapid growth in the
other capitalist countries then British firms could increase their
exports without the need to secure a higher share of the market. But
the world boom of the fifties and sixties, which to a certain extent
dragged limping British industry along in its wake, is over for good and all.
The most dramatic indicator of this is the slump in investment,
which is the real motor of the capitalist economy. In Europe and
Japan the rates at which the capitalists increased their expenditure
on new factories and machinery, declined, during even the feverish
boom of the early seventies, to little over half the rate of the
early sixties. In the crisis of 1974/5 investment slumped by between
7% (UK) and 22% (Japan). The forecasts for 1978 show private
investment (excluding housing) only at about the 1973 level in all
the major countries except Japan where it is still 15% below the 1973
level. The report of the Bank for International Settlements pointed
out that in Europe investment in new factories and machinery is one
third below the level it would have reached if the trend of the
sixties had continued; in Japan it is less than one half of the trend level.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has
labelled the capitalists’ refusal to invest “investment shyness”.
But far from being hesitant to press their claims, all that the
capitalists are shy about is losing their money. For underlying this
decline in investment has been a more or less drastic fall in
profitability in the various major countries. While figures for
profits are notoriously difficult to calculate on a comparable basis
as between countries, the following table does give an indicator of
the decline in profitability within each country:



Manufacturing Profits as % of Output




 


1960


1973


1975




Italy


16.5


  3.6


  7.0




Germany


29.3


20.9


16.0




Japan


39.2


27.0


22.0




UK


27.4


17.7


  6.9




Sources: National Income Statistics of each country







Rates of Profit, Industrial and Commercial companies,
% of Capital Employed




 


1964


1973


1975




UK


11.8


  7.8


3.5




USA


12.8


  8.6


6.9




France


10.5


10.0


3.5




Sources: UK – Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, June 1977
             USA – Brookings Papers 1977, No. 1
             France – INSEE, November 1976
Note: Figures are not strictly comparable between countries due to
different definitions of depreciation etc.



The process by which the huge rates of capital accumulation in some
countries such as Japan, and the relatively low rates in others such
as Britain, combined to give a generalised decline in profitability
is a complex question which cannot be gone into here. But the fact
that in each of the major capitalist countries the rate of profit had
fallen by one half or more as compared with the early sixties, shows
the depth of the crisis with which the capitalist class is faced with
on a world scale.
While total profits certainly rose since 1975 in a number of
countries, they have not recovered earlier heights. The first task of
capitalists in all the countries is to restore rate of profit by
driving down real wages, through wage controls and unemployment, and
by increasing productivity through rationalisations and speedups.
Like the British capitalists each group hopes to solve the problem of
markets by expanding at the expense of the rest. But only the strong
capitalists will succeed.
Moreover it is no good the weak countries like Britain calling on
the strong countries to expand their own economies by tax cuts or
higher public spending. They all know that their last attempt in
1972/3 to drive the world economy forward through tax cuts and money
supply increases collapsed in a disastrous acceleration of inflation.
The cuts in living standards have not restored profitability
sufficiently, whilst the resulting stagnation has driven out the
memory of the booming markets of the sixties. Meanwhile the mass
unemployment has not materially weakened the trade union and labour
movement. Together with the cuts it has built up a legacy of
bitterness likely to lead to industrial struggles and Left
governments. Against this background the successive economic summit
statements have a hollow ring. “We will not allow recovery to
falter” (Paris, November 1975); “the soundness and breadth of our
recovery” (Puerto Rico, June 1976); “sustained non-inflationary
growth” (London, April 1977). Not surprisingly the Bonn meeting
(July 1978) sounded a plaintiff note: “We need an improvement in
growth”. The Japanese government summed up all their fears when it
pointed out that “it was important not to end up making everybody
equally weak rather than trying to get all countries equally strong.”
(Times, March 2 1977)
Excess capacity is running at 15% or more in the capitalist world.
Profits are still extremely low. The strong countries are refusing to expand.
The OECD survey of the world economy in July 1977 pointed out the
failure of investment to rise.
“The difficulty of stimulating business fixed
investment in conditions of moderate recovery and remaining slack may
have been underestimated. In most Member countries business fixed
investment is likely to remain below – or only fractionally above –
the peak attained in 1973. Capacity utilisation rates, already low in
most countries, are unlikely to rise. much over the next twelve
months. Stronger growth in the United States might be expected to
boost business expectations elsewhere, but there are as yet no
indications of this in business surveys. The persistence of inflation
probably weighs heavily on business expectations. Profits, although
recovering over the last 18 months, remain well below pre-recession
levels, and a further shirt to profits may be necessary in many
countries to restore a position which – other conditions being
satisfactory would encourage productive investment to rise.”
At the end of 1977 the story was the same: “any marked revival
in business investment – the essential motor if expansion is to be
sustained – is now extremely unlikely”. The July 1978 survey
echoed the same point. “There is little indication of an impending
upswing in capital formation – neither profits, capacity
utilisation nor confidence have recovered sufficiently”.
 
Protectionism
The effect of sluggish investment is that the capitalist world has
stagnated and the possibility is growing that control of imports will
escalate as individual countries seek to protect their markets from
the increasingly fierce competition. One economic historian has
recently described how in the 1930s there was “a headlong stampede
to protection and restriction on imports, each country trying to ward
off deflationary pressure of imports, and all together ensuring such
pressure through mutual restriction of exports”.
The April 1978 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
pointed to “a worldwide and disturbing resurgence of protectionist
pressures which in recent months have reached a level not experienced
for more than a generation” It blamed “a search for new panaceas
in the face of unacceptably high unemployment, low investment, an
unhappy combination of recession and inflation, monetary disturbances
and doubts about the stability of the postwar monetary and trading order”.
The IMF’s report said “that by early 1977 it was apparent that
there had been an interruption to the reduction of protectionism that
had characterised the commercial policy of the industrial countries”
since the War. So far few of these measures have comprehensive,
across the board restrictions (Sweden for example invoked a security
of supply clause, always reserved for strategic materials, to justify
keeping out imports of tennis shoes and Wellington boots!). But the
trend is unmistakeable, as the usually cynically cheerful Economist
reported in an extraordinary review-of-1977 article worth quoting at length:
“It was easy to believe in free trade when everyone
seemed to benefit. Today, the best it receives is lip-service; and,
in any seriously affected industry, not even that. Subsidies, though
widely practised, were officially regarded as a support to the halt
and the lame – the Mezzogiorno or the farmers, for instance. Today,
they are, in many countries a normal part of industrial policy. The
industrial development of the third world was proclaimed a case for
public sympathy; now it is privately cursed as a bloody nuisance.
Another country’s trade surplus is no longer a virtue
to be emulated but a vice to be denounced; and your own appreciating
currency no longer reason for pride but cause for lamentation.
The change did not happen suddenly. But 1977 was the year
when it became all but respectable. Near the start of the year, when
the French prime minister used the words ‘organised free trade’,
it was the word ‘organised’ that raised eyebrows. So he changed
the slogan to ‘orderly growth’ of trade – and today quite a lot
of eyebrows go up at the ‘growth’.
The trouble may arise, as in domestic electricals, from a
growth in world capacity as new, cheaper sources of supply are
established, typically in low-wage countries. Or, as in steel and
shipbuilding, it may come from dramatic fall in world demand; those
industries would be struggling today even if the third world had
never set a finger to them. The results in both cases are much the
same: fierce competition, price-cutting and dumping, then protection
to secure home markets and subsides to grab markets abroad. And the
problems look much the same: to protectionists, how to keep the
bastards out, to all but purist free-traders, how to allow time for,
and to ensure, orderly rather than instant and chaotic adjustment.
But the rich countries are singularly short of any agreed
rules for orderly adjustment. They have no mechanism at all except ad
hoc get-together, as between Europe and Japan in shipbuilding, to
handle proposals for a general reduction of capacity (or the parallel
problem, as in synthetic fibres, the non-installation of gross over-capacity).
So, instead, the world has built up its private armouries
of unilateral protective measures, bilateral ‘orderly marketing’
or ‘voluntary restraint’ agreements, and the multilateral
multi-fibre arrangement.”
 
North Sea Oil
Many people are bound to wonder whether the promised bonanza of
North Sea Oil will allow Britain to escape from the ravages of the
world crisis. Tony Benn, for example, recently said that the
countries to whom the British Government was going cap in hand to
borrow cash will soon come begging to Britain for energy supplies. To
answer this it is necessary to go into the economic effects of North
Sea Oil in some detail.
The Government’s forecasts are that the UK will be
self-sufficient in oil by 1980; that is equivalent to a saving of
about 13% of imports by 1981.
But while this improvement in the balance of payments does ease
that problem, the following points indicate just how ‘marginal’
is the effect of North Sea Oil.

The improvement from North Sea Oil is hardly any greater
than the effect on the balance of payments which has already come
from the earlier development of North Sea gas and which has quite
failed to stem the catastrophic performance of the rest of British industry.
 
North Sea Oil does no more than offset the impact on the
balance of payments of the quadrupling of the oil price in 1973. So
only somebody who held that there was no crisis in British industry
before 1973, and that all the problems stemmed from the rise in the
price of Arab oil, could possibly argue that North Sea Oil solved
the crisis. Given the increasingly rapid decline in the position of
British capitalism before 1973, such a view is quite unsustainable.
In fact North Sea Oil does not even fully offset the 1973 rise in
oil costs. North Sea Oil will actually cost more foreign exchange in
1980 than Arab oil cost in 1972. This is because of the profits sent
home by the US oil companies, which have developed much of the
field, and the imports of machinery etc., used in the exploration
and production.

Using the oil to buy extra imports, takes some pressure off the
pound but any argument that North Sea Oil will transform the position
of British capitalism must rest not on its direct impact, but on
indirect effects on the rest of industry. Can the revenues from North
Sea Oil production be seriously expected to get an investment boom
going?
Now it is certainly the case that the production of North Sea Oil
itself is extremely profitable. The Labour Government did introduce a
special Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) to mop up some of the extra
profits resulting from the huge 1973 increase in the world price of
oil. But this only applied to fields yielding less than 30%.
Estimates of the expected rate of profit from the individual fields
range from around 20% at the bottom and to practically 50% in the
case of Occidental’s Piper field (Financial Times, February
27th, 1976), many times rate of profit in UK industry.
Moreover Labour’s original plan that the Government share in
these high rates of profit, through compulsorily taking a majority
share holding in all the oil fields already licensed, was dropped in
the face of opposition from the oil companies. It was no good the
government saying that there would be “no unfairness to the
licensees (of the oil fields) since the state contributes its share
of the costs, including past cost.” The oil companies obviously
objected bitterly and successfully to losing part of their
super-profits. All that is left of direct state participation is the
right of the British National Oil Corporation to take a majority
shareholding on fields resulting from the much less important rounds
of license allocation in 1977 and later, plus the interests in
various fields inherited from the Gas Council and Coal Board. BNOC
will only get about one tenth of the profits from North Sea Oil in
the early 1980s.
The “participation agreements” for existing fields stipulate
that the BNOC should be able to purchase 51% of the oil at market
prices. But in the cases of Shell and Esso the Government has agreed
to sell back an equivalent amount of North Sea Oil for refining in
Britain. These agreements simply have the minimal effect of
guaranteeing British access to North Sea Oil in case of emergency.
The profits resulting from North Sea Oil will be very large –
around £2½ billion in 1981 or 1½% of national product (National
Institute Economic Review, November 1977). If all the North Sea
profits were reinvested in British industry they would go over half
the way towards the target of doubling manufacturing investment. But
there is no likelihood that this will happen. Nearly two thirds of
these profits will go abroad to the foreign oil companies which took
the major part of the licences. They will have no reason to invest
these profits back into unprofitable British manufacturing industry.
Nor indeed will the UK firms receive a share.
Of itself North Sea Oil production does nothing to increase the
profitability of the rest of UK industry (since the oil is sold at
world market prices), nor does it widen the market (with the rather
minor exception of those industries supplying the rigs etc.). So this
leaves the question of whether the taxes paid by the companies
extracting the oil could be used to transform the profitability of industry.
The National Institute’s figures suggest that in 1981 taxes
would be a little less than the profits earned from the oil (together
with revenues of £300 million or so for BNOC, the taxes from the
North Sea Oil would be less than 5% of public expenditure).
So could the extra revenue equivalent to around 1½% of GOP be
used to initiate an investment boom? But even if it was all offered
to the capitalists as grants it would not provide a profitable market
which would make it worthwhile investing.
North Sea Oil does improve the balance of payments but not through
a profitable “export-led boom” in the rest of industry; and it is
the profitable export-led boom, not the improvement in the balance of
payments, which would be necessary to “justify’ investment.
 
A Service Economy
One section of the capitalists based in the City of London,
far-sighted enough perhaps to see that the restoration of British
industry on a capitalist basis is a pipedream, has turned to a new
solution. Former Tory minister David Howell has called for an end to
the restrictions on overseas investment, which have been labelled “a
most sinister infringement of personal freedom” (Times,
January 3, 1978) by Lord Cromer, ex-Governor of the Bank of England.
Sam Brittan of the Financial Times explained the advantages
for the capitalists:
”To attempt to force still more (!) resources into
domestic manufacturing investment when we are already on the
threshold of negative returns makes very little sense ... with
overseas investment the case is utterly different ... A policy of
overseas investment would not run into the problem of rapidly
deteriorating marginal productivity of capital (i.e. profitability!)
which would beset any forced investment drive at home.” (Financial
Times, September 15, 1977)
But even if investment overseas promised fabulous profits for the
capitalists, which is certainly not the case in the context of world
crisis, a policy of investing overseas is a policy for driving more
and more industries in Britain out of business. For they are
uncompetitive because they have invested too little. The effect of
more overseas investment on the domestic manufacturing sector is more
or less admitted by Howell when he calls for “still further
expansion of an immensely profitable service industries at which we
are so good and which earn so much in world markets” (Evening
Standard, November 7, 1977). Could these service sectors provide
jobs for the industrial workers put on the dole by the further
rundown manufacturing? The overseas earnings of service sectors are
very large:


Earnings of foreign exchange
£ billion 1976




Export of Goods


25.4




Services and Profits from Abroad


12.8




Sea Transport


  3.3




Aviation


  1.1




Tourism (and other visitors)


  1.6




Earnings of the City


  1.5




Other Services


  2.2




Profits from Overseas Subsidiaries


  2.1




Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1966–76



But most of these sectors employ tiny numbers of people. 88,000
people were employed in sea transport, 78,000 in air transport in
1975. While 690,000 were employed in the financial sector, the great
majority work in the routine High Street operations of the banks,
building societies, and insurance companies. Only a fraction handle
the big international deals, and so expansion of these overseas
financial operations would provide next to nothing in terms of
employment. That is even if it could be achieved anyway. UK
“invisible earnings” have fallen from 14.6% of the world total in
1964 to 11.1% in 1973, and there were falls in the British share in
every major category. Howell never explains how the falling behind in
these sectors as well could be reversed.
About the only service sector with big overseas earnings which
does employ large numbers of people is tourism. But what are the
ex-industrial workers of the Midlands, Tyneside, and Liverpool
supposed to do during the long winter months when there are no more
jobs dressing up as beefeaters or selling (Italian) ice-creams on the
beaches? Apart from the dream of establishing financial dominance,
the call for an expansion of the services sectors is really a
recognition that the one advantage British capital has is cheap
labour and that this gives the biggest advantage in ‘labour
intensive’ service sectors. But the task of driving industrial
workers into being the skivvies of Europe is no more realistic than
the industrial capitalists’ hope of recreating their lost
industrial might.
 
Programme of the CBI
The capitalist class as a whole is too closely dependent on
industry to succumb to such ridiculous fantasies. The CBI’s
pamphlet The Road to Recovery published at the end of 1976 was
an agenda for wage controls and public spending cuts which has still
not been completed. The CBI said:
“The balance of power has been distorted(!)
overwhelmingly in favour of many groups of employees so that
collective bargaining has ceased to be a process whereby voluntary
agreement on terms and conditions is sought to the satisfaction (!)
of both sides and consistent with economic needs.”
Subsequently they proposed that all bargaining over wages should
be concentrated in three months after the Budget and that would be a
“restructured free bargaining system” to distribute an overall
increase in the wage bill agreed by the CBI, TUC and Government. In
effect there would be “freedom” allowed to workers to fight
amongst each other for a bigger share of what the capitalist class
reckoned it could afford.
The CBI’s pamphlet goes on to document the decline in
profitability in British industry over the last 10 years, together
with the parallel decline in the rate of investment. Even the
increase in profits since the pamphlet was written has not reached
the CBI’s target of restoring profitability.



Industrial and Commercial profits as % of Net Output




1965


1970


1973


1974


1975


1976


1977


1978
1st half




12.9


9.8


10.7


5.3


3.9


4.2


5.7


6.3




Source: National Income and Expenditure 1966–76, Economic Trends, July 1978



Although profitability has risen by nearly one half since the
summer of 1976 it is still not quite half the level of the mid-1960s.
And a third of the increase in profits has been from North Sea Oil
and so does not reflect higher industrial profits generally.
The hard-liners of the Tory party have no faith in further use of
incomes policy, but are at one with the CBI in wishing to hold down wages.
”Monetary restraint, including the setting of targets
for monetary expansion, is a key feature of economic policy.
Excessive wage chums should clearly not be accommodated by an easy
expansion of bank lending. In the public sector this must be
supplemented by the use of cash limits. Every organisation, including
those in the public sector should be put in the position in which
workers and management are obliged to face together an inescapable
choice between realistic pay levels and job security or excessive
earnings and a doubtful future.” (The Right Approach)
Sir Keith Joseph has made it all too clear how he would like to
proceed. “As we know, the right to work has come to mean the right
not to work, the right to go on receiving wages, usually high wages,
unrelated to economic contribution,” and he called British Leyland
and Chrysler, “foci of highly-paid outdoor relief” (Monetarism
is Not Enough). The leaked Ridley report gave a crude insight
into the strategy of class confrontation which the Tories are working
out, a strategy mapped out much more subtly by Jan Gilmour, the Tory
defence spokesman, in his book Inside Right. (See the long
analysis by Peter Taaffe in Militant International Review, Summer 1978)
The CBI’s pamphlet gives some revealing pointers to how they
foresee the dismantling of the so called Welfare State:

“Rents on municipal housing could be increased
to more realistic levels” (the CBI does not point out that in 1975
rents paid by council tenants more than paid for maintenance and
depreciation on the houses – the true cost of the housing –
while the subsidies of more than £1,000 million all went to pay
interest on the money borrowed by the local authorities to pay for the houses).
 
“Transport subsidies should be substantially reduced.”
 
“There is scope for commercial charging for some
of the services provided which could save several hundred million
pounds. A few examples that could be considered include pre-schools,
leisure courses, school meals, higher charges for certain medical
services. More radical changes, such as the substitution of loans
for grants in higher education and personal insurance to cover the
cost of health care, should also be considered to reduce the burden
on the general tax payer.”

What is surprising is that the CBI seems to take seriously the
view that if workers are charged more for public services, and if
their taxes were cut by an equivalent amount, they will feel better
off and will be content with lower wage claims. Here we have the
ideology of the free market deceiving not a raving Tory backwoodsman
like Heseltine, but the representative of big capital. A worker faced
with say an extra £3 per week to payout for rents, school meals,
health charges etc. (this is roughly what the cuts of £3,000 would
amount to for the average worker if they were all concentrated on
charges for social services) is supposed to be so pleased with the
extra £3 he receives in reduced taxation (more likely it would be £1
of course) that he foregoes his next wage claim. Because some of his
consumption is “privately financed” (i.e. he pays for it directly
himself), implying a “wider freedom to choose between public and
private services”, he is supposed to feel better off. This may seem
plausible to the authors of the CBI’s programme who no doubt do
feel better off ‘privately financing’ their children’s
schooling and their own private hospital care (at the expense of the
rest of society). But it does not take much imagination to visualize
the attitude of most workers to the suggestion that they should feel
the glow of satisfaction from handing over more cash to the rent
collector or to the doctor’s receptionist.
 
The Labour Government
The perspectives of the capitalist class whether for the
regeneration of industry or the expansion of services offer no
solution to the problems of workers. The Labour Government, under
relentless pressure from the CBI and the City, ably supported by the
IMF, has faithfully followed the demands of the big business, as
described earlier.
In his 1976 budget speech, Dennis Healey said:
”It is because our manufacturing industry has declined
since the war both in size and efficiency by comparison with those of
our competitors that our economic record since the war has been
inferior to theirs.” Remedying this would require “a major shift
in the use of our resources away from private and public consumption
(i.e. workers’ living standards – AG) towards export and
investment.”
He summed it up in a remark at the Overseas Bankers Club in
January 1977 that “firms will only expand and invest if they can
see scope for making profits.”
 
Job Schemes and Subsidies
The rising tide of unemployment that has resulted from these
policies has led the government to introduce a barrage of special
employment and training measures to try and keep down the numbers on
the register. Albert Booth claims that after the various
modifications recently announced the total number of workers involved
in the schemes will be 400,000 by March 1979. At the end of 1977
177,000 workers were said to be covered by the temporary employment
subsidy, 47,000 by Job Creation and around 80,000 more by other
experience programmes and training schemes.
The Job Creation Scheme has been correctly criticised for
sometimes involving youngsters in meaningless make-work projects like
knocking down World War II pillboxes. And even the genuinely useful
projects in the area of public services often do no more than stem
the ill effects of the public spending cuts. The left hand obviously
knows what the right hand is doing, but it is convenient to pretend
that some of the effect on employment of the spending cuts is being
offset by the government. But the pretence is thoroughly hypocritical
for in the context of the government accepting that spending has’
to be cut by so many hundred million, then the more spent on schemes
like the JCS the more that has to be cut elsewhere. In reality, then,
all that happens is that a number of younger workers are taken off
the dole to work on the schemes and in order to ‘pay’ for them,
more cuts are made elsewhere, pushing other workers on to the dole.
This effect of shuffling around who is unemployed, rather than
reducing the total number, was even more obvious with the subsidy to
firms to take on school leavers. The Department of Employment
Gazette (July 1977) reported a survey which showed that three
quarters of the school leavers taken on by firms claiming the subsidy
would have been taken on anyway, and half of the rest merely replaced
other workers. The school leavers’ subsidy was replaced by the
Youth Employment Subsidy which gives £10 per week for up to 26 weeks
for firms taking on workers under 20 years of age who had been out of
work for six months or more. The DE dutifully carried out another
survey into its effects (Gazette, April 1978) and found almost
exactly the same results. Three quarters of the “subsidised young
people would have entered their employment regardless of the subsidy”
and half of the rest were filling jobs which would have gone to
somebody else. However desirable it may be to break up extended
periods of unemployment for youngsters it just shares the misery out
more evenly (and salves the government’s reputation by allowing it
to boast of the number of jobs covered by its schemes).
Much the biggest employment subsidy is the Temporary Employment
Subsidy which gives £20 per week for a year for each worker kept on
who would otherwise be made redundant (recently restricted under EEC
pressure to cover only 70% of a firm’s labour force with the rest
being eligible for a subsidy to make up 75% of lost wages while on
short time). In principle this gets round the problem of giving money
to capitalists to employ people they would take on anyway, since the
applications are supposed to be rigourously scrutinised to ensure
that the redundancies really would take place. The TUC is pressing
for a Job Expansion Subsidy of £20 per week per job to be provided
for one year to all firms providing an increase in manufacturing
jobs, and so far the Government has responded with the Small Firms
Employment Subsidy (SFES) which does just that (for six months) but
limited to small firms. All these schemes, if they really do save
jobs, have a great attraction for the government since £20 a week is
much less than the government makes in terms of not having to pay the
dole and in getting the tax and national insurance contributions paid
by the worker. As the DE put it, referring to the TES “flowbacks to
the Exchequer might amount to three quarters of the worker’s
earnings” – so if the job “saved” paid £60 the government
would gain £45 and only spend £20 on the subsidy. Pure magic ... a
scheme which cuts unemployment and government borrowing at the same time!
But do the jobs “saved” by TES, or “created” by SFES
really reduce unemployment? Or do the subsidised jobs simply
“displace” unsubsidised jobs in other firms leading to no real
difference in total unemployment at all? The argument that this
“displacement” does occur is straightforward. If a given amount
of commodities are being produced, one firm producing more as a
result of a subsidy, means another firm producing less which will
have to cut its labour force. Since the subsidies do little or
nothing to increase demand for commodities they will not increase
employment. And the government will lose as much tax and national
insurance from the worker “displaced” as it gains from the job
“created”. All that’s left is an addition to the numbers which
the government can claim to be helping. And those individuals are
kept off the dole, but just to make way for somebody else. These
schemes must be condemned as basically cosmetic operations.
 
The Industrial Strategy and Rationalisations
Dennis Healey, described the “industrial strategy”, as the
means by which “the government, the trade unions and the employers
are seeking to improve the performance of our manufacturing industry,
in particular its productivity and its ability to compete in world
markets.” The main function of the Sector Working Parties so far
has been providing a forum in which the employers pressurise the
government for more hand-outs. The favoured ones have been successful
in getting a larger slice of the £3,000 million currently handed out
to big business via Regional Development Grants (£393 million),
Selective Assistance (£144 million), Export Credits (£544 minion),
Industrial Training £286 million), Employment Subsidies (£181
million) – nor to mention the £4000 million tax concessions to
encourage investment.
The object of such “planning” as there has been is not to
expand industry, but rather to savagely “rationalise”, as the TUC
sadly noted when it wrote that “implicit in some of the reports is
the idea that employment reductions are needed” (TUC Economic
Review, 1977). The capitalist hope that by closing down old
plants, and speeding up the production process in the rest they can
reduce costs and increase profits. Indeed the government has used the
companies controlled by the National Enterprise Board to give a lead
to this process (see table below) – a vicious parody of what the
Board was supposed to do (see pages 43–45).



Loss of Jobs in NEB companies during 1976 and 1977




British Leyland


19,000 jobs lost


 


Others


600 jobs gained




Ferranti


  1,100


 




Herbert


     800




Rolls Royce


  5,500




ICL


  1,300




Source: National Enterprise Board Accounts, 1976 and 1977



Even with all these efforts manufacturing productivity rose by
only 3% in Britain between 1973 and 1977, as compared with 12% in the
USA, 14% in France and Italy, 19% in Germany and Japan. So the period
of acute crisis since the early seventies has seen a further falling
behind of British capital.
 
Mass Unemployment Into The Eighties
Despite the profits explosion no boom in investment is in
prospect. Forecasts for the growth of manufacturing investment in
1977 were reduced from 15–20% to 10–15% and the outcome was only
8%. The same process of downward revision occurred for 1978. The
first forecast was for a 12–17% rise, revised down to 10–13%.
Even this is above the National Institute’s forecast of 5% growth,
slowing down to 4% in 1979. It is no good Dennis Healey bleating to
the City that:
“At a time when ... working men and women are being
asked to show their confidence in the future by continued
self-discipline in pay negotiations, I do not believe it is unfair to
ask that British firms should match that confidence by their
discussions on investment and show for once (!) that their announced
intentions are fulfilled in the event” (Financial Times,
October 21, 1977).
The stark fact is that after deduction of depreciation net
investment in manufacturing is little over one third of the level of
1961, and probably less than in 1951. Manufacturing output in
mid-1978 was hardly above that of January 1974, at the height of the
3-day week. Stagnation in the world economy is deepening. OECD In
July 1978 forecast that growth in the capitalist world would be
around 3½% in 1978, and would tend to slow further in 1979. They
forecast UK export growth of only 1% per year. So the dream of an
export-led boom remains just that; and the higher profits of British
firms will be channelled into financial assets. The surplus on the
balance of payments reflects the huge excess capacity in industry
which means lower imports. The enormous rise in the reserves of
foreign currencies – more than £15 billion during 1977 –
represents cash which the multi-national banks and firms have decided
to deposit in the City because interest rates are high and confidence
in the pound improved. But this is simply borrowed money, which could
leave quicker than it arrived. To use it to pay off IMF debts would
merely change creditors, following the advice of the Chicago money
lender who advertised his services with the slogan “We will lend
you enough money to get you right out of debt”.
The Government’s own Public Expenditure White Paper of February
1978 was based on virtually no fall in unemployment up to 1981. The
Times (December 14, 1977) reported a Bank of England paper
concluding that it would be impossible to reduce registered
unemployment below the one million mark in the 1980s. Even the
usually optimistic National Institute was unable in its November 1977
discussion of “medium-term policy options” to construct a
“scenario” with unemployment below a million in the early 1980s.
The Institute for Manpower Studies (Times, May 15. 1978)
suggests that in 1986 unemployment of people under 25 will be 1
million, twice as high as in 1976. The Cambridge Economic Policy
Group foresees unemployment of 3 million by 1985 if existing policies
continue. The unanimous view of all the serious capitalist
commentators, then, is that mass unemployment will persist and most
probably increase substantially if present policies continue.


II. The Alternative Strategy of the Left
The conclusion of the first section of this pamphlet is that the
continuance of orthodox policies has no chance of guaranteeing jobs
and living standards. In response to the cuts and mass unemployment
the majority of the left in the Labour Movement, led by the Tribune
Group of MP’s a number of prominent trade unionists and the
Communist Party are now advocating an Alternative Economic
Strategy to the policies advocated by the CBI and implemented by
the Labour Government. While there are many variants suggested –
from the “soft” version of the TUC Economic Review to the
hard versions of some of the Tribune Group and the Communist Party
(CP) – the measures listed by Brian Sedgmore (Tribune,
October 29 1976) under the headline The Alternative Strategy,
provide a useful starting point for discussing the different measures
involved. He gives the following nine points as the “invisible
bedrock upon which the alternative strategy is founded”:




Import Controls
End to Sterling’s Role as Reserve Currency
Price Controls and an Incomes Policy
Planning Agreements
Muscle to the National Enterprise Board
Industrial Democracy
Public Ownership of the Financial Institutions
The Maintenance of Labour’s Social Programmes
Defence Cuts




Other ideas usually given a fairly prominent position are the
wealth tax (e.g. Tribune Group Economic Report, No. 2,
June 1975) and the call for the government to expand the economy
through higher real wages and increases in public spending e.g. Bert
Ramelson’s pamphlet Bury the Social Contract. We also
discuss the 35-hour week, included for example in Stuart Holland’s
latest version of the Alternative Strategy.
The basic idea is that armed with these policies, a Labour
Government could pressurise what would remain a capitalist economy,
in that the overwhelming majority of the means of production would
remain in private hands, into providing sufficient jobs and
improvements in living standards. One assumption behind this approach
is that the severity of the economic crisis is exaggerated, so that
simply a more determined approach by the government will succeed in
securing a ‘better performance’ from industry. If the basic
conditions for the capitalist to invest are present then removing
some of the temptations (property speculation, investment overseas),
together with more pressure from the government and trade unions will
do the trick. Playing down the extent of the crisis ties in with the
even more fundamental assumption that the capitalists will accept the
directives of a socialist government. If more government intervention
could really lead to a boom in the economy, then the capitalist would
stand to gain a great deal in higher profits, as compensation for
allowing the government a more active part in directing the economy.
Moreover the distinctly nationalistic flavour about these policies,
the idea that Britain’s economic problems can be solved by Britain,
rather than seeing them in the context of a crisis for the labour
movement in the world as a whole, is also related to the depth of the crisis.
The capitalist class abroad has more freedom of manoeuvre
economically and politically to adapt to policies adopted to protect
British capital’s interests (e.g. import controls), the less
serious is the situation in the world economy. But with the present
crisis in the world economy there is no possibility of the
capitalists abroad accepting measures to restore the position of
British capital at their expense. Much of the detailed criticism of
particular aspects of the Alternative Strategy which follows
rests on the view, argued for in the first section of this pamphlet,
of the deep-seated and international nature of the economic crisis.
But is it really fair to claim that the proposers of the Alternative
Strategy play down the depth of the crisis?
Calculations like those given on p. 16 above show the drastic fall
in the rate of profit in the UK over the last ten years. These
figures attempt to measure real profits, that is to exclude the
fictitious element arising from inflation, which is counted in the
profits announced by the companies. The CP’s pamphlet, Bury the
Social Contract, says that these calculations are a swindle “to
relieve the bosses from the major part of taxes as well as to hide
the real profits being made”, and that the old conventional methods
of accounting show that there has been no fall in profitability.
Of course the capitalists will use every means available to reduce
the taxes they pay. But the fact that the new methods of accounting
have been devised with this in mind does not mean they are a swindle.
A story from the German inflation of 1923 will show why it is quite
correct to only reckon profits after taking account of the cost of
replacing stocks of goods and machinery at current prices. The story
concerns a young iron monger whose father had always told him that if
he kept the money value of his stocks intact he could treat all the
rest of his takings as profit and spend it on himself. All went well
until inflation began to rocket and then he found that keeping stocks
to the same money value led to his shelves becoming emptier and
emptier. But he kept on enjoying himself, reckoning all his takings
over and above what was required to maintain the money value of his
stocks as profit, as he had been told. Eventually he found himself
without any stocks at all except one nail and a piece of rope, which
were now worth the same as his whole stock has cost at the beginning.
Bert Ramelson points out that all the textile industry’s reported
profits for 1976 would disappear if the accounts were adjusted for
inflation. But the fact that these methods for adjusting for
inflation are new (for the very good reason that they have only
become necessary with the acceleration of inflation) does not make
them wrong. Profits “appear to have been squeezed” on the new
methods of accounting because they have been squeezed; they appear
not to have been squeezed on the old methods of accounting because
these methods are wrong. The textile industry was earning no profit
which it could plough back into expanded plant. The fact that these
methods “are not applied to measuring wages” (presumably meaning
that the extent to which wages have been hit by inflation is
concealed where possible) is absolutely right. But “retaliation”,
by denying the fall in profits, is to lose sight of real depth of the crisis.
Stuart Holland also suggests that the growing involvement of
British companies in overseas operations has increased than ability
to understate profits earned in the UK by charging low “transfer
prices” for their products shipped abroad to overseas subsidiaries
and that “this factor alone could account for a considerable
proportion of any profits squeeze” (The Socialist Challenge,
p. 396). Of course the capitalists will use this method to
transfer profits to where they pay least tax, but it is unbelievable
that there devices could have increased sufficiently to account for
much of the drastic decline in profitability. And the string of huge
firms in dire trouble (Rolls Royce, British Leyland, Alfred Herbert
etc.) shows that it is quite wrong to regard the multinational firms
as substantially immune from the overall decline in profits.
It is a gross exaggeration to suggest that the profits crisis is
fundamentally a reflection of the power and manipulations of the
multinationals – in squeezing out the small firms and then
syphoning off their own profits abroad. Without the fall in
profitability all the policies of the capitalist class, such as wage
cutting, appear simply as evil-minded greed, rather than as something
which they are forced to do if their system is to survive.
 
Expand the Economy
Expanding the economy is an obvious first step to eliminate
unemployment. This is how Bury the Social Contract puts it:
“There is only one way to expand the economy and that
is by an incentive to Increase output. The only incentive ... is to
ensure a market for the increased output. The only way to ensure a
market for the increased output is to increase the demand which is
within Britain’s control. That in turn means and end to wage and
public spending cuts.”
But this approach only sees one side of the dilemma of the
capitalist class – the question of markets – while ignoring the
other and equally fundamental, question of profitability. Any policy
which increased real wages, while temporarily improving the market
situation, would further. drive down profits. On the basis of
capitalist production – that is production for profit – such
gains in employment as would result from higher demand would soon be
wiped out by a further rush of closures of factories by firms which
could not meet the higher wage bills. The only way this could be
avoided is through the government pumping in sufficient cash into the
economy and letting the pound slide, so that prices could rise at
least as fast as wages and maintain the profitability of production.
The C.P. calls for price controls to prevent the inflation which
would tend to result from an expansion of demand. But to impose rigid
and effective price controls in a situation where workers were taking
advantage of a temporary upswing and an ending of wage controls to
put in for big wage rises would be to drastically worsen
profitability. This would eliminate any possibility of the temporary
rise of production being translated into a sustainable boom through
higher investment. The extra credit would flow into speculation as in
Barber’s ill-fated boom of 1972/3. The strategy of the capitalist
class sees quite correctly that the contradiction between
profitability and markets can only be solved by expanding at the
expense of the rest of the capitalist world. It is unacceptable to
the labour movement, in terms of reductions in living standards, the
unemployment and the social spending cuts involved; its chances of
success are negligible given the situation in the world economy and
the opposition of the labour movement at home. But the implication
drawn by the CP is to opt for a policy which ignores the workings of
the capitalist system by asserting that in a situation of crisis
production and investment can be expanded by driving down
profitability further. What the CP and the other proponents of the
Alternative Strategy will not face up to is that there is no way to
reconcile the interests of the working class and the continuation of
production for profit. Keynesian policies to expand demand) provide
no solution at all. Obviously all socialists would support the call
for a massive programme of public works to soak up unemployment, but
the proponents of the Alternative Strategy never face up to the
contradictions involved if this is implemented while the economy
remains on a capitalist basis.
 
Import Controls
Superficially the idea of import controls is attractive. A system
of licenses for imports (quotas) would reduce the volume of imports
of those commodities which could be produced at home. The balance of
payments would be improved, and, most important, unemployment reduced
as consumers switch to home produced commodities. The great advantage
claimed for import controls is that, unlike devaluation, the price of
imported commodities is not automatically pushed up.
The first point to be clear about is that import controls would,
mean that British workers would be faced with higher prices. With
their sales limited, foreign capitalists would no longer have any
incentive to undercut British firms and they would raise the price of
the imports which were allowed in. Not only would workers also be
forced to switch to already dearer British goods, but these would
also be increased in price as British capitalists would no longer be
restrained by foreign competition. To a substantial extent, then,
import control is just a variant on the old capitalist theme of the
necessity for the working class to pay, with a wage cut, for the
“privilege” of maintaining employment.
Moreover if import controls were introduced there is no reason at
all to suppose that the capitalists would take advantage of the
breathing space afforded them to boost investment and radically
improve efficiency. All experience points in the opposite direction.
In the ten years or so after the War, British capital was virtually
totally protected from foreign competition, both in the home market
and in the colonies. Profits were high, credit was available, the
firms were flush with cash due to investment being held back during
the war. Yet even in the late forties the British capitalists were
only investing half to two thirds as much as their rivals abroad. Of
course Tribune pins its faith in boosting investment and
efficiency on the NEB and Planning Agreements. The point being made
here is that without effective government control of industry import
controls would certainly not lead to a revitalisation of British industry.
Perhaps the most basic question is that of retaliation. If other
capitalist countries took similar action against British exports the
whole scheme would be ruined as employment and the balance of
payments would be hit. Tribune has suggested that capitalists
abroad should be just as happy to see their exports to the UK limited
by import controls as they would be to see them held down by
deflationary policies. But a deflationary policy-cutting workers
living standards and keeping up unemployment – is the orthodox, and
correct in capitalist terms, response to the crisis. Import controls
would be seen by foreign capitalists as an attempt to deal with
Britain’s problems at their expense.
Their reaction would be all the fiercer since the import controls
would have to be concentrated on a relatively narrow range of
manufactured commodities, since more raw materials would have to be
imported to sustain a higher level of production. The Cambridge
Policy Group sees a reduction of imports of manufactures of nearly
one quarter as necessary; and since some sorts of machinery cannot be
produced in the UK with the present capacity, the degree of
restriction on other manufactured goods, such as cars, would have to
be sharper still. Such imports come mainly from the major capitalist
countries – the EEC, Japan the USA – which are precisely those in
the best position to take the most damaging retaliatory action. To
label retaliation by major exporting capitalists abroad as based on
“spite or ignorance” (Brian Sedgemore, Tribune, August 18,
1978) may not be spiteful but it certainly is ignorant; it ignores
the fact that they are bound to protect what are their real interests.
The fact that they have the most to lose from a trade war is
irrelevant. They would use their control of international
institutions like the IMF, on which a capitalist Britain depends, to
do all in their power to prevent the introduction of the controls in
the first place.
The experience of the 1964 Labour Government of Temporary Import
Surcharge is instructive in this respect. Harold Wilson’s memoirs
(p. 35) record the situation less than one month after the measure
was introduced:
“On the night of Thursday 19 November I had an
emergency, almost panic call from Patrick Gordon Walker in Geneva. He
needed my clearance for a firm assurance that the 15% import
surcharge would be reduced in a matter of months. Otherwise the
discussions (with EFTA) would break down and country after country
would be likely to retaliate against our trade.”
Within two years Wilson was forced to scrap the surcharge
entirely; and the TIS was a feeble measure, calculated to have
reduced imports by about £100 million a year, and that at a time
when the capitalist world was still enjoying an unprecedented boom.
For Labour’s Programme 1976 to say that retaliation did not
occur when “Britain imposed import controls in the mid-sixties”
is irrelevant because there was no need for retaliation given the
ineffectiveness of the measures and the successful pressure to end them.
Similarly the reference in the programme to Italy’s import
deposit scheme not provoking retaliation is not convincing. It was a
very mild measure (simply requiring advance payments for imports), it
was of limited duration (1 year, though subsequently reapplied) and
it was partly aimed at the orthodox objective of deflating the
economy. It is not difficult to imagine what reception a Labour
Government would receive if it attempted to introduce really tough
import controls (Tribune talks of £3,000 million) in a time of
crisis in the capitalist world. With markets shrinking, and
competition intensified, each government would be under overwhelming
pressure from big exporting industries to prevent British capitalists
getting away with the controls, however “intelligently” they are
applied, and however much “care is taken that they do not fall too
heavily on any individual country” (Bob Rowthorn, Comment,
13 May 1978).
The depth of the economic crisis, and the competitive nature of
the capitalist system, make it inconceivable that the British state
could get away without retaliation to the introduction of really
tough import controls. If they were introduced as a last resort it
would probably tip the balance in the world economy towards
widespread protectionism. Workers abroad whose jobs would be
threatened by the controls would be pushed into supporting their
bosses in the campaign for retaliation, and the same thing would
develop in the UK as export industries met retaliation from import
controls abroad. The competitive scramble for tighter import
controls, rather than solving the mass unemployment faced by workers
in every capitalist country, would just make the situation worse as
world trade spiralled downwards, after the pattern of the thirties.
So the demand for import controls must be recognised as being
nationalistic – an attempt to preserve the interests of the
‘British nation’, workers and capitalist’s alike, and on this
basis there would be no possibility of British workers appealing to
the labour movement abroad to oppose the retaliatory action of their
capitalists. A class approach, by contrast, sees the only solution to
the problems faced by workers in all the capitalist countries in a
common struggle against the capitalist system which is the source of
these problems. So any measure which sets workers in this country
against workers in other countries must be rejected. It weakens the
struggle for socialism by strengthening one of the strongest
ideological weapons in the hands of the capitalist class – the
appeal to workers to make sacrifices in the name of a national
interest being threatened by actions of foreigners.
How do proposers of import controls counter these arguments? In an
article in Tribune (November 21, 1975) Brian Sedgemore says
that “every socialist country in the world, including China, Cuba,
Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, uses such controls on a scale
undreamed of by the Tribune Group” implying that it is absurd to
call them reactionary. But what he fails to understand is that the
content of a policy depends on the context in which it is introduced.
It is perfectly correct that under a socialist plan of production,
such as Militant argues for, a monopoly of foreign trade would be an
essential planning tool. But there is every difference between a
policy introduced to protect a section of domestic capitalist class
(Sedgemore has never proposed the immediate nationalisation of every
industry where he wants to see import controls introduced) and its
introduction as a necessary part of a socialist plan to control the
economy in society’s interests.
On the question of exporting unemployment he says that the
purists, “conveniently forget that the alternatives of deflation
and devaluation do precisely that”. Sedgemore is perfectly right as
to the effects of these policies; but we do not accept, like him,
that the only alternatives to import controls are devaluation or
deflation (or rather both). These, just like import controls, are
both capitalist policies for meeting the crisis at the expense of
working class living standards. Socialists should never be forced
into arguing for one capitalist solution to the crisis on the basis
that it will be less harmful than other capitalist solutions.
Opponents of capitalist import controls are not thereby supporting
the nineteenth century liberal principle of free trade as Bert
Ramelson suggests. Indeed it is symptomatic of the CP’s failure to
see beyond capitalist solutions that Ramelson can talk in this way.
Sedgemore says we forget that “it is capitalist countries such
as Germany and America which, by their insistence on running balance
of payments surpluses despite the colossal rise in oil prices, are
exporting unemployment to Britain”. But what an argument for a
socialist to use; that we should reply in kind to the capitalist
policy of unemployment. Sedgemore says we forget that “the Tribune
Group has always excluded the goods of Third World Countries from
such controls”. But all that means is that the effect on workers on
the advanced countries will be greater (and as we pointed out above
the capitalists in those countries are best able to retaliate).
Sedgemore says that “it is a demonstrable truth that reflation
behind widespread import controls would lead to such economic growth
that world trade would quickly increase”. Here he seems to be
arguing for all the major countries to expand behind import controls.
But to the extent that the policy worked it would be the reflation
which would push up world trade, and not the import controls which
would have the opposite effect. Sedgemore gives no analysis whatever
of why the major capitalist countries will not reflate, why they are
all waiting for an export led boom, why they fear growth substantial
enough to push down unemployment. Without an understanding of the
real situation in the world economy, such as we tried to give
earlier, Sedgemore can only complain about the wrong headedness of
the policies of the main capitalist countries.
Finally Sedgemore says that “every argument which can be adduced
against import control can be adduced against the control of the
movement of capital”. This is quite ridiculous. How can it be
argued that controlling the outflow of capital will lead to lower
living standards and retaliation costing the jobs of those in export
industries? The effects on the British economy of limiting the
outflow of capital are much over-rated by many of the left (see
below). But controlling the ability of British capital to move funds
overseas is at least a fundamentally anti-capitalist measure (and one
bitterly opposed by the CBI for example). Limiting imports protects a
section of the capitalist class (though it is opposed by the
capitalist class as a whole for fear of retaliation).
Neither import controls nor free trade provide a solution to the
crisis of British capital; the fact that the capitalist class in
Britain may be forced by the growing tide of protectionism, and by
its own weakness, to impose import controls is all the more reason
why socialists should give no credence to them.
Lawrence Harris (Marxism Today, April 1977) professes to
find the argument that import controls will tend to export
unemployment to be a Keynesian one. He says that it is impossible to
know the precise effects without “a detailed analysis of each
country’s particular circumstances”. But it is possible to
understand the basic implications of import controls without waiting
for detailed analysis. Harris’ paralysis has nothing in common with
Marxism and serves to cloak the Communist Party’s nationalistic
approach.
 
End Sterling’s Role as a Reserve Currency
This proposal has a slightly dated feel since the government is
already putting into effect a scheme whereby governments which
previously held their reserves in Britain (the sterling balances) are
to be given guaranteed bonds. But this does little to deal with the
speculation that afflicts sterling periodically. For while overseas
governments will no longer be moving their funds out of London the
huge international companies can move billions of pounds out of the
country simply by delaying or speeding up payments to their
subsidiaries abroad. Whether or not they decide to do this has
nothing to do with the role of sterling, but depends on how they view
the underlying prospects for the British economy. It is also rather
bizarre that Brian Sedgemore should advocate handing over the
sterling balances to the IMF as a way of “free(ing) us from the
dictates of international bankers”. (!)
This also raises the question of controlling the outflow of
private capital from the UK. There is no exchange control system
imaginable which can determine which overseas payments made by the
monopolies are strictly commercial, and which are tied to protecting
themselves from fluctuations in the exchange rate. The only way to
effectively control such payments would be for these companies to be nationalised.
This was the experience of the Labour Government of 1945–51
which imposed apparently rigid controls, and when firms had many
fewer overseas links than now. Lord Balogh, an ardent supporter of
exchange controls estimated at the time that there was illegal export
of capital of £2,000 million between 1946 and 1948.
Control of long-term investment abroad (the setting up of
factories overseas) is a more feasible proposition as identifiable
financial transactions are involved. Indeed quite stringent controls,
in terms of how the investment is financed, how quickly there will be
inflows of profits etc. have been in operation for a number of years,
though are currently being weakened under pressure from the City.
It is often suggested that more stringent controls on foreign
investment would lead to higher investment in the UK. In 1974–75
overseas investment by British firms was 37% of investment inside the
UK, almost double the ratio of three years earlier. Tribune comments:
“Clearly this trend holds serious dangers for the British
economy. It means that British manufacturing industry is being
starved of the new capital needed to buy the new machinery, expertise
and plants required to improve our international competitiveness and
economic potential.”
Now any suggestion that overseas investment involves a drain of
profits generated in the UK is completely incorrect. As the Treasury
Progress Report (September 1976) shows direct investment overseas
has actually been less than the profits earned overseas by British
firms, so that there has been a net flow into the British s economy
as a result of past investment abroad. This inflow has been as big as
£1,500 million per year because the British firms investing overseas
have raised very considerable sums of finance in the foreign
countries concerned.
Of course if the big firms were forced to repatriate all the
profits they earn by exploiting workers overseas this would increase
what they have available for investment in the UK. But it is wrong to
suggest that there would be some more or less automatic increase in
the amount they invest in new capacity. Stuart Holland points out
that British firms produce twice as much abroad in their subsidiaries
as they export, whereas for German and Japanese firms the figure is
about one half. But simply reducing the amount which British firms
can produce abroad, would not lead them to produce at home. In many
cases transport and other costs, or import policies, would make
exporting too expensive. And the capitalists will only plough back
more in capacity in the UK if they see a profitable market to supply.
Rather than additional productive capacity, they always have the
alternative of investing in government bonds or other financial
assets and this would happen if stiffer controls on capital export
were introduced. Simply preventing the capitalists from doing
something, will not automatically cause them to do what the
government wants, especially given the political advantage for them
in showing the government’s policy to be a failure. Stressing the
role of the multinationals in moving capital around tends to divert
attention from the basic issues as to why capitalist production in
Britain is falling behind. The fact that a government introducing a
real socialist plan of production would certainly have to clamp tight
controls on movement of funds to prevent capital flights, should not
delude anybody into thinking that applying the same type of measure
within the context of the capitalist system would have very
significant results, in terms of higher investment etc.
 
Muscle to the National Enterprise Board
The industries nationalised by the Labour government of 1945–51
provided the basic inputs of fuel, steel and power for the private
sector. They were mainly unprofitable industries that the capitalist
class in Britain was manifestly incapable of reorganising and
rationalising into the large production units necessary for efficient
operation. The best known example of this is the coal industry, where
as early as 1919 the Sankey Commission had recommended
nationalisation in the interests of efficiency.
The most important aspect of the plan, in Labour’s 1973
Programme, to use the National Enterprise Board to take over a
range of giant manufacturing companies was that they were to be
profitable. The original Labour Party Study Group’s proposal was
for the N.E.B. to take, within a five year period, a controlling
interest in 20–25 companies controlling about one third of the
turnover and half the employment of the top 100 manufacturing
companies. Labour’s plan for nationalisation has always been in
terms of industries or firms which were ‘failing the nation’ (the
actual phrase used in the 1951 Programme). The realisation that
profitable (or relatively profitable) manufacturing industry was
‘failing the nation’ in terms of investment, jobs etc. marked a
definite watershed and one which was distinctly threatening as far as
the capitalist class was concerned. The plan for selective
nationalisation remains a cornerstone of the Left’s policy, being
reiterated for example in Labour’s 1976 Programme in terms
of there being publicly owned firms in “each of the key sectors of
industry” covering the 32 industries identified by the N.E.D.C.
plus industries “whose main customer is nationalised”. In the
shorter term Brian Sedgemore wrote (Tribune, April 2 1976):
“The National Enterprise Board might legitimately be
expected within the next two years to extend its coverage and/or move
into the process plan, instrument systems, petrochemicals, chemicals,
ferrous foundry, machine tools, telecommunications and food process
plan, instrument systems, petrochemicals, chemicals, continued growth”.
Before examining the political implications of such a programme it
is important to look at whether it really represented a viable plan
significantly increasing government control of the economy. The
theory behind the plan for selective nationalisation of profitable
manufacturing firms is most fully spelt out in The Socialist
Challenge by Stuart Holland, an economist influential in drawing
up the plan.
The vital point in Holland’s analysis is that the group of 25 or
so nationalised manufacturing companies would not merely carry out
expanded investment programmes of their own. (Tribune has
often mentioned £1,000 million per year being invested in this way).
They would also exert a “pull effect on other big firms,” based
on “oligopoly leadership, or the situation in which one of the new
firms at the top end of an industry breaks from the pack and pioneers
a new product or technique on a major scale. While the remaining
leading firms might otherwise have hung around and delayed
introducing a similar project or process, they cannot any longer
afford to do so without risk of losing sales, profits and market
share to the pioneer firm” (page 185).
Here we have the essence of Holland’s economic case for
selective nationalisation – that the extra competition, which the
nationalised firms with the expanded investment programmes would
represent, would force the majority of large firms left in private
hands to invest more. For the competitive pressure proposed by
Holland to work, the private firms would have to have profitable
markets, which for some reason they were not taking advantage of.
This is precisely what they do not have at present. Holland in fact
wants the nationalised firms to be used to get more information on
costs which would “increase government capacity to levy effective
taxation on real profits” (page 201) and to act as price cutters
themselves in order to reduce “excessive” profit margins. This of
course would simply make the crisis of I profitability worse. The
idea that the industrial capitalists are just “hanging around”
waiting for more competition to prod them into massive investment
programmes is a grotesque misrepresentation of the true situation of
British capital over the last decade. Far from there having been
insufficient competition, British capitalists have been manifestly
unable to meet the growing competition in home and export markets
from foreign capitalists. Holland gives no reason why nationalised
competitors should spur them on more successfully. A nationalised
competitor pouring millions into new plant which is uneconomic,
because it is not used to full capacity or because it is too
expensive, would not compel the private firms to follow their lead.
If the finance, the markets and the underlying profitability were
present, then it would not take the leadership of nationalised firms
to persuade the capitalists to invest; their own self interest and
pressure from competitors overseas would be sufficient.
The NEB does have the possibility of taking over profitable
manufacturing companies. The regeneration of British Industry (White
Paper, August 1974) said:
“The NEB will be the instrument by which the Government
ensures that the nation’s resources are deployed to the benefit of
all, by extending public ownership into profitable manufacturing
industry. The Government consider that suitable criteria for the
acquisition of a company should include the following: danger of its
passing into unacceptable foreign control; and stimulation of
competition in a sector where that is weak.”
But even at that stage the potential strength of the NEB had been
virtually annihilated by the phrase “holdings in companies ...
should be acquired by agreement”. This was far removed from the
Study Group proposal for compulsory purchase. The guideline for the
NEB published in 1976, stipulated that if the NEB could not get
agreement from the directors of the company it wanted to take over
(which would never happen if the company was not going bankrupt) it
would have to make a bid for the shares in the normal way. The chance
of the NEB persuading a majority of share holders, including the
financial institutions, to agree to the nationalisation of the firm
against the advice of the directors is negligible. It is not simply a
question of the NEB having access to “a bottomless private purse”
which would mean that “prices would obviously be marked up when the
Board arrived on the scene” (Study Group Report). Rather the
directors, supported by the CBI, the City etc. would launch a
tremendous campaign calling on shareholders to refuse to sell their
shares to the government at any price in order to defend free
enterprise. Such a campaign, given the interest of the big
shareholders, would obviously be successful. No wonder the Economist
(February 28 1976) crowed “The NEB’s guideline favour the bosses”.
In the event the NEB, under tycoon Lord Ryder, has been confined
to conducting rationalisations of bankrupt or near-bankrupt firms
(British Leyland, Ferranti etc. see p. 29 above) plus a few
deals with small firms. With no real power, and a maximum of £1,000
million (which would not buy ICI!) it bears no relation to the
original conception.
Why was there such a successful campaign from big business against
the proposal of the NEB to take over 20–25 of the largest
manufacturing companies? It was never suggested that full
compensation should not be paid to shareholders. There was no
suggestion that they would compete “unfairly” with their private
competitors. Surely the power of the capitalist class in Britain was
not threatened by the plan. But the fundamental point is that the
nationalisation of any profitable companies is unacceptable to those
who own and control industry, simply because of what it represents.
The very fact that it would not revitalise the British economy, as
the capitalist class must have known very well, that it would not
give the government real leverage over the non-nationalised
companies, would immediately raise the need for a much more
thorough-going programme of nationalisation, which would give the
government adequate control over the economy.
Every socialist would support the demand for nationalisation of
profitable firms. But those who advocate the type of selective
nationalisation outlined here have never explained how they would
deal with the fundamental question of how to overcome the opposition
of the capitalist class to any measure which seriously threatens to
erode their position, while still leaving them with the main levers
of economic power.
 
Public Ownership of the Financial Institutions
The nationalisation of major banks and insurance companies,
carried overwhelmingly at Labour’s 1976 Conference, represents a
major piece of unfinished business for the Labour movement. The 1931
Party Conference unanimously passed a resolution calling for the
nationalisation of the banks and the direction of investment. Banking
was the only major sector included for nationalisation in Labour’s
1945 programme which was left in private hands, only the Bank of
England being taken over.
The most important proposal of the National Executive’s
statement in 1976 was for: “A major publicly-owned stake in the
financial system comprising the top seven insurance companies
(sufficient to account for 30% of premium income), a merchant bank
and the four major private clearing banks” (i.e. Lloyds, Barclays,
Midlands, National Westminster).
The implementation of a real socialist plan of production for the
economy is inconceivable without government control of the financial
system. To produce for need rather than profit requires the whole
financial system to be used for mobilising society’s resources
wherever they can most usefully be put to work. At the moment the
reverse is the case. It is production which is subjected to the
search by the financiers for fatter profits. A classic example of
this, as the National Executive’s statement made clear, was the
property boom of the early seventies. The hysterical chase for
super-profits by the City caused a boom in the price of office blocks
and diverted much of the resources of the construct ton industry into
quite superfluous buildings. A socialist plan, by contrast, would use
the financial system to ensure that the cash was available to finance
the undertaking by the construction industry of a huge housebuilding
programme, expanded on the basis of the needs of workers and their
families.
The weakness of the National Executive’s statement was, that it
tended to exaggerate what could be achieved simply by taking over the
banks. It stressed the low rate of investment in British industry,
and argued that the key to success in reaching the target of doubling
manufacturing investment “lies in developing a publicly owned stake
in the very areas of the financial system where critical lending and
investment decisions are made: the banks and the insurance
companies.”
But simply channelling more funds in their direction will not
cause the capitalists to invest. In their evidence to the Wilson
Committee the banks pointed out that Manufacturing industry was
borrowing less than one half of what the banks had made available to
them. The CBI said that:
“The clear conclusion of an overwhelming majority of
our members is that it has not been a shortage of external finance
[for example bank credit] that has restricted industrial investment
but rather a lack of confidence that industry will be able to earn a
sufficient return.”
In other words they did not require even more unused borrowing
facilities, but rather higher profits. The NEC’s original statement
contrasted the lack of government control of finance in the UK with
the situation in other major capitalist countries like France, Italy
and even Japan. But over the last four years fixed investment has
actually fallen or stagnated in all these countries just as in the UK
(see page 15).
Nationalising the banks would in no way give the government the
power to force industry to invest. You can take a capitalist to the
bank but you cannot force him to borrow if he cannot see a profitable
use for the cash.
It is true that the insurance companies hold large volumes of
shares, so that taking over the largest seven would give the
government big shareholdings in many of the monopolies (the
Prudential for example holds more than 1% of the shares of 35 of the
biggest 50 companies). But this is nowhere near control, and the rest
of the shareholders would certainly prevent government
‘interference’. The situation is quite different from that in
Portugal for example, where nationalisation of the banks gave the
government control over much of industry, for in Britain the banks
lend to industry rather than owning it.
The real conclusion from this is that securing the full use of
society’s resources requires nationalisation and planning not only
of the financial system, but of industry as well. The two sectors are
inextricably linked in the economy and have 10 be combined in a
socialist plan of production.
The TUC-Labour Party statement of July 1978, however, abandons
nationalisation of the financial system. It calls for the Bank of
England “to act on behalf of the Government in monetary affairs and
not as an independent body”; for the Department of Trade and
Industry to “take the lead in ensuring proper connection between
the financial institutions and the industrial strategy”, both
entirely vacuous suggestions while the financial system stays in
private hands. It does see “a need to regroup certain institutions
notably GIRO and the National Savings Bank so that a new
publicly-owned bank can compete on equal terms with the big four
clearing banks”. But as a concession to those who voted for the
NEC’s Statement this is derisory. Look at the pathetic size of such
a bank! Whilst the Clearing Banks in 1976 controlled nearly £24
billion capital, other banks £8½ billion, and Building Societies
£33 billion, the National Savings Bank could muster £2 billion and
the Giro a mere £176 million. Some competition!
Nationalising the banks, like a number of other elements of the
Alternative Strategy, is an essential element of a real socialist
programme for transforming the economy, and as such every socialist
must support and fight for its inclusion in Labour’s Programme
and for its implementation in a socialist fashion. But it is
essential not to be misled about what it could achieve within the
essentially capitalist framework which the Alternative Strategy
accepts – that is with the overwhelming majority of means of
production in industry in private hands.
 
Planning Agreements
The third string to the alternative industrial strategy is the
proposal that the government should enter into planning agreements
with the major firms. As summarised in Labour’s Programme 1973
the role of planning agreements would include:
“1. Securing up-to-date information of a systematic and
continuing basis from all companies and enterprises within the
system. This information will concern both past performances and
advance programmes – programmes which can be checked later against
results. It will cover such areas as investment, prices, product
development, marketing, exports and import requirements.
2. Using this information to help the government to
identify and achieve its planning objectives, and to plan for the
redistribution of resources which will be needed to meet those
objectives.
3. Securing the agreement of the firms and enterprises
within the system – the written Planning Agreement – that they
will help the government to meet certain clearly defined objectives
(e.g. a certain number of new jobs in a Development Area) – while
leaving the tactics needed to achieve these strategic objectives to
the companies and enterprises.
4. Providing for the regular revision of the agreements
in the light of experience and progress.
5. Providing a basis for channelling selective government
assistance directly to those firms which agree to help meet the
nations planning objectives.
6. Providing a systematic basis for making large
companies and enterprises accountable for their behaviour, and for
bringing into line those which refuse to cooperate – using, where
necessary, the extensive powers under the proposed Industry Act as
well as the activities of new and existing public enterprises and the
powers of public purchasing.
7. Publishing a detailed annual report to the nation on
the record of the companies and enterprises in the system, and on
their progress – or lack of it – in meeting the nation’s
economic objectives.”
So one aspect of the proposed agreements was the requirement on
the monopolies to reveal a great deal more information to the
government, and to the trade unions concerned. Holland’s list of
information to be required includes details of past levels and
planned trends of turnover, investment and profits for each main
product (information very seldom available in published accounts),
trade with subsidiaries abroad, amount of government assistance
received, management salaries and all fringe benefits (including
private health arrangements, mortgage benefits, stock option
schemes), details on wages-by work category and plant, advertising
expenditure, main supplying firms and purchasers.
The TUC’s Checklist for Trade Union Representatives
included the demand for an inventory of capital equipment in the firm
with age specified (Economic Review, 1976). This is just the
type of information which socialists have long demanded under the
slogan ‘Open the Books’, in order to reveal the manipulation of
the capitalists and their incapacity to properly develop production.
But the objective of those who argue for planning agreements is
not simply to expose the capitalists, but rather to enable the
government to get the firms to carry out policies (notably investment
programmes) which they would not otherwise do, i.e. which they
consider unprofitable. There is a strong hint in the TUC’s
checklist that a role for trade unionists in this type of discussion
of management’s plans is to ensure that management is really acting
in management’s best interests! How else can one interpret the
TUC’s suggestion that union representatives should press companies
to set maximum levels of investment overseas, asking “are companies
satisfied that investment would not be more worthwhile (profitable
presumably – AG) in the UK”. But the general drift of
planning agreements is undoubtedly to pressurise firms to do things
which they do not consider profitable. Holland says that the
monopolies should “be required to reach deep into the kind
of funds which they have been siphoning abroad through transfer
pricing in meeting their future investment needs in this country” (p. 234).
One important weakness of the system as proposed by Holland (and
his is the most comprehensive discussion of how the agreements might
work) is that he envisages the government department playing no role
in drawing up the programmes of the individual companies, but merely
scrutinising them to see whether they conformed With “the
government’s overall economic and social objectives” (p. 230).
This is a hopeless task unless the government department concerned
also has a detailed plan for the particular sector(s) where the firm
operates. If the system was to achieve anything it would have to be
in terms of forcing individual firms not just to conform with
‘overall objectives’ but rather with a detailed programme for the
particular sector, based on an overall plan for the economy as a whole.
But the vital question is how could the government force
the individual firms to conform to its requirements. Holland mentions
four ways. He suggests the government could use the nationalised firm
in the sector concerned to carry out the programme if a private firm
refused. How this is supposed to be a- effective threat against a
firm which does not consider the project profitable is quite unclear.
He suggests publication of the government’s requirements, but the
firm could always counter accusations that it failed to invest enough
by pointing out that it did not consider it to be profitable, that it
had a duty to its shareholders etc. Though the publicity would
obviously be valuable in exposing what the capitalists were failing
to do, it is most implausible that simply bad publicity would change
their minds. Finally Holland echoes Labour’s Programme and
suggests withholding government financial assistance (including
presumably refusing loans from the nationalised banking sector) or in
the last resort nationalising the recalcitrant company. Labour’s
1976 programme talks of power under an Industry Act to issue
directives to companies “on a wide range of individual matters”,
of using price controls (presumably making price increases contingent
on investment levels) and of putting in an official trustee to assume
“temporary control”.
But as Holland himself says “A government Bill requiring leading
private companies to expand would be likely to result in at least
widespread non-co-operation, if not a capital strike ...” (p. 186).
Any idea that a capital strike would be frustrated by the activities
of a small number of nationalised firms (how he does not say. perhaps
the capitalists would fear that the nationalised firms would seize
their markets?) is wildly unrealistic. The proponents of the
Alternative Strategy have given no other explanation for their
belief that the capitalists in the vast majority of non-nationalised
firms will forego a capital strike and be prepared to accept the
direction of the government. And they certainly must believe this. or
putting forward the idea that the government can direct the economy
via planning agreements would just be a deception. If they believe
that sufficient pressure can be brought to bear on the capitalist
class to force it to surrender its autonomy, what is the advantage of
leaving them in control of the firms at all? Why don’t they put
forward a policy for expropriating all the big monopolies which would
give a socialist government the “leverage” necessary to introduce
real planning?
So far nothing has come of the planning agreements proposal. The
Times (February 17, 1977) reported a statement from one major
company that “we would sign a planning agreement tomorrow if we
could do it Our way ... We are not reassured by the way in which the
government sees planning agreements and so we will not sign one”.
The article speculated that by the end of this year the only
companies which will have signed them would all be “seeking
abnormal nourishment by the Exchequer or some favoured gain in
government policy”. The Economist (November 27, 1976)
reported that in its desperation the government “would now be
prepared to sign quite meaningless bits of paper if only companies
would be prepared to negotiate them”. A year or so later the Under
Secretary of State for Industry, Bob Cryer, was bleating “in view
of the massive amounts of aid to industry which this government has
been giving ... it seems that industry could develop a more
co-operative attitude towards planning agreements” (quoted in
Tribune, by Jeff Rooker, January 13, 1978).
Despite this Labour’s 1976 Programme reiterates the need
for planning agreements in similar terms to previous programmes.
Nowhere in the massive document is there any analysis of why these
proposals have not yet been implemented by the Labour Government.
This is all it has to say on this key issue:
”In Labour’s Programme 1973 we argued that our
planning strategy must be underpinned by new powers and public
enterprise. The Government, we said, must be able to bargain with big
companies from a position of strength. In the White Paper, The
Regeneration of British Industry, however, the Government based
the emphasis of its strategy upon winning the co-operation and
confidence of private industry: the planning effort would be on an
entirely voluntary basis. We recognise the Government has made some
progress on this basis. But we believe the analysis and strategy set
out in the 1973 Programme remains the right one for Britain today.”
The proponents of the Alternative Strategy have never made
clear why Government was forced to “base the emphasis of its
strategy” on submitting to the C.B.I. The attempt to impose the
outlines of a socialist plan (production for need rather than profit)
on a capitalist economy, which is what the planning agreements amount
to, is bound to be hopeless while the capitalists still hold the main
levers of economic power.
 
Price Control and Incomes Policy
Brian Sedgemore says that his alternative strategy will not work
without an incomes policy. Now it is obvious that a socialist plan of
production would have to include a plan for incomes growth, for the
growth of workers’ purchasing power is a central element in such a
plan. As we saw above, the “alternative industrial strategy” is
designed to give a Labour government the kind of control – to
decide investment, production, employment, exports, imports and
prices – that a socialist plan would allow, but on the basis
of the overwhelming majority of major firms which dominate the
economy remaining in private hands. But as argued above we do not
believe this ‘as if’ socialist plan is possible, because those
who own and control the major monopolies will never consent to it. So
it would be quite wrong to call on workers to sacrifice their one
weapon to maintain and improve their living standards – their
ability to bargain with these self-same monopolists – and to
jeopardise the maintenance of the strength and independence of the
trade unions.
Brian Sedgemore says in his pamphlet, The How and Why of
Socialism:
“Are we to go on and agree with the extreme right that
planning incomes is incompatible with a free society? And if this is
the case how do we view planning generally? Surely the essential
point is that planning in whatever sphere it takes place should be
democratic – not that planning is wrong. What has been wrong with
incomes policies to date is that they have all been used in periods
of economic depression to shift resources from wages to profits ...” (p. 40).
But it’s not an abstract question of democracy; after all
incomes policies have been implemented by “democratically”
elected governments, and usually agreed with trade unions. The
fundamental point is that under capitalism incomes policies will
always have to conform to capitalist logic of maintaining profits,
and no tinkering with the system removes that fact. Sedgemore never
faces the fact, more of less admitted by John Grahl (Comment,
April 29, 1978) that the rate of profit has fallen so low in Britain
that the price controls would have to allow profits to rise, rather
than fall, if there was any chance of persuading the capitalists to
invest. The idea that in general there are fat monopolistic profits
which can be squeezed, while at the same time forcing those self same
firms to invest more by means of offering them cheap loans, just does
not come to grips with the reality of how the capitalist system
operates. How does Sedgemore propose to deal with the strike of
capital which would certainly result?
Of course holding down of prices is essential for workers, but
whilst the economy is run according to capitalist criteria price
controls inevitably degenerate into the kind of farce of the last
year when they are used to ensure huge profit increases. Real
supervision of prices, carried out by committees of trade unionists
and housewives would immediately raise the question of overall
control of the economy given the incompatibility of real price
controls and capitalist criteria.
 
Maintenance of Labour’s Social Programmes/Defence Cuts
No socialist could quarrel with these ideas. On the first Brian
Sedgemore quotes the 1976 Cambridge Economic Policy Group Report
suggesting that if the Alternative Economic Strategy were
adopted there would be the possibility of increasing public spending
if full employment could be maintained. The Cambridge Group’s
strategy has only one thing in common with Tribune’s and
that is import controls. Since Sedgemore points out that import
controls do not add up to an alternative economic strategy (let alone
a socialist one) why does he seek respectability behind the Cambridge
academics? Does he believe his strategy is a socialist
alternative or not? Also how does he feel now that in their 1977
Report the Cambridge Group say that unemployment could only be
got down to 1,200,000 by 1981 if import controls were used (p. 31).
They are admitting that simply using import controls will not secure
enough investment to secure rapid return to full employment. Given
the amount of spare capacity it is quite obvious that returning to
full employment would allow an increase in social expenditure. The
question is whether the Alternative Strategy add up to a
viable way of achieving it.
On defence cuts socialists will want to know if the ‘alternative
industrial policy’ is powerful enough to ensure alternative
employment for workers in munitions industries made redundant. It is
precisely one of the major advantages of a socialist plan based on
real control of the economy that whenever it was necessary to run
down a particular industry it would be entirely possible to convert
the plants to produce commodities which were needed, or to build new
factories to take on workers who leave that industry. But the NEB
plus planning agreements would not give that sort of control over
society’s resources, because the capitalist class would never
permit it.
 
The 35-hour week
Although not one of the original demands of the Alternative
Strategy the 35-hour week has effectively been incorporated into it.
Stuart Holland, for example, calls for a national debate, sponsored
by the NEC of the Labour Party, on the case for the 35-hour week. In
Full Employment (edited by Michael Barratt Brown and others)
he says “The 35-hour week could, and should, be stressed to relate
to the trend of technological unemployment” (p. 135). This,
whilst perfectly correct in particular industries like the Post
Office, is misleading in its suggestion that the mass unemployment of
recent years is primarily a technological question (see p. 10
above). The 35-hour week should not be advanced as a desperate last
attempt to hang on to full employment in the face of inexorable
technical trends. The justification in terms of excessively long
hours of work rather gains extra force from the absurdity of these
long hours coexisting with massive unemployment. In 1977 average
hours worked by full-time employees were 41.3 per cent. If these were
cut to 37 (by for example a cut of the ‘normal’ working week to
35, plus a reduction of average overtime from 3 to 2 hours) then at a
stroke 10% more jobs would be created, enough to absorb all the
unemployed registered and unregistered.
Whilst every socialist would wholeheartedly support such a
reduction of the working week and elimination of unemployment the
vital question posed is of wages. Any suggestion that the 35-hour
week should be ‘paid for’ by a corresponding cut in the weekly
pay packet is quite unacceptable, particularly in view of the cuts in
living standards of recent years. Yet a reduction of say 10% in the
number of hours worked weekly would lead to a corresponding increase
in costs for the capitalists If the weekly wage was maintained. On a
capitalist basis this would involve profits being slashed by at least
half. The capitalists would then press for extreme inflationary
policies of devaluing the pound and pumping up the money supply in
order to allow them to recoup their profits by raising prices. This
is exactly what happened in France when under the Popular Front
Government of 1936 the French workers won wage increases of 30% and a
cut in hours from 48 to 40. Whilst such inflationary policy at the
present time would be fraught with dangers for the capitalist in
terms of the bitter response it would provoke, and the possibility of
hyperinflation developing, they would have no alternative.
Much of the discussion of the 35-hour week is evasive on this
issue. John Hughes, in his detailed discussion of many aspects of the
35-hour week (in Full Employment), merely notes that part of
the extra costs for the capitalists “is likely to be offset ... by
the greater willingness of organised labour – in return for the
shorter working week – to settle for more moderate advances in
weekly pay” (p. 114). But in the context of continuing
inflation “more moderate advances in weekly pay”, amounts to
exactly the same thing as a wage cut, however much certain trade
union leaders may try to disguise it.
John Hughes says that “the critics of the 35-hour week raise the
danger of damage to our comparative cost position, the danger of
weakening competitiveness.” His answer to this is for the TUC to
press other trade union centres abroad to make the same advance,
which, he says, would mean that “the transition to the 35-hour week
would not be delayed by employer and government resistance based on
fears of adverse effects on the competitive comparative cost position
of anyone country” (p. 122). But it is completely misleading
to suggest that the prime objection of the capitalists to the
reduction in the working week comes from the fact that it would
weaken their relative position. This is certainly an argument that
each individual capitalist class will use to demonstrate the
impossibility of such a demand. But their real objection, which is
that their profits would be reduced because they would have less time
to force their workers to produce surplus value for them, would
remain just as strong if the reduction in the working week was
implemented universally.
The CBI has already begun the attack on the 35-hour week by
arguing that according to its calculations “a reduction in the
standard working week from 40 to 38 would cut employment across the
country by 100,000” (Financial Times, July 22, 1978). The
answer to this and the wave of propaganda which is developing is not
to delay the campaign until the cut in the working week is agreed
internationally. Rather the argument must be that if the capitalist
system cannot afford a rational system of sharing work and
determining the length of the working week then so much more reason
for replacing the profit system by a socialist plan of production. In
the meantime any firm declaring redundancies on the grounds that it
cannot afford the 35-hour week must be nationalised and the jobs
preserved under the control of the workers’ organisations.
 
Industrial Democracy
The most important proposal under the heading of Industrial
Democracy in Labour’s Programme for Britain 1976 is that
companies employing over 2,000 workers must establish a Main Policy
Board of which half the places “would be available for workers’
representatives, elected through the recognised trade union
machinery.” This idea is also the main plank of the majority
recommendation of the Bullock Committee, though in the watered down
form of equal numbers (x) of workers’ and shareholders’
representatives electing an additional number (y) of other members of
the Board. Fundamental to such a concept is the idea that the
interests of capital and labour can be reconciled, that acceptable
compromises can be reached.
The section in Labour’s Programme points out that:
“If a company decides on a five-year plan which involves running down its
British operations, the first workers know about the plan is usually
when the redundancies are announced. All that can be done, through
collective bargaining, is to salvage a compensation agreement.”
The implication is that with workers having 50% of the votes on the
Board, which would decide such things as investment programmes, then
an acceptable compromise on a question of closures for example, could
be reached. Lying behind this is the further assumption that with the
benefits of advanced warning, and the powers implicit in the NEB and
Planning Agreement, that “justified” closures could be made
acceptable by the provision of alternative jobs, Stuart Holland
writes in his book.
“By the same token, it is crucial that workers in
those enterprises faced with rationalization should secure advance
information on closures if they are to negotiate effectively through
their union structures, either for the provision of new jobs in
acceptable industries, or for the maintenance of the previous
employment where they consider that the management’s reasons for
closure are inadequate or based on short-term profit maximization
against the longer-term interests of both the workers concerned and
the economy at large.
In practice, the longer-term view and wider framework of
Planning Agreements bargained on the tripartite basis can also
benefit management itself. If the closure is considered to be
justified, the government should seek advance information from the
unions on the proportion of the existing labour force which would
freely accept severance and redundancy pay. For the remainder of the
labour force, for whom unemployment would be involuntary the
government should seek to assure the provision of alternative jobs at
comparable levels of pay. The government would be able to make major
progress in ensuring the abolition of large-scale redundancies in the
economy, provided that new public enterprise is established on a
sufficient scale both to provide new jobs directly, and indirectly to
lever leading firms in the private sector to cooperate with the
specific location of new plant.” (pp. 274/5)
The assumption that capitalism can be planned in the interests of
society, that reforms in terms of improved living standards etc. can
be guaranteed, not by the free market itself, but by the free market
tamed by the N.E.B. and Planning Agreements, would provide an
objective basis for the class collaboration implicit these schemes.
The objection to the schemes follows from the belief that such
extensive clipping of the wings of free enterprise is impossible, as
we have argued before. The capitalists would accept some trade union
members on the Board as a way of trying to give them a sense of
power, so that they will more readily take a share of responsibility
and blame. This is especially clear in the minority report of the
businessmen which recommends simply a Supervisory Board with workers
represented. But the difficulty of achieving class collaboration in a
time of crisis means that such plans would develop into demands for
real workers’ management. This makes the capitalist class violently
opposed to even the modest Bullock recommendations – one of their
representatives on the Committee describing the majority report as
leading to “bloody chaos”. But nevertheless such moves should be
opposed since they do give the Illusion that class collaboration, be
it on the basis of much greater planning, is in fact in the interests
of workers. They arise from the unwillingness of the advocates of the
alternative strategy to put forward a demand for real workers’
control, that is not collaboration with the management, but full
supervision of every action the management takes. Brian Sedgemore
says that the most important aspect of workers being on company
boards is that “they would be able to inject arguments about their
interests into the boardroom – an area where such arguments are
inadequately represented at the moment.” Again this suggests that
class collaboration is feasible, once the workers’ arguments are
“adequately represented” no reasonable capitalist could refute them.
 
Wealth Tax
Labour’s Programme for Britain (1972) pointed to the
“gross maldistribution of wealth in Britain today” and said “we
shall therefore introduce a wealth tax, consisting of an annual levy
on the large concentration of private wealth.” As the government’s
Green Paper on the tax explained it (in August 1974) “the
fundamental purpose of the wealth tax is to make the distribution of
the tax burden accord more closely with taxable capacity and thereby
contribute to the creation of a more equitable society in which
social divisions characterised by differences of wealth are reduced
and in which social and economic power created by the possession of
wealth is less concentrated than at present”.
Figures provided by the Royal Commission on the Distribution of
Income and Wealth give some indication of present degrees of
inequality. In 1972 the top 1% of income receivers got 6% of total
pre-tax income and the top 5% got 17%. Nor does taxation at present
do much to reduce the share of the best off; as the report says
(para. 150) “the effect of all taxes on the distribution is
small, with the progressive effect of direct taxes (income tax,
insurance contribution) ... largely offset by the regressive nature
of indirect taxes (on commodities).” Since so many people have
virtually no wealth at all the degree of inequality in this respect
is even greater than for incomes. The Royal Commission calculated
that in 1974 the top 1% and 5% of the population held roughly one
quarter and one half respectively of total personal wealth (Table 49).
Of course the apologists of capitalism point to the fact that
there has been some reduction in the degree of inequality (for
example the richest 5% probably held around two thirds of total
wealth in 1960). But this has been largely due to the spread of
ownership of consumer durables, like cars and houses, as workers
secured some improvement in their living standards (by 1973) these
items accounted for more than one half of personal wealth). The rise
in house prices, and fall in share prices, have reduced the value of
ordinary shares. which represent control over the key sections of
British capital, to not much more than 5% of total personal wealth –
a sure indicator of the declining fortunes of industrial capital. But
of course shares are decisive for controlling the whole economic
system, and they are as unequally distributed as ever – the top
0.6% of wealth owners held 54% of privately held ordinary shares in
1973 and the proportion of land they hold is greater still.
As the Royal Commission’s Second Report shows the
proportion of shares held by individuals has fallen from nearly 70%
in 1963 to about 50% in 1973, with more and more shares being bought
up by pension funds and insurance companies. But it would be quite
wrong to see the benefit from these as evenly spread; in 1973 less
than one quarter of those with incomes between £1,000 and
£2,000 p.a. contributed to occupational pension schemes,
whereas 60% of those with incomes above £3,000 p.a. did. In any
case the fact that the pension funds and insurance companies control
these huge chunks of shares in industrial firms in no way disperses
control of the economy in a “democratic” fashion, but if anything
concentrates it even further among the handful of directors of the(
huge industrial and financial companies.
The Green Paper of 1974 proposed a wealth tax with rates
beginning at 1% on wealth in excess off £100,000 rising to either
2½% or 5%, according to two alternatives, on wealth in excess of £5
million. It discussed in detail what assets might be included and how
they should be valued; how trusts by which the rich have avoided
taxation should be dealt with (the Inland Revenue now reckons these
to stand at £6,000 million, excluding another £2,500 million in
trust for wives); how to deal with problems of small businesses etc.
The question was then referred to a Select Committee of the Commons
to “hear the views of those directly affected and of anybody else” ...
The views of those directly affected came in thick and fast,
taking up well over one thousand pages. The CBI describes the
proposals as “confiscatory” because “the combined burden of
income and wealth tax could, after allowing a reasonable margin (!)
for living expenses, exceed the net income of the tax payer in a
particular year, forcing a sale of assets”; their objection to this
method of redistributing wealth is that it would redistribute wealth.
The CBI proposed that income plus wealth tax should not take more
than 70% of income (considerably less than the theoretical weight of
income tax on the very rich, though they contrive to avoid paying
anything like this by taking their income in the form of capital
gains). They tried to frighten the Committee with a horror story of
how the owner of a business worth £½ million could find himself
after 35 years owing more in deferred wealth tax than his business
was worth (the Inland Revenue pointed out that with less ludicrous
assumptions than the CBI’s he would have £900,000 left after
paying the tax!).
The Stock Exchange thought that “abiding damage could be
inflicted on the delicate balance of the mixed economy. The
Government seeks to increase investment in industry, but it is
effectively prohibiting the flow of capital through the Stock Market
by the existing and proposed taxation policies.”
In the event the Government yet again bowed to the pressure of big
business, and the tax was shelved, though it remains in Labour’s
1976 programme and seems likely to be revived. But in any case it
would be wrong to overestimate the significance of the tax as
proposed. The Treasury in fact summarised the effects in its own
evidence to the Committee:
“It is unlikely that the reduction in consumption
associated with the tax will be large ... it is not envisaged
therefore, that the tax will provide scope for any significant
increase in personal consumption (financed by reduced taxation) or
for the financing of additional public expenditure (without the need
to increase taxation) ... the main effect will be to increase total
tax revenue in relation to government expenditure. this means that
over a long period of time the National Debt will fall (or its rate
of growth be lessened) as a result of the imposition of the tax.”
What this amounts to is that the tax would not be heavy enough to
reduce the consumption of the rich, nor to force them to hand over
part of their shares. It would simply reduce the increase in the
national debt. Certainly a slower rate of increase of interest
payments on the national debt would be an advantage and all
socialists would support any measure which reduces the wealth of the
rich. But the reduced holdings by the rich of government securities
would in no way reduce their domination of the economic system
through their ownership of shares; the Labour Party has not been
contemplating a wealth tax sufficiently sweeping to force the
capitalist class to hand over its shares to the government, and if it
did their response to the modest Green Paper proposals would be as
nothing to what would follow. In any case if the objective is, as it
should be, to remove the power from the owners of industry there is
nothing to be said for a really punitive wealth tax, which would take
several years to have this effect, as against nationalisation with
compensation according to need. This would go to the heart of the
matter without trying to make confiscation respectable by doing it
via the tax system.
* * * * *
Conclusions
Though we concentrated on the Tribunite version of the Alternative
Strategy is virtually indistinguishable from other versions –
with the significant exception that many who support virtually all of
the Tribune demands would reject any control of wages. This
goes for example for the programme advocated by the Communist Party
for a future Left Labour Government (the British Road to
Socialism, Draft 1977, lines 1179–1245). It contains all the
Tribune demands, while on wages says “a government carrying
out such a progressive programme could be assured that the unions
would take this into consideration in forming their wage demands.”
On the central question of capitalist resistance the draft has stern
words, but muddled thinking:
“The fierce resistance to this policy which would come
from the monopolists and bankers at home and abroad would have to be
met by mobilising wide popular support for it on the basis of full
democratic discussion at every level in society. The right of the
democratically elected government to carry out its programme would be
firmly maintained. Concentrating the measures of nationalisation on
the main monopoly groups would create possibilities for dividing the
capitalist class and preventing united capitalist counteraction.”
A programme of nationalising just the “key firms among the top
firms which dominate the economy” (how many, 25?) would still leave
the “great majority” of top firms in private hands, subject to
“drastic controls”. But the idea that this creates a difference
of interest between the capitalists singled out for immediate
nationalisation, and the rest of the top firms which would simply be
subject to ‘drastic control’, is ludicrous. The rest would know
that the drastic controls must be the prelude to their
nationalisation, and they would be as vigorously opposed to such a
programme of selective nationalisation as the firms immediately
threatened. Only a programme of nationalisation of all the
major monopolies would remove from the capitalist class the crucial
levers of economic sabotage which are at present concentrated in
their hands. Attempts to play off one section of the capitalist class
against another are doomed to failure, since their interests must be
fundamentally the same when it is a question of the implementation of
a socialist programme.
If one theme runs through the various points of the Alternative
Strategy it is that they attempt to implant in a partial fashion
aspects of a fully-blooded socialist plan on what would remain
fundamentally a capitalist organism. Thus we have:



Alternative Strategy


 


Socialist Plan




Import Controls


State monopoly of foreign trade




Sterling/Capital Controls


State monopoly of foreign exchange




Nationalisation of banks


State monopoly of credit




Selective Nationalisation/
Planning Agreements


Nationalisation of the Monopolies,
Socialist Plan of production




Industrial democracy


Workers’ Control and Management




Wealth Tax


Expropriation of the Capitalists/
Compensation according to need




Expand the Economy/
Maintain Social Programmes/
Cut Defence/35-hour week


Production for need rather than profit




Incomes Policy/Price Controls


Planned growth of incomes



As already argued the character of these measures of the
Alternative Strategy varies from those which, in general terms
at least, represent a limitation on the power of private capital
(e.g. nationalisation of the banks) to those which many agree can
only be in the interests of big business if instituted while the
economy remains on a capitalist basis (e.g. incomes policy).
Socialists should demand that those elements of the Alternative
Strategy which are in Labour’s Programmes and which do
impinge on capitalists’ freedom should be implemented. But the
fundamental point is that even in combination they do not form a
coherent strategy for planning the economy. And there is a danger
that if put forward in a piecemeal way these demands will form an
easy target for the capitalist media. This was shown clearly by the
opposition stirred up amongst bank workers to Labour’s ideas of
nationalising the banks. But the solution is not to water down the
policy – to “public control” over the banks as Brian Sedgemore
suggests. But rather to mould them into a coherent and convincing
programme, thoroughly argued for and explained.
By attempting to go part of the way towards a socialist programme,
this strategy is not ‘transitional’ to such a programme, but is
transitional to a tremendous disaster. An attempt simply to implement
such a programme would be met by the capitalist using the enormous
economic power left in their hands to sabotage the government’s
plans. The danger is not just that the ideas of socialism would be
discredited in this way, but that the economic chaos which would
result would pave the way for a reactionary takeover on the basis of
crushing the organisations of the working class, as the Chilean
experience makes clear. From this point of view a thorough critical
analysis of the alternative strategy, despite its support in the
labour movement, does not constitute sectarianism. Rather it is a
vitally serious question for all socialists.
The Alternative Strategy is aimed at meeting the problems of
redundancies, cuts in living standards, cuts in public spending by
means of government policy within the context of a capitalist
economy. We do not accept that this is a coherent strategy, but this
does not mean that these issues should be ignored until the
conditions for implementing a socialist plan have been achieved. On
the contrary the struggle for these immediate questions is essential
for the interests of the working class. Rather than relying on the
Alternative Strategy these interests can only be safeguarded by
workers’ own struggles around the slogans of work or full pay; a
minimum wage of £70; a 35-hour week; a sliding scale of wages, with
the price index to be worked out by trade unionists; a crash
programme of public works; open the books. The struggle for these
demands by the organisations of the labour movement immediately
raises the question of whether workers’ basic requirements can be
guaranteed under capitalism, and the corresponding need to generalise
these struggles around a programme to transform society. The
transformation of society will never be achieved by the wizardry of
economic tinkerers. It is a political act of the working class; the
need for which will become apparent to broader and broader sections
as their struggles over living standards etc. shows the inability of
capitalism to provide jobs and a decent wage for all.
Analysing the Alternative Strategy in some detail has already
covered, by means of the criticisms made, many of the central ideas
of what we consider a real socialist programme. The next section
takes up some basic issues about what a socialist plan could achieve
and how it would operate.


III. A Socialist Plan of Producton
Militant campaigns for a socialist programme summarised in
the slogan “Nationalise the 200 monopolies and the banks under
workers’ control and management, and with compensation according to
proven need”. This is not intended as a blueprint for the
establishment of socialism, rather to indicate the indispensable
basis for replacing production for profit, by production according to
need, for replacing the blind play for market forces with conscious
social control.
 
Nationalisation of the 200 monopolies plus finance
The extent to which a small number of firms dominate the economy
can be demonstrated by many different statistics. The 100 largest
manufacturing firms are estimated to control nearly one half of
manufacturing production, and the largest 200 about 60%. Drawing the
net rather wider to include commercial firms (retailers, wholesalers
etc.) and property companies, the top 200 companies hold 80% of the
assets held by the top 1,000. Of course there are hundreds of smaller
companies (turnover less than £13½ million in 1975) which are not
included In the top 1,000, so the 80% figure is an overestimate of
the share of total assets owned by these companies. Yet the 80%
figure is more indicative of the power of the giant companies, and
the extent of control that nationalisation of them would give. In
fact it manifestly understates the degree of control even for
industries where smaller firm predominate. For many of the smaller
firms are basically component suppliers to, or retailers for, the
giant firms. So the top 200 companies are monopolies, not in the
sense that each individually dominates the supply of a particular
product (though many do of course), but in the sense that as a group
they dominate the economy as a whole and practically every sector of
it. There is nothing magical about the figure of 200; it serves to
indicate that just as the giant arms dominate the economy under
capitalism, so they form the basis for carrying out a socialist plan.
For example the huge car firms effectively determine the operations
of the smaller engineering firms supplying components, and the car
distributors. The decisions of the great chain stores control
numerous small producers of consumer goods (Marks and Spencers
already has the reputation for exercising this control in a
particularly active fashion in the case of many textile suppliers).
The giant firms dominate the supply of virtually all the major inputs
of fuel: metals, chemicals etc. So planning the operations of the
monopolies would force the smaller firms to conform to the
requirements of such a plan. There can be hardly one commodity which
in whole or part does not pass through the hands of the monopolies.
Even fish and chips are cooked with corn oil made by Unilevers!
Finally there is control of finance: at the end of 1974 there were
25 financial institutions (excluding insurance companies) each with
capital in excess of £500 million, and in total they controlled £72
billion or more than 87½% of the assets of the top 100 financial
institutions. The biggest 10 insurance companies also comprise around
two thirds of the insurance industry. Nationalisation of the
financial giants is necessary to gain control over the credit system
which as argued earlier is essential to secure the implementation of
plans to expand production and investment.
Obviously, no socialist government would simply nationalise the
largest 200 in mechanical fashion; the London Brick Company which
lies just outside the 200 is obviously of more central importance to
a socialist plan than is the Nestlé company or Consolidated Gold
Fields (which operates mainly in South Africa). The list of priority
companies to be incorporated into a socialist plan would have to be
drawn up on the basis of detailed information about the different
sectors. This 10 turn could only be done when full access to the
books. of the different companies was a achieved by the action of the
workers. The demand for the nationalisation of the 200 monopolies
plus finance indicates the indispensable basis for planning the
economy. To attempt this on the basis of nationalising 20–25
companies would be like trying to wag the dog with its tail.
But how would a plan of production actually operate. Is it
possible to plan an organism as complex as the British economy?
As Marx pointed out in Capital, the same people who extol
the organisational excellence of capitalist factories and businesses
and the sophistication of the planning techniques available to the
individual capitalist enterprise, also deny the possibility that the
same techniques can be applied to the co-ordination of production
between the different giant enterprises which dominate the economy.
If General Motors is capable of planning of its worldwide operations
(according to its own interests of course) why could not a workers’
government in Britain apply the same systems to planning the British
economy? General Motors sets production targets for its various
different models produced in the various different countries and
works out the implications for all its factories making the different
mixes of components etc.
In broad terms, exactly the same approach applies to the
implementing of a socialist plan of production. The starting point
must be the broadest political decisions as to how national
production should be divided up between consumption, investment and
provision of social services. The implications for individual sectors
of industry can be worked out using techniques of input-output
analysis which show how the different industries feed into one
another. From this follows output targets for the giant enterprises
which dominate each of these sectors (this is exactly what did not
follow when a similar approach was tried out under the conditions of
capitalist competition with George Brown’s 1965 National Plan.
Then, after an overall production target for the motor industry was
set it was found that each of the giant producers was planning on the
basis of increasing its own share of the market – a manifest
impossibility of course and a clear example of the futility of trying
to impose a plan on the anarchy of capitalist production). Production
requirements for the giant firms would imply orders for all the
smaller component suppliers. These production targets also imply
labour requirements, volume of imported raw materials required etc.
Investment targets would be set for the different industries to
ensure a balanced growth of production; from these targets would
follow production levels for the industries producing the relevant
items of plant and equipment. While it would be wrong to
underestimate the problems involved in working out the detailed
implications of the plan, it is essentially a technical problem. The
development of capitalist production itself, in terms of computers,
information systems, has rendered planning possible to a level of
sophistication and complexity that could hardly have been dreamed of
40 years ago. In fact the capitalist system has in a sense taken the
process of planning a good way itself by the tremendous
centralisation of production 10 a relatively small number of
enterprises. Essentially it remains to crown the achievements in
technical terms, of the giant capitalist enterprise with a rationally
and democratically worked out plan of society’s resources, rather
than allowing so much of its productive potential to be wasted by its
subjection to the anarchy of the market.
 
Workers’ Control and Management
Workers’ management of industry refers to the fact that a
socialist plan for the economy as a whole, can only be formulated by
a workers’ government, that is a government subject to workers’
democracy with all representatives subject to the right of recall by,
and paid no more than, those whom they represent.
What is clear from the history of attempts to plan 10 a socialist
fashion are the twin dangers of an over-centralised bureaucracy on
the one hand or a lack of central direction essential to planning, on
the other. Obviously workers in a particular industry, workers in
other industries (as consumers of the industry’s products at home
or at work) and representatives of the government (who have the plan
for the economy as a whole to implement) all have a role in the
democratic management of a particular industry. In individual plants
workers’ control means control over the technical specialists, to
ensure the implementation of the plan for the plant, and control over
the immediate issues of hiring and firing, safety etc. The forms of
control would obviously vary from industry to industry depending on
the historical traditions of the workers in those industries and how
these practices, such as control over hiring and firing evolves as
the struggle to dislodge the capitalists develops.
This control would naturally extend to firms not immediately
nationalised and would ensure that these firms too fitted into the
requirements of the plan through fulfilling their obligations to the
State sector.
 
Compensation Only According to Proven Need
The capitalists accuse the Marxists in the labour movement of
wanting to expropriate everything in sight, strewing the country with
destitute widows, orphans and old people. Our programme is certainly
to remove the vast wealth of the tiny proportion of the population
who use it to control society. But the working class would pay
compensation to the dispossessed owners on the basis of proven need.
They would be as free to earn their living by working, or to draw
social security if that was impossible, as anyone else. But small
savings, pension rights etc. would be guaranteed by the state to cut
through the crude propaganda of the press that the socialists would
implement the immediate abolition of all private property. Workers’
control, in the factories concerned and in the financial institutions
would be essential to prevent evasion by the big capitalists, a
flight of capital etc.
 
What a Socialist Plan of Production could achieve
The proof of the viability of planning is demonstrated by the
experience of Russia, where production grew six and a half times
between 1913 and 1965. And this tremendous development of production
in Russia has been despite the monstrous mismanagement and waste
imposed by the totalitarian rule of the bureaucracy which ever since
the mid-1920’s has been the source of interminable inefficiencies.
The argument that planning inevitably leads to such a bureaucratic
degeneration is just assertion, based on a crude extrapolation of the
history of the USSR with no attempt to understand the historical
circumstances. Ultimately too it is based on a contempt for the
capacity of workers to maintain democratic control of their society.
Because it is impossible to foresee all the circumstances it is
impossible to draw up a blueprint as to the precise methods of
working out and implementing a socialist plan. A proper analysis of
socialist planning, concentrating on the wealth of experience
accumulated over the last 60 years is beyond the scope of this
pamphlet. But a few general indications of the advantages of
socialist planning and answers to some common objections may be helpful.
The wastes of capitalism are so pervasive that the following is a
sample list:

Cost of capitalist competition (duplication of product
ranges between different firms where specialisation would be more
economical, duplication of research facilities, unnecessary model
changes and differentiation of products, advertising etc.)
 
Costs of the capitalist financial system (the stock
exchange, a good proportion of the banking system – not all of
course; the banking system would become an essential part of the
implementation of a socialist plan and workers would require the
banking services to be available, but all the speculative activity
and a tremendous amount of the duplication of facilities, the
existence of numerous banks and building societies in every High
Street, could be eliminated).
 
Costs dependent on the antagonistic relations between
capital and labour. Any factory or office obviously requires people
whose job it is to organise and supervise work, but under capitalism
there is a further function (often performed by the same
individuals) of maintaining discipline. Under workers’ control
this function, as a specialised one would disappear, (as would the
whole industrial relations department). It should not be forgotten
of course that, modes of decision making within the factory would
take time; one of the effects of the drastic shortening of the
working week would be that workers would have the possibility of
full involvement in the running of their firms. Similarly many of
the repressive functions of the state (army, police, law) would
cease, at least in, part, to be specialised functions, and costs
could be drastically reduced.

It is not possible to calculate what resources would be released
by the elimination of these costs of capitalism. While some of the
benefits would come rapidly others would inevitably take a longer
time.
Take the question of duplication of financial services. It would
be foolish to immediately implement a huge rationalisation of the
banking system as soon as the big banks were nationalised, involving
closing thousands of branches. Widespread unemployment of bank staff
would result, and the prospect of this would obviously rally this
section of the working class against the prospect of a socialist
transformation of society. Rather it would be necessary to work out
in advance alternative employment for these people (many for example
might be required in the local offices of the planning apparatus
where their skills and training could be put to good use). The
superiority of socialist planning lies precisely in the potential for
doing this.
The difficulty of quantifying the extent and timing of the savings
involved from the elimination of these wastes should not prevent
socialists from stressing their importance. A similar problem of
quantification arises in respect of the potential increases in
productivity resulting from unleashing the creative ability of the
workforce. The stories about workers suggesting improvements to the
productive process and ending up with a brass handshake of a few
pounds convey a basic truth about capitalist production. Bur even
under what are effectively capitalist relations a recent study of
technical change in the coal mining industry found that about one
third of innovations patented by the NCB on coal cutting technology
came from ideas of those working outside the research departments,
and that more than one half of the ideas in 1973/74 came from
non-professional groups of workers (i.e. not engineers).
Another cost of capitalism which would be eliminated is the
production of luxury goods for the consumption of the capitalist class.
How much could be saved for society by cutting out luxury
consumption? It is extraordinarily difficult to calculate this as the
statistics for the consumption of the rich just are not available
(the figures for their incomes are notoriously deficient, especially
in respect of capital gains which is the main way of becoming
wealthy; there is no adequate information on what they save rather
than consume and there is no overall information about the fringe
benefits supplied by their firms). But looking at the figures for
total consumption, in relation to what workers, pensioners etc. have
available to spend suggests that luxury consumption must be of the
order of 5% of national production.
This may seem quite a small figure though it is larger than some
other estimates. But one family consuming goods worth £1 million a
year ‘only’ consumes 5% as much as do 10,000 families consuming
£2,000 a year; there just are not that many extremely rich people –
for example in 1973 less than 1 in 1,000 families had post-tax
incomes estimated greater than £10,000 a year. The basic point is
that the major gains from socialism will be through full utilisation
and development or the productive forces, which capitalism prevent,
rather than through redistributing what capitalism does produce.
The final and most glaring cost of capitalism is unemployment. As
explained at the beginning of this pamphlet the full utilisation of
society’s resources would allow a massive increase in production
even before the longer-term advantages of a socially rational
deployment of resources were realised.
But is there some elementary fallacy in this argument as to the
possible increase in production? Where will the money come from? How
could a socialist plan be financed? These objections are based on a
very common misunderstanding about the role of money. The fundamental
point is that commodities are produced by human labour working with
machines etc. There is no problem about a socialist government having
sufficient money to pay the increased wage bills of the nationalised
firms, or for the goods and services consumed directly in the state
sector. All it has to do is to print sufficient cash and distribute
it where necessary through the banking system. There is no question
of this being inflationary as there will be a corresponding increase
in production. The extra cash will perform a purely subsidiary role
in allowing the different commodities to be sold. In fact a planned
expansion is definitely anti-inflationary in that inflation
fundamentally reflects shortages of one sort or another. It would be
necessary that the extra wages paid out should not exceed the extra
production of wage goods planned. But apart from this there is no
question of the “country” being “unable to afford” the extra
production potentially available. The whole notion is a piece of
capitalist mystification designed to conceal the fact that the reason
for the waste of resources under capitalism is that the capitalists
will not “afford” to produce more, in the sense that it is not
profitable for them to do so. Obviously many goods might be
distributed directly rather than by being purchased out of wages. The
point is, though, that even money and wages perform a quite different
role in the context of planning – that is tools for the social
allocation of resources rather than reflections of the anarchy of the market.
But what of the balance of payments? Would there be a problem
about selling sufficient exports to pay for necessary imports. The
fundamental point is that control over the giant firms means a
virtually automatic monopoly over foreign trade, extended to the rest
of industry through state control of the banking sector. Import
limitation to conserve foreign exchange would serve as one instrument
of a socialist plan, rather than bolstering up backward capitalist enterprises.
It may be objected that this would provoke just the retaliation
which is claimed to be the basic failing of import controls under
capitalism. But the problem of retaliation, and indeed sabotage, from
other capitalist countries does not revolve around the extent of
limitation of imports or indeed the amount of foreign assets
expropriated (26 of the top 200 companies are foreign owned –
depending on the particular situation it might be expedient to leave
some of them unnationalised but the nationalisation of others would
probably be indispensable – for example it would be impossible to
implement an effective plan of production for the motor industry
while three of the big four companies remain in capitalist hands).
Bob Rowthorn says “widespread confiscations, especially of
European-owned property, might lead to a crippling trade boycott”
(Marxism Today, August 1974) and he advocates the use of
British capital’s vast overseas assets to pay off the foreign
capitalists who own factories in the UK.
But this fundamentally misses the point that the opposition of
world capitalism to a socialist transformation of Britain would not
be based on what it stood to lose directly in the form of assets
expropriated or export markets curtailed. Rather it would derive from
the fear of capitalists abroad that the success of socialism in
Britain would act as a beacon to the working class in their own
countries. Bearing in mind the crisis in their own countries they
would fear expropriation not just of their assets in Britain but of
their assets in their home base. This makes any attempt to buy off
the capitalists abroad an ultimately futile one, for just the same
reasons as attempts to use salami tactics on the capitalists class at
home – slicing off bit by bit, meanwhile appealing for support to
the rest of the sausage – must be futile. The only protection
against the attempts of world capitalism to sabotage a socialist
Britain would lie in solidarity action from the labour movement in
the rest of the world. Selling off British owned factories to foreign
capitalists would hardly be the type of action designed to secure
such solidarity. The only way to ensure solidarity is by a clear call
for the rest of the working class on a world scale to support the
expropriation of British capital and to follow suit with the
expropriation of their own bourgeoisie.
Many people who support the alternative strategy of Tribune
say that Militant’s programme is unrealistic in the sense
that the majority of people in the labour movement do not accept the
need for such a far-reaching transformation of society. This is not
surprising given the enormous weight of propaganda against socialism
which comes not just from the capitalist press, but from the leaders
of the labour movement as well. But if the organisations of the
labour movement can be won to the necessity of a thoroughgoing
socialist programme this would provide the basis for a tremendous
campaign to explain how the everyday problems of unemployment and
living standards are caused by capitalism and can only be solved
through socialism. It is not in the least unrealistic to believe in
the success of such a campaign once the issues are clearly explained.
To argue like the CP against an “extensive nationalisation
programme” on the grounds that “it would seem to many people like
out and out socialism” (Michael Bleaney, Comment, April 15,
1978) betrays a crippling pessimism about the capacity of the labour
movement to swing the rest of society behind it.
What would be thoroughly unrealistic would be to suggest that the
capitalist class could be dislodged from their dominating economic
position simply by winning the argument and securing a parliamentary
majority for a socialist programme. It is only necessary to look at
the lessons of history, most recently Chile, to be convinced that no
ruling class will ever surrender its power without a struggle. But
such a mobilisation must be around a coherent and effective
programme, not based, as we have argued in the case for the
Alternative Strategy, on a failure to appreciate the necessity
for definitively depriving the capitalist class of its economic power.
 




It was only five or six years ago that the Marxists were denounced by the capitalist economists as distorting the facts, for pointing out the long-run decline in the profitability of British capitalism. But now what Marx described as their “horror of the falling rate of profit” (Capital, Vol. 3) takes the form of an almost obsessive probing of the facts. Recent articles in the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin (December 1978) and in the government magazine Trade and Industry (22 September 1978) provide striking confirmation of the catastrophic decline in profitability. The following table, showing the development of the rate of profit (see below) since 1960, summarises information from both these articles:



RATE OF PROFIT % (before tax)




 


’60–64


’65–69


’70–72


’73


’74


’75


’76


’77




All industrial and
commercial companies


12.5


10.6


8.7


7.2


4.0


3.4


3.6


4.0




(After tax)


  7.9


  5.9


  5.4


  5.7


  3.3


  2.1


  2.1


2.2




Manufacturing industry


10.9


  9.0


  6.8


  5.7


  1.6


  1.4


  1.9


3.2




Food, drink, tobacco


12.9


10.8


  9.8


  8.1


  4.0


  4.4


  6.5


–




Chemicals


11.6


10.0


  6.0


  5.4


  4.7


  4.0


  5.8


–




Metal manufacture


  8.8


  6.7


  5.8


  2.5


−0.7


  0.9


−3.0


–




Engineering, ships, vehicles


11.5


  8.8


  6.9


  7.1


  1.3


  0.6


  4.0


–




Textiles, clothing


11.3


10.4


  6.4


  6.4


  7.2


  0.3


−1.3


–




Wholesale distribution


–


11.4


11.7


  9.3


  7.3


  6.6


  4.7


–




Retail distribution


–


16.8


17.6


18.4


11.4


11.2


10.1


–




Sources: BEQB, Table C; Trade & Industry, Tables 1, 2, 3.



The rate of profit shows the percentage return received by the capitalist for every pound invested. Suppose the capitalist invests £700,000 in a factory. Workers in the factory produce £500,000 of commodities each year. The capitalists’ costs are £100,000 for materials, fuels, etc.; £200,000 for wages; leaving him a ‘gross’ profit of £200,000 a year. But in addition he sets aside £100,000 in depreciation so that when new factory and machinery can no longer be profitably used – 7 years in the example – he will be able to purchase new ones. This leaves him with a net profit of £100,000 for materials and £200,000 for wages. So that his net profit expressed as a percentage of capital employed is 10%. This is his rate of profit. It shows for example the amount he has expanded his capital during the year. It is often called the rate of return on capital employed or the return on investment. In Marx’s terms, constant capital used up (c) is £200,000 (£100,000 depreciation plus £100,000 materials), variable capital (v) is £200,000 (the wage bill) and surplus value is £100,000. The rate of profit is surplus values divided by constant capital advanced (the whole £700,000 for the factory plus the £100,000 for materials) and variable capital advanced (£200,000) which again gives the same rate of profit at 10%.
 
Competitive power eroded
What comes out very clearly from the figures is that the rate of profit in industry as a whole, and especially in manufacturing, was declining throughout the sixties and early seventies. For example in manufacturing the rate of profit during 1970–72 was more than a third below 1960–64, and it fell further in 1973, supposedly a ‘boom’ year. Only in the distribution sector was profitability maintained. However the deepening crisis after 1973 affected even this sector, whilst manufacturing profitability virtually disappeared as the effects of the world recession were added to the downward trend. In some industries in fact the rate of profit became negative: the capitalists were actually eating into their capital to keep production going.
Just how desperate the situation is can be shown by a longer-term comparison calculated by the Bank of England which shows profits as a percentage of national income. This does not show the rate of profit (for which the longer term figures are not available) but rather is an indicator of the share of the value produced by the working class appropriated by the capitalists as pre-tax profits directly.



 


Share of industrial &
commercial companies’
profits in domestic issues




1920–29


12   




1930–34


11   




1935–39


14   




1940–49


15   




1950–59


15   




1960–64


14   




1965–69


 12½




1970–73


 10½




1974–77


   5½




Sources: BEQB, Table A



Over the last four years, then, the share of profits has been one half of the level of the slump years of the early 1930s. Nor have all the attempts of the capitalists to restore profitability over the last few years had the desired effect. The table for the rate of profit shown above indicates an increase in pre-tax profitability of barely ½% between 1975 and 1977, and after tax no increase at all. Admittedly the figures exclude North Sea Oil, but even when these are added it varies the rate of profit in 1977 by a mere ½% to around 4½%. The latest figures for profits show a rise of about one quarter between the third quarter of 1977 and the third quarter of 1978 – roughly the period covered by phase 3 of the last Labour government’s incomes policy. This rise practically doubled the growth of earnings – will have pushed the rate of profit up a bit further, to about 5% before tax, or 4½% leaving out North Sea Oil profits. But even this increase leaves the rate of profit at well under half the level of the early sixties. In the second quarter of 1978 manufacturing productivity was a wretched 3% above the level of 1978 – no basis at all on which to rebuild the profitability of British capitalism and its competitive power on world markets.
 




The nineteen eighties began where the 1970s left off. The capitalist world economy is passing through yet another recession.
Industrial production fell at an annual rate of 5% in the second half of 1980. Workers’ consumption has stopped growing as real incomes were cut by rising inflation.
Oil price increases in particular have worsened the “terms of trade” of the advanced capitalist countries. This means prices of imports such as fuel and raw materials that have risen faster than the prices of industrial exported goods to pay for them.
The capitalists have been able, to a certain extent, to restore their battered profit margins by keeping their prices rising ahead of wage costs. Public expenditure has stopped rising at all, as even programmes to cope with rising population are cut back. Exports have stagnated.
Capitalists’ investment in new factories fell slightly in 1980, and in the second half of the year there was a massive run down of stocks of commodities due to tight monetary policies and the prospect of stagnant demand.
Could this develop into a major slump along the lines of 1929-31? Almost certainly not.
 
Stagnating investment
The only basis on which this could happen would be if there were a massive credit crisis throughout the capitalist world. This would force through major bankruptcies of firms currently trading at a loss and unable to obtain credit to tide them over. Stocks would be liquidated on a tremendous scale, production cut, and workers laid off.
Most important, new investment by capitalists in factories and equipment would be slashed – in the USA between 1929 and 1933 it was cut by nearly three-quarters.
Such a credit crisis would be possible. Borrowings, both by the capitalists in the advanced countries and by the ‘third world’ countries are at record levels. But the most likely outcome is that the credit system will weather the storm.
Investment, instead of crashing will continue to stagnate. Between 1963 and 1973 it grew by 6.1%; in 1981, however, it will be at about the same level as in 1973.
But even if there is no crash, this does not mean that a sharp upswing will follow.
The OECD (Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development) the major capitalist nations, says that the “recovery is expected to be extremely attenuated” (Economic Outlook, December 1980). In plain English: “feeble”.
They expect the capitalist governments to continue their policies of cutting public spending and increasing taxation – policies which they say will cut production by 2% next year. But the hope – and they admit this is optimistic – that there will be no further rise in “real” oil prices (that is, oil prices will not rise faster than prices generally).
 
Waste of resources
This would allow inflation to subside a little (from about 10% now to, say, 8%) and thus consumption would grow a little. Exports should also gain as the spending of oil producing countries catches up with their revenue from oil sales.
But even the OECD cannot manage to produce a forecast of an upturn in investment in 1981. All they can drag up is an end to cuts in stocks. By the first half of 1982 the best they can hope for is that production will be expanding at 3% a year.
Even without a crash there is a monstrous waste of resources involved in stagnation.
Between 1963 and 1973 production in the capitalist world rose by 5.1% a year. Between 1973 and 1981 the average increase will be slightly over 2%.
 
Youth unemployment
If the increase had been maintained at the previous rate of the 1960s and early 1970s, production would have been 25% higher this year than it actually will be.
This is around $2,000 billion, that is, just about exactly the total production of Germany and Japan. This is what is lost by the insane logic of capitalism which dictates that resources should lie idle.
One aspect of this waste of resources is the steady rise of mass unemployment.
The OECD expects that total unemployment in the capitalist world will be about 25½ million by mid-1982, or around 7.5% of the labour force. This is more than double the rate of the 1960s, and half as much again as the seventies.
Young people will be the worst hit, as the OECD’s forecasts show.
Table I shows the OECD predicts horrifying rates for youth unemployment (people under 25) in Canada (14%), USA (15%), Britain (16%), and France (17%). It predicts a catastrophic 30% rate of youth unemployment in Italy.
Not only are millions of workers unemployed, but the productivity of those at work is rising much more slowly than in the past.
Japan, which had the highest growth of productivity between 1963–73 experienced a fall to only 3.8% annual growth between 1973–81. The United States, which had one of the most sluggish annual rises in productivity between 1963–73 (1.9% pa), has seen its productivity fall to a mere 0.2% between 1973 and 1981. As the OECD figures in Table II show, other countries with levels of productivity growth in between Japan and US have all experienced a similar decline from the 1963–73 period to the 1973–81 period.
In none of the major countries is productivity growing much more than half as fast as in the 1960s. Part of the explanation lies in the stagnation itself.
Under-utilised capacity lowers labour productivity, since the capitalists find it very difficult to trim down their labour force. This partly for technical reasons: machines operating slightly more slowly may require the same manning levels, and office staff, sales staff, etc. are still needed.
 
Productivity slowdown
But it is also because of trade union opposition. “Rationalisation”, by closing down the less efficient plants, is aimed at overcoming these “difficulties”.
Moreover, the stagnation of investment means that the stock of capital grows more slowly and new technologies are less rapidly introduced.
In the USA productivity growth has ground to a halt. Since the USA has the technological lead in many sectors, this carries frightening implications for the other countries like Japan, where many of the possibilities of increasing productivity simply by catching up with the USA have been used up.
In the USA a first response to this productivity slowdown was, not surprisingly, to blame the work-force. In particular, the capitalist spokesmen blame the increasing proportion of less experienced women and young workers.
 
Pace of invention
This was soon shown to be quite false. A recent article by a US government economist, Michael Boresky (Challenge, Nov./Dec. 1980), argues that the pace of invention has slowed down.
What he calls “pivotal US inventions” used to come forward every few years:
“Since 1958, however, we have had only two. One of them, optical wave guides, introduced in 1967, is of rather limited importance. The second, the development of the electronic microprocessor in 1970, though of immense importance, is really an extension of the improvements in electronic resistors developed in 1947, and therefore is likely only to revolutionise the electronics industry, rather than originate an entirely new industry.”
 
Post-war developments halted
He produces a table showing “key advances in productivity enhancing technology in the US.”
Boresky’s table lists 25 “pivotal” inventions, usually in the centre of many related or “satellite” inventions. He shows that in the period 1945–65, 18 out of these 25 went through “very intense (rapid and broad) diffusion”, in many cases leading to the development of entirely new industries.
These included crucial developments like the growth of the private-car and truck industries; the application of large-scale machinery and automated processes to civil construction, electricity generation, steel production, and mining. It also included the development of synthetic fibres and the replacement of natural raw materials like rubber, wood, etc., by synthetic substitutes, like plastics, synthetic rubber, fibre glass, etc.
There was also the replacement of piston-powered aircraft by jets and the mechanisation and “chemicalisation” of agriculture. The growth of electronic computers and calculators, and different forms of electronic instrumentation and control also began in this period.
By the 1966–1979 period, however, the number of “pivotal” inventions experiencing “very intense diffusion” had fallen to 8.
Boresky lists no major “pivotal” inventions which will experience “very intense diffusion” in the period from 1980 onwards.
 
Socialist planning
He concludes that not only will many of the technologies have less effect in the 1980s than previously, like the “chemicalisation of agriculture”, but that some of the earlier productivity improvements, like the substitution of gas and oil for coal, will actually be reversed.
Boresky’s view is that even computers will have less effect on productivity in the 1980s than in the 1970s, despite the microchip.
Has mankind reached the limits of its ingenuity? Not at all.
The OECD in a report in 1977 said that in the USA real expenditures on research and development were growing at 12% a year during 1953–64. But between 1971–75 expenditures did not grow at all. This they attributed principally to “a more pessimistic outlook for profits and corporate cash flow” (McCracken Report, p. 148)
Boresky also comes near as a government economist decently can to blaming the short-term profit-grabbing strategy of the capitalists:
“At present, the role of management is overwhelmingly seen as control of cash flow sufficiency and quarter-to-quarter targeting of returns on investment. This is the philosophy promulgated by the business schools in the last 25 years or so.”
As even its own spokesmen admit, capitalism is incapable of either using the resources currently available or of developing the forces of production in the future at anything like the rate possible.
What greater condemnation is there of a social system?
Historically, capitalism played a progressive role in developing industrial production and the world market, although at enormous cost to the working class and the exploited peoples of the world. After the Second World War, because of the political settlement that the great capitalist powers managed to achieve, capitalism was given a new lease of life, particularly in the advanced industrial “West”, Western Europe, North America, and Japan.
Now there is every indication that the development of science, technology, and production is reaching the limits of development in a system dominated by the private ownership of production by a small class of profit-makers, and fettered by the narrow limits and contradictions of rival nation states.
The world is crying out for socialist planning, with democratic control of production by the producers and the world-wide planning of resources and production.





Table I:
1981 Youth Unemployment %




USA


15




Japan


  4




Germany


  6




France


17




Italy


30




UK


16




Canada


14




OECD Economic Outlook, December 1980, p. 25









Table II:
Productivity growth




 


% per year




1963–73


1973–81




USA


1.9


0.2




Japan


8.7


3.8




Germany


4.6


2.9




France


4.6


2.6




UK


3.0


1.5




Italy


5.4


2.1




OECD Economic Outlook, December 1980, p. 23



 




The media throughout the capitalist world love to portray
Japanese labour relations scene as one of unruffled harmony.
But it is a ‘harmony’ maintained by intense discrimination
and repression whenever the trade unions struggle for their members’ interests.
A very important tactic used by the bosses in Japan has been to
split militant unions when they develop and replace them with stooge
company unions. A classic example of this occurred in Japan Airlines (JAL).
The union for JAL’s ground staff in the mid-fifties was a docile
organisation, but dissatisfaction with pay and conditions led to the
election of a much more aggressive leadership. Substantial
improvements were won.
The management immediately started their efforts to weaken the
newly-conscious union. First they proposed revision of the collective
agreement won by the union less than a year before.
After this they tried to have one of their puppets elected to the
chairmanship of the union. When this manoeuvre was decisively
defeated on two occasions, management decided to split the union.
In 1965 they were successful when they threatened that employees
who did not cross over to the new union would suffer in terms of
jobs, promotion, etc. Unfortunately the overwhelming majority where
terrorised into joining the new union, leaving a couple of hundred in
the original one.
Then the discrimination began. In 1967, the management introduced
a “performance-based” allowance which, to quote a Japanese paper,
“resulted in a wide gap in promotions and wages” between the two
unions during the subsequent ten years.
For example, a 48-year old former chairman of the minority group,
who joined the airline in 1955 is still a chief of the lowest rank
whilst his contemporaries belonging to the majority union have mostly
been promoted ... As a result his monthly wage is 260,000 Yen,
compared with 450,000 for those in the majority union.
What the paper did not report, but what Mr Orgura, the former
chairman, told me, was that he had virtually been exiled for ten
years, sent to manage JAL offices in places like Karachi and Tehran
where it was quite impractical for him to take his family, and where,
of course, he was isolated from other militants.
The minority union has kept up a continuous struggle against this
discrimination. Finally, in February last year, 13 years after a
compliant was originally filed, the Tokyo District Labour Relations
Commission found that JAL had discriminated and should pay over £1
million in back pay to 247 members of the minority union.
So far JAL has refused to comply with this order, but the workers
are confident of success and that when they succeed they will be able
to win over the majority of their fellow-workers from the rotten
company union.
The present leader of the union, Shiro Wakatsuki, explained to me
that there is frequently a lot of sympathy among members of the
company union for those attempting to fight the company.
The example was quoted of the JAL pilots’ union which was split
in the same way, leaving only 8 out of 1,000 in the original union.
Whilst these eight were struggling against the discrimination they
were supported by donations secretly given by their colleagues in the
company union who were frightened of the consequences of open
support.
Management lost the case in the Labour Relations Court and
eventually has to reinstate the four strike leaders and the union reunited.
Also in the transport industry, but at the other end of the size
spectrum is Kukoro, the Japan National Railway Workers’ Union, with
over a quarter of a million members.
 
Punishments for industrial action
In 1948 under orders from the US Occupation all workers in the
public sector, including Japan National Railways (JNR) were totally
and uniformly banned by law from taking strike action. Since 1953
management has taken punitive measures against literally thousands of
Kokuro members for taking part in industrial action in support of
wage claims and of the right to strike.
Up to mid-1979 441 workers have been sacked, 4,238 have been
suspended, 72,118 have suffered wage cuts, as well as 306,345 cases
of reprimands and warnings which can also result in lost promotion,
pensions, etc.
Supporting workers who have suffered loss of job or wage cuts has
cost Kokuro £40 million over the years; they are also facing a court
case from JNR for a similar sum arising from an 8-day strike in 1975
for the right to strike.
The number and severity of punitive actions taken by JNR are
related entirely to the political circumstances. In 1970 and 1971 the
management carried out a vicious campaign of terror against trade
union activists involving third-degree-type interrogation of, and
threats against, militants.
In each of those years 50–60 workers were dismissed for taking
industrial action. Since 1976 no workers have been dismissed and in
1979 no measures were taken against strikers in the hope of scoring
union agreement for redundancies. But in June last year JNR announced
that 304 workers would be suspended for up to one year, 1,491 would
suffer pay cuts of up to 10% for up to one year, 5,399 will be denied
wage increases that year, and over 90,000 given written warnings.
Management has taken the offensive again in order to try and force
through a reduction of the workforce from 420,000 to 350,000.
So much for labour relations harmony Japanese-style.
 




Andrew Glyn analyses Labour’s alternative economic strategy
The main elements of the Alternative Economic Strategy [AES] are the official policy of the Labour Party and have been since 1972. Yet there is insufficient discussion on it.
It suits the Right to have the AES kept as vague as possible so that any alternative to Thatcher’s policy, such as relaxing monetary control or reducing the severity of spending cuts, can be concocted from the AES, while shuffling aside the anti-capitalist parts like selective nationalisation.
Some on the Left argue that the failure of the last Labour government to carry out the AES was simply a reflection of lack of grass-roots control over the PLP, and that this has to be remedied, partially, at least, by Conference decisions on party democracy. Now, they argue, the main task is to unite against the Tories and not engage in “sectarian” discussions as to whether the programme itself is adequate.
The ultra-left even argue that any discussion of an alternative political programme is a diversion from local struggles against Tory policies.
In one way or another all these points of view display a dangerous contempt for the activists who see the need for a convincing and radical alternative to Thatcher, which comes to grips with the crisis in British society and the power structure which has to be overcome.
In this context ‘The AES’ published by the Conference of Socialist Economists (CSE) and the Labour Co-ordinating Committee, is thoroughly welcome as the clearest and most comprehensive version of the AES yet published. It is also distinguished from other accounts by the fact that it attempts to analyse the problems which implementation of the AES would encounter.
Indeed, substantial parts of the book are devoted to meeting criticisms from the left – bits of it read like a dialogue with a Militant supporter!
In essence, replacing a capitalist economy with a socialist one means replacing production for profit by production for need. The socialist case for the AES is that the best that can be achieved at present is to “reduce the role of profit in the economy”. (p. 45, our emphasis)
But is reducing the role of profit really a more immediately attainable objective which would be “transitional” (in their phrase) to abolishing it completely?
Abolishing the role of profit requires the nationalisation of all the commanding heights of the economy. How then does the CSE group propose that its role can be reduced?
The most striking feature of their presentation of the AES is the low priority to nationalisations. They half accept the criticisms of the idea that selective nationalisation (one profitable firm in each key sector) will allow “the behaviour of private sector firms to be moulded by competition from publicly owned firms.”
They add that “workers in a company faced with bankruptcy because of a public firm receiving subsidies or operating with lower rates of return will be just as vocal in opposing ‘unfair competition’ from the state” (pp. 71/72)
Their main idea seems to be that nationalisation of “dominant profitable firms… provides the opportunity for new forms of successful public ownership, allowing new relationships between workforce and management and provides hope for improvement in areas where there is a popular perception of failure.”
 
Planning agreements leave industry in private hands
But just how could these nationalised firms operate successfully according to the criteria of production for need when they are operating in competitive industries which will “subject them to the logic of capitalism even more directly than the existing public monopolies”?
Forced to admit that a nationalised tail will not be able to wag a capitalist dog, all the group can hope for is that “political determination” will allow the tail to wag according to its own laws (which might indeed disorientate the dog which unfortunately is physiologically impossible).
Again, they give little priority to nationalisation of the banking system, simply saying that it “could allow a greater control over the allocation of credit” (p. 76), presumably accepting the argument that it would give firm control over industrial firms left in private hands.
This, of course, is the crunch question for supporters of the AES. The CSE group sees planning agreements as the crucial weapon and describes them thus:
“an agreement negotiated annually, but for a five-year period which would cover the main strategic decisions taken by companies on investment levels and location, employment, price policy and the like. It would be negotiated between management and government with the trade unions playing an important role.
“The government would have available a variety of sanctions and incentives to enforce the agreement including allocation of selective aid and discretionary tax relief, control of funds channelled through a National Investment Bank… public purchasing policy, planning permission and permission for price increases ...
“a final sanction of nationalisation in cases of obstinate non-co-operation would be available.” (p. 77)
The Group makes it quite clear that it sees planning agreements as cutting directly across the criterion of profitability. Projects will be drawn up according to “non-market or social criteria” (i.e. need); finance will be provided from government sources (so the capitalists cannot plead lack of funds); and the role of profit as giving the incentive to invest can be at least “to some extent supplanted… by using appropriate sanctions and non-profit incentives.”
But actually these “sanctions and non-profit incentives” are not “non-profit” at all. They are based on the threat to capitalists that if they do not invest in a particular place then the government will do something to them, refuse to buy things from them or, in the last resort, nationalise them which will cut their profits much more than the particular investment project.
The capitalists, being rational “profit maximisers,” will take the option which is most profitable, or rather least unprofitable, accept the new “rules of the game” and do what the government says.
But will they?
They have a third option, of course, which is to “Subvert attempts at planning and to resist attempts at the imposition of social control… It is not difficult to see that any measures taken to deal with this problem through the exercise of more direct control by the government or the trade unions would simply harden the opposition of Capital and could result in an all-out investment strike.” (p. 73)
Now, if the CSE Group believe this will happen, which is not too clear, they are actually admitting that it is impossible to “reduce” the role of profitability. The whole basis of their strategy collapses.
The Group thinks that overcoming capitalist opposition is possible given sufficient mobilisation around and support for the strategy. But this process would surely not leave industry in private hands. Workers could only defeat economic sabotage by widespread strikes and occupations of the factories. Does the Group really envisage the factories being handed back to the bosses in return for a “No investment-strike” agreement?
This review has concentrated on the central question of whether the capitalists could actually be regimented and directed under an AES; whether, in effect, they could be made to carry out their operations according to “socialist criteria”. It is the central question because if they could, then many objections to parts of the AES would lose their force.
Import controls would be “Planned-trade” in reality and not in name; industries would be restructured, living standards would not be cut in the context of expanding production, and retaliation could be met by appeals to the labour movement abroad on the basis of the anti-capitalist programme being implemented.
With take-home pay and public spending being increased, a planned growth of incomes worked out by the trade union movement would be necessary as part of an overall planning and not wage cuts under another name (the Group produces the amazing figure that between 1948 and 1976 there were 14 years in which incomes policies operated and over these periods real take home pay fell by 2%, whilst in the periods without incomes policy it rose by over 45%).
But planning agreements and so forth would not give a Labour government the control necessary to make realities of ‘planned trade’ and a socialist plan for incomes policy.
 
Commanding heights of economy
Any strategy for socialism will encounter opposition from the employers, using not only their economic power but also their control over the state machinery. But the weakness of the AES is that by deliberately leaving the economic levers so firmly in the hands of the capitalists, it will allow them to undermine the benefits from a planned expansion which the Group quite correctly stresses.
We cannot accept the argument that it is actually impossible to build up mass support for a programme of taking over the commanding heights of the economy as the only way of supplanting production for profit by production for need.
As the CBI is fond of telling us, profit has become a “dirty word,” and quite rightly so in view of the misery and suffering inflicted on the mass of people in its name.
By showing the impossibility under production for profit of essential demands , such as full employment and an £80 minimum wage, and by explaining how they could be guaranteed under a socialist plan, enormous support could be built up for depriving the capitalists definitely of their economic power.
The AES does not measure up to the tasks set for it.
 




Andrew Glyn introduces an account by Matsuoksi of work at a Japanese car factory
Every week, the Japanese motor firm Nissan (Datsun) place a help-wanted advertisement in the major national paper: “Want to earn a stable income at a super modern factory located in green forests? Two days off every other week! No previous experience required!”
 
The real conditions in the Japenese motor industry make a mockery of the fine words of the ads.
The industry is often held up as a model for other industries and even economies to copy. Its success has been staggering.
Already in 1977 Japan was by far the biggest exporter of cars in the world, sending abroad twice as many as West Germany. Since 1977 the value of Japanese car exports has doubled.
At the heart of this success has been continual increases in labour productivity, which in Nissan increased twelve times between 1955 and 1975.
By 1973 the industry was producing twice the number of cars per worker as the British industry. Even in the last three years productivity has risen another 40%.
How have these terrific increases been achieved? Firstly by very heavy mechanisation. By 1974 Toyota and Nissan had invested in seven times and five times as much equipment per man as BL.
Wages are slightly higher in Japan than in Britain – in 1978 in the motor industry the differential was estimated to be about 20%. But the enormously higher productivity at present more than covers the higher labour costs and the huge outlays on plant and equipment.
In 1977 Toyota and Nissan were earning 27% and 20% profit respectively on their capital employed; Leyland on the other hand, paid the inevitable cost of underinvestment. Using old models and antiquated equipment it was earning 1%.
But what’s it like to work in a Japanese motor factory? The conventional picture is of the paternalistic company looking after all the workers needs.
The following account of work at Nissan by Matsuoksi, published in 1974 in the magazine AMPO, explains why on the contrary the workers there call it “Hell’s Battlefield”.

Transcriber’s Note
Rest of article consists of extended quotes – ID
 




In Militant 16 January we carried a report of the hellish conditions endured by workers at the Nissan [Datsun] plants in Japan and the blatant divide and rule tactics of management.
Undoubtedly many readers will ask where is the union? Unfortunately for a long period now it has been firmly in the pockets of the company.
Up to 1953 Nissan workers had one of the most militant unions in Japan with a high degree of control over the shop floor. In December 1952, shortly after rescue from near bankruptcy by US orders during the Korean war, Nissan concluded a technical tie-up agreement with Austins to assemble knock down kits.
In order to regain control of the shop floor management provoked a strike, and after a 100 day struggle, succeeded in breaking the union and replacing it with the Nissan Workers Union which co-operates totally with the company.
The union is virtually an extension of Nissan’s industrial relations department; there is a well trodden career structure involving moving from an official position in the union to a higher position in the IR department, and sometimes back to the union!
In annual bargaining, there is full consultation between union and management before the claim is submitted. In the years 1970–74 the union obtained from the company 100% of its claim each year!
The economic crisis made it necessary for the union to go through the motions of submitting a real claim and then negotiating a compromise, but even this hardly changes the reality of the situation.
The union’s charter prescribes that voting should be direct and secret. The percentage of voters who cast votes varies from 99.72% to 99.99%. But something is fishy; the percentage of votes gained by elected officers is between 99.58% and 100%!
The reason is that votes are cast under strict surveillance. One worker, quoted in an article by Kiyoshi Yamamoto of the Tokyo University Institute of Social Science, says:
“When we vote, we are asked to gather round the supervisor’s desk in a group of several at a time, and write out our voting slips right on the spot, on the desk in front of everybody. The desk is an ordinary office desk of about one meter in width.
“And standing beside the desk are the election administrators, I mean the assistant manager and the shop steward, who watch closely to see if we write down the right name.”
Another worker at the head office of the company explains:
“If blank votes or invalid votes are found, the shop steward is forced to submit a written apology to the top union leaders. That is why he keeps an eye on how we fill in the voting slips. He even fills out ballots for new employees, saying that they miswrote the characters or that they may not know who the candidates are.”
The workers are forced to accept this rotten system by an ingenious system of sticks and carrots. Firstly two-thirds or more of the wage is not basic pay but a “special allowance” manipulated by the company to the advantage of “loyal workers”.
The few remaining members of the original ‘first union’ are discriminated against in a host of ways, wages, promotion etc. (a later article will show how this operates in another Japanese firm, Japan Airlines).
The union actually intervenes over the question of promotion, urging priority be given to “one’s record of union activities” and “one’s standing in the union hierarchy.” Ultimately exclusion from the union can mean loss of job (with this kind of union the “closed shop” would be most acceptable to Mrs Thatcher!).
 
Until the early seventies the control exerted by the unions was cemented by the very rapid increases in living standards which the boom in Japan brought. Between 1955 and 1979 consumption per head rose an estimated 368% in Japan (six times the increase achieved by British workers).
Since 1974 of course, increases have been much less, 1 or 2% a year. In the last year or so there have been a couple of cases of groups of Communist Party members in big firms winning re-instatement to the union (and therefore the company) after being dismissed for insisting on their democratic rights (ironically not concerned with union affairs themselves but with the right to campaign for CP candidates in parliamentary elections).
This is only the first whisperings of what will have to be an enormous struggle by Japanese workers to rid themselves of the exceptionally powerful system of labour control which is exercised over them and to reclaim the unions as their own fighting institutions.
 




The disastrous [policies] of Labour’s right wing have been completely
rejected by the great majority of Labour Party members and active
trade unionists.
The attempts of the right-wing ‘Solidarity’ spokesmen to
justify the record of the last Labour government, claiming that it
implemented most of its manifesto policies, cut no ice with Labour’s
ranks.
Amazingly, Denis Healey himself, interviewed recently in New
Socialist, says he now supports an expansion of demand, increased
public spending, “new public enterprise and a strengthened NEB”,
“reshaped” financial institutions to provide cheap long term
credit, selective import controls and a massive expansion of
industrial training.
All these are elements of the Alternative Economic Strategy (AES),
originally put forward as an alternative to Healey’s monetarist
policies during the 1974–79 government. The Party has moved left
and, it seems, Healey has moved left with it.
The main components of the AES are now restated in the NEC’s
conference document, The Socialist Alternative. The
overwhelming majority of the Party supports the reforms proposed,
reforms which would be an enormous step forward for the working class
– if they could be implemented.
Does Labour’s economic programme really present a socialist
alternative to monetarism? As the NEC’s new document
(Statements to conference, pp. 1–33) quite rightly says:
“Our whole economic strategy should be the discussion
and debate in the labour movement. Unless our policies are widely
understood and supported both within and outside the party, we cannot
hope to carry through the radical transformation they entail ...
“The crisis we shall inherit cannot be met by cautious
tinkering or piecemeal measures. It demands an imaginative and
sweeping programme, based on coherent strategy and guided by
socialist values.”
The statement begins with a vivid and well-argued account of the
effects of Thatcher’s policies. Scorn is poured on the theoretical
pretensions of monetarism: “Milton Friedman’s equations have had
a more devastating effect on British industry than Hitler’s bombs.”
It points out the absurdity of policies costing £18 billion a
year in lost output (a less conservative estimate would be more than
double that figure).
Moreover, in contrast to some previous denunciations of it as
absurd and “outdated”, the political purpose of monetarism, an
all-out attack on the labour movement, is clearly recognised:
“Unemployment is not an accidental side-effect – it is the
central weapon.”
The document boldly says:
“Just as the government demobilised three million
servicemen and women returning from the war, so the next Labour
government must demobilise the three million who have been
conscripted onto the reserve army of the unemployed.”
It knocks on the head the idea that we cannot afford more public
spending to provide jobs.
But it also admits that in the past the hostility of the
capitalist class, expressed in a “fall in business confidence and
the flight of capital has created an atmosphere of crisis in which
Labour governments have been forced to abandon their social
priorities in favour of economic orthodoxy ... we must be prepared to
counter this disruption when it occurs.”
But how? The NEC calls for exchange controls and the “monitoring”
of foreign investment; but even preventing the outflow of capital
does not mean the controllers of finance will lend to the government
to finance an expansion.
A “strike of finance” is in their power. How can what the
document calls their “unwarranted degree of control” be ended?
The answer must be nationalisation of the major banks, insurance
companies and other financial institutions. But unfortunately this
vital component of any socialist programme is now dropped from
Labour’s plans.
All we have in its place is the news (p. 17) that “we are
looking at the possibilities for orderly sales of debt through
agreements (our emphasis) with lending institutions.”
This would be how the Labour government would finance the
increased public borrowing which the statement says would be
necessary “in the short run” to finance increased public
spending. The new arrangements would cut through the monetarist
mystifications now surrounding monetary targets and the PSBR (public
sector borrowing requirement) and reduce the “unwarranted degree of
control by the financial institutions”.
But what price would the Labour government have to pay for such
agreements? Surely it would be the abandonment of social priorities
in favour of economic orthodoxy ...
The NEC believes that the risk of retaliation to import controls
should be minimised by proceeding “through negotiation” with
trading partners. But negotiation implies something is offered in
return for closing markets to further import prevention. What has the
NEC in mind?
The NEC points out that expansion will help to curb inflation as
costs are reduced. It argues for price controls to “prevent
companies taking advantage of new economic conditions just to
increase profits.”
But providing a market is not simply a question of generating
demand at any old price. There is enough demand in the world from the
point of view of people’s needs to keep all Britain’s factories
blasting at full stretch, if only they could produce profitably.
Increasing profits will be necessary to induce the capitalists to
expand production in many of the worst hit industries. And even if a
system of price control would be cunningly juggled to make an overall
expansion worthwhile, what about increased investment, without which
any expansion will peter out?
There is now way that the capitalists would contemplate ploughing
back extra resources into their businesses in the absence of a
significant increase in the rate of profit – now standing at around
2% and only a fraction of the rate even of the mid-1960s.
The establishment of a “publicly owned stake in each important
sector of industry”, whether that is intended to mean a
nationalised company or some form of government holding, certainly
will not encourage the rest of the capitalist to invest. On the
contrary big business – and they will not have to read Labour’s
programme to understand this – will see it as a first stage to “the
common ownership of the means of production.”
They will show how they feel by refraining from investment, which
would be throwing good money after bad as far as they were concerned.
Nor will planning agreements with major firms in each sector succeed
in creating jobs and new investment unless this is profitable.
Indeed, the document seems to regard planning as a dialogue
between government, trade unions and business:
“While some big companies will make political
objections to Labour’s plans, they have good business reasons for
welcoming arrangements by which industrial realities can be fully
taken into account in government ...”
We have had plenty of experience in past Labour governments taking
into account “industrial realities”.
The problem raised in implementing socialist policies are not
unique to Britain. Proposals very similar to those in The
Socialist Alternative are currently being put into practice in France.
Already, important reforms, in terms of a higher minimum wage, a
shorter working week, better pensions have been brought in. The
government is proceeding with its plans to nationalise a number of
important industrial groups.
But already, only 100 days into office, the familiar attempt to
reassure the industrialists is in full swing. The Financial Times
reported (8 September 1981):
“The French government has embarked on a campaign to
soothe employers’ fears over a socialist administration and to try
to urge industry to boost investment ... The prime minister ... sought
to reassure employers on two accounts.
“There was no question, he said, of interfering with
the decision-making powers of the heads of companies or imposing on
them a veto over dismissals. Trade unions have been claiming
consultative powers over both management and dismissals that have
frightened employers.
“He also said that is was necessary to halt the rise in
social security costs payable by industry ...
“M Francois Ceyrac, head of the employers’
federation, queried last week some of the contradictions in the
government’s policy. How was it possible, he asked, both to woo
industry and to saddle it with new taxes, higher social security
charges, restrictions on employers’ powers and now
nationalisation?”
The previous week the Financial Times reported that the
Minister for the Economy was resisting union demands for a freezing
of some consumer prices. The likelihood is of inflation of 18% this
year, and there is strong pressure to devalue against the D-Mark to
restore French competitiveness (i.e. profitability).
Despite the government’s expansionary programmes, growth is
expected to be only 3Â¼% next year, which would certainly not prevent
unemployment staying above the 2 million mark.
If Mitterand has these problems in implementing his programme,
despite his huge popular support and parliamentary majority, imagine
the situation faced by the next Labour government with a crisis even
more severe than in France.
British Business (4 September 1981) reported that the rate
of profit was twice as high in France as in Britain according to the
most recent figures.
The NEC’s Socialist Alternative warns that it would be
dishonest to pretend that full employment could be quickly restored.
Yet the post-war experience to which they refer was that in two
years, between 1945 and 1947, 2½ million jobs were created outside
the armed forces, and unemployment in 1947 was less than 2% despite
the demobilisation. Investment rose from 5% to 16% of total
production, and consumption per head of the population rose by 13%,
as the burden of military expenditure was reduced.
A crucial difference between then and now, however, is that
profits were high in 1945 – 12% of domestic product. So the
employers were quite ready to raise production and boost investment.
With profits a fraction of that level, and their position
threatened by price controls, future nationalisation, etc. there is
no way the next Labour government could get the same response whilst
the economy remains dominated by private capital.
Yet just as rapid an expansion is needed now.
The document does state clearly that it believes that common
ownership should be substituted for private ownership of the means of
production. But this is said to be a “long-term goal”.
It cannot be relegated to the misty future in this way.
The NEC says:
“Transformation of the economy in a socialist direction
is not (our emphasis) to be postponed until we have achieved a
reconstruction of industry.”
But not even the reforms proposed in the document will be
implemented in a lasting way within the rotten framework of
capitalism. They could be achieved only through a fundamental
socialist transformation, not through ‘half-way’ measures “in a
socialist direction.”
To give reality to the social improvements outlined, therefore,
the next Labour government must link them to a programme for the
nationalisation of the banks, finance houses, and the 200 or so big
monopolies which dominate the economy.
Nationalisation should not be with exorbitant compensation, as in
the past, but minimum compensation on the basis of proven need. If
the financiers and big investors are incapable of working and an
prove they are hard up, they could be paid decent social security
under a socialist government.
Nationalised industry should not be run by massive bureaucracies
composed of ex-owners, ex-private managers, retired civil servants
and super-annuated politicians, as they have been up until now.
Industry should be run under democratic workers’ control and
management, under boards composed of a third from trade unions in the
industry, a third from the TUC, and a third from the government.
Then there could be a socialist plan of production. Under a plan,
there would be an enormous growth of production, science and
technique, creating the conditions for rapid cuts in the working day
and working year, and for immeasurable improvements in workers’
living standards.
Without a socialist plan, the irreversible decline of British
industry will continue, with untold suffering for working people.
Transformation of the economy cannot be postponed. But
transformation is possible only through the working class being
mobilised to implement through-going socialist measures.
 




New figures for the rate of profit published by the Department
of Industry (British Business, 18 September 1981, p. 111)
confirm the dire situation faced by the British capitalists.
In 1980 their rate of profit was 4.9%, compared to an average
of 11.6% in the years 1960–65.
But the 1980 figure itself is heavily influenced by the profits
from North Sea Oil. These are of temporary duration. A large part of
them go to the American oil companies, and in any case they have no
bearing on the profitability of the rest of British industry.
Excluding these returns from the North Sea, the rate of industry
and commerce was 3.0%, barely a quarter of the level of the early
sixties. The manufacturing sector, hardest hit by the cuts in
production and the high exchange rate last year, was receiving only
2% on its capital employed.
The situation has deteriorated further this year. Figures are only
available for the first quarter, but they indicate a further fall,
perhaps to 1½% or less for manufacturing. Whilst profitability has
fallen elsewhere, the decline has been sharpest in Britain. Latest
figures (for 1979) show rates of 14% for USA, 10% for France and 14%
for Japan (British Business, 4 September 81).
The Bank of England has just reported that manufacturing
productivity rose by 3% to 4% between the end of 1980 and the middle
of 1981. But as the Bank wryly comments, part of this is probably a
statistical mirage.
If a number of the least productive plants are shut, the average
productivity level automatically rises, without signifying any
genuine gain. Indeed if the workers are thrown on the dole were
counted, their productivity having fallen to zero, the average would
certainly have declined!
While closing loss-making plants does improve profits the only
real improvement in competitiveness occurs through genuine
productivity in the more efficient plants. How much management has
achieved in this respect is an unknown quantity.
The drastic state of profitability has important implications for
the Labour Party’s expansionary Alternative Economic Strategy.
Many supporters of the AES admit that to secure an improvement in
investment the capitalists would require an increase in
profitability. But they often overlook the extent of this increase.
To return the rate of profit of industrial and commercial
companies (excluding North Sea Oil) to the level of the early 1960s
would require an increase in profits of nearly £21,000 million (1979
prices). This represent 25% of what companies are currently
producing. It would therefore take 25% expansion of their output, all
of which would go to profits, to return the profit rate to its
earlier level.
Probably there is spare capacity to increase output by a bit more
than this. Nevertheless, the restoration of profitability would take
the lion’s share of extra production.
Whether or not even this would be sufficient to secure a radical
improvement in investment is dubious enough in the context of
anti-capitalist measures of the AES (nationalisation of profitable
firms, planning agreements, etc.) But there would be huge pressure on
a Labour government to secure such a boost to profits by holding down
on any growth in living standards.
The contradiction of trying to secure production for need in an
economy based on profit would face the government with a stark
choice: Either abandon its objectives or move more decisively against
the profit system.






Net rate of return at current replacement price




 


All Industrial/
commercial
companies

%


Industrial &
commercial
companies
exc. North Sea
%


Manufacturing
Companies


%




1960


13.3


13.3


13.3




1961


11.4


11.4


11.0




1962


10.4


10.4


  9.9




1963


11.4


11.4


10.6




1964


12.0


12.0


11.3




1965


11.3


11.3


10.6




1966


10.0


10.0


  9.2




1967


10.0


10.0


  9.2




1968


10.1


10.1


  9.2




1969


  9.8


  9.9


  9.1




1970


  8.7


  8.7


  7.5




1971


  8.8


  8.9


  7.7




1972


  9.3


  9.3


  8.1




1973


  8.9


  9.0


  8.1




1974


  5.8


  6.0


  4.3




1975


  4.9


  5.2


  3.9




1976


  5.4


  5.6


  4.1




1977


  7.1


  6.7


  5.8




1978


  7.2


  6.7


  6.0




1979


  6.3


  5.0


  3.6




1980


  4.9


  3.0


  2.0







NOTE: Figures show net rate of return on capital employed. Net
Return means gross operating surplus (i.e. gross trading profits
less stock appreciation plus rent received) less capital
consumption (i.e. depreciation) at current replacement cost. Net
rates of return have fallen more than gross rates. Net rates were
above gross rates in the 1960s, but since 1974 have been well
below them, reflecting the increased share of capital consumption
as profits have fallen. Excluding North Sea activities, capital
consumption has increased from 20% of gross operating surplus in
1960 to 28% in 1979 and 56% in 1980.









 




Under the capitalist system, with production geared to private profit, society’s resources are squandered in a thousand and one ways. Any High Street demonstrates this, with mushrooming banks and building societies which produce nothing and with the shops full of goods made more expensive by the duplication of product ranges and built-in obsolescences. But the biggest waste is undoubtedly unemployment.
A worker is at least twice as likely as the ‘average’ to be unemployed if he is 16–17 years old, or if he lives in Northern Ireland, or if he works in the building industry. Between 1973 and 1977 unemployment of immigrant workers rose more than twice as fast as the average. Over 300,000 workers have now been continuously unemployed for at least a year. The dole is so low that about half the unemployed are now drawing supplementary benefit.
But as well as the uncalculable cost of the demoralisation and misery of the unemployed and their families, unemployment represents a monstrous waste of society’s resources in terms of what the unemployed could contribute to production.
There are now around one and a half million workers registered as unemployed. Many more people want a job but are not registered because they are not registered because they are not entitled to benefit or live in areas where there is no chance of finding work. Cambridge economists have estimated that these unregistered unemployed total nearly one million, bringing total unemployment to around 2½ million or 10% of the labour force.
 
10% lost
Ten per cent lost production would be bad enough. But in fact, if all these workers were employed, production would rise much more than 10%. Not because those out of work are more energetic than those in jobs. Nor because they would be working with better equipment – firms will obviously try to keep their most efficient plant operating in a recession.
But the reality is that in many industries unused capacity also means low productivity. A good proportion of jobs are not tied directly to the level of production. The bosses have to keep on most office and sales staff even during a fall in production. A growing number of direct production jobs, moreover, cannot be cut out by the capitalists as soon as sales fall.
Most nineteenth century factories consisted of large numbers of workers doing a small range of jobs, and it was simple to lay off a proportion as soon as output fell. But now many industries involve integrated processes with each worker like a cog in a huge machine which cannot be removed without everything grinding to a halt. And even where there is the technical possibility of cutting employment as output sags, the capitalists’ freedom of action is curtailed by the powerful opposition of the organised workers.
These technical and ‘labour relations’ difficulties explain why so many redundancies now take the form of bosses trying to find an opportune moment to close down a whole plant or section of a plant, particularly if it is old and inefficient, or one with a high level of militancy.
But they also explain why a low level of production means low productivity; and conversely why an expansion of production to provide jobs for the unemployed would involve a very substantial increase in productivity as well.
The economists’ calculations are that to increase employment by 10% (and thus eliminate unemployment), would require increased production of about 20%. Or to put it the other way round, the unemployment of 10% of the labour force involves underproduction of 20%. Confirmation of this figure, and for the really big increase in production which could be achieved without any increase in employment at all, comes from a survey or spare capacity in industry:



Potential Percentage Increases in Output




 


Averages, weighted by employment




With
present
hours


With
additional
overtime


With
additional
labour




Food, drink and tobacco


  6.3


11.0


15.5




Chemicals


16.9


18.2


19.5




Mechanical engineering


13.6


21.5


35.0




Motors


  1.4


  6.7


33.6




Metals


  6.0


10.6


11.5




Textiles


  7.4


13.0


18.8




Clothing and footwear


15.0


20.8


24.5




Paper and printing


13.4


22.4


28.3




Construction


14.9


22.2


36.0




Total


  7.6


12.4


21.5




National Institute Economic Review, February 1977



The massive increases in production which would be involved in taking on all those who require a job is no argument that full employment is impossible. Rather it shows just how essential it is. Twenty per cent lost production represent (in terms of 1976 prices) around £22,000 million. Twenty two thousand million pounds represents:

Nearly double the current total of pensions, unemployment pay and other welfare benefits
 
Three and a half times expenditure on the health service
 
Ten times council house building
 
More than on third take-home pay of the whole working class

The extent of the ‘sacrifice’ involved in £22,000 lost production is clearly gigantic.
 
Why has unemployment risen?
If it were true that the unemployed were scroungers, it would certainly be a magnificent testimony to capitalism, would it not, that it turned a large section of society into parasites? Parasites there are, of course, who live on the labour of others – but out of choice and in great comfort derived from their stocks and shares.
The vicious and reactionary theory that the unemployed are there from choice has no basis. One of the reforms of the 1964–70 Labour government was to raise the level of unemployment and supplementary benefit relative to earnings. Bearing in mind that unemployment is concentrated among low-wage sections it has been calculated that the average dole for a married worker relative to take home pay in their most recent job rose from about 50% in the early ’Sixties to around 60% since the late ’Sixties. Those receiving earnings-related benefit get 75–80% of their take-home pay when at work, but only for six months. It is quite possible to find individual cases where these ‘improved’ rates have caused workers to quit a lousy job a bit earlier or to stay on the dole a week or two longer before being forced into some sweatshop on starvation wages.
But there is no evidence whatsoever that this applies to very many workers on the unemployment register. And even if it did, it just means that their place in a particular job is being taken by somebody else. The Tories and the gutter press never explain how cutting down workers’ capacity to hold out on the dole while looking for a job will increase total employment. It would do nothing of [the sort. – NB missing line, guess at what it should be – ID]
The campaign against ‘scroungers’ and in favour of making the dole less ‘generous’ has got nothing to do with unemployment. What the capitalists are after is making unemployment even more intolerable, so that fear of the sack is a more potent weapon for ‘disciplining’ the workers – that is for keeping down demands for wage increases.
 
Is new technology responsible for unemployment?
A hundred years ago the church told people to accept their fate as the will of God. In 1978, when a TV pundit mutters darkly about technology and presses a button which makes “2 to 3 million unemployed in the 1980s” appear in computer readable lettering on the TV screen beside him, he is also conjuring up the idea of a process beyond the control of men.
But this new technological fatalism is just as much of a smokescreen as its religious counterpart.
The idea that the mass unemployment of recent years is due to a sudden acceleration in technical progress has no basis. Certainly, the tendency to replace men by machines (the increase in what Marx called the technical composition of capital) has been a feature of capitalist development in recent years. But this is nothing new: it is a permanent feature. It was just as true of the booms in the ’Fifties and early ’Sixties when there was more or less ‘full’ employment.
There is no evidence that there has been an acceleration in this process in recent years. Certainly, there now seems to be the possibility of a leap forward by automation opened up by the use of microprocessors – the tiny silicone chips with the power of a computer – in many sectors of industry and especially services. But this process has hardly begun and has no connection with the mass unemployment of recent years. And even if the possibilities for the replacement of human labour in the direct production process are speeding up, this would spell unemployment only in the context of stagnant production.
 
Too few new jobs
The reason for the rise in unemployment over recent years has not been a sudden acceleration of productivity – in fact it has stagnated. The ‘number of people registered as unemployed at some time during the year’ has only increased from 4 million to 4½ million each year, and all this increase is accounted for by women, the main explanation apparently being their greater readiness to register rather than an actual faster rate of job loss.
The very stable number of men registering each year – practically three million – does not seem consistent with the idea that technical progress is destroying more and more jobs each year. In fact, the rise in unemployment is explained mainly by the slower provision of new jobs rather than the faster destruction of old jobs.
Almost all the rise in unemployment reflects the fact that each worker put out of a job, or leaving for some other reason, is finding it much more difficult to find a new one – the average unemployed worker has been looking for a job for 17 weeks, compared with 8 weeks in 1967.
But, some will say, isn’t the labour movement stranded between the horns of a dilemma? If investment does not rise British industries are driven out of world markets – and unemployment rises. If investment does increase, it means more and more workers replaced by machines – and unemployment rises.
But the fundamental point is that investment in new equipment does not itself cause loss of jobs. Certainly, in the context of a stagnant market, investment will tend to have that effect, as new capacity, which can produce more cheaply and employs fewer workers, drives out older plant. But in the context of an expanding market, higher investment would increase employment immediately in the industries producing the investment goods. In the longer run, extra workers could be taken on in work with the new plant to supply the growing market. Increased production would accommodate this without requiring the scrapping of old plant.
To see investment and technical progress as destroying jobs is to see just one side of the two-fold relation between the accumulation of capital and unemployment. As Marx explained, on the one side, accumulation of capital means more jobs on the new capacity. On the other hand, accumulation ‘repels’ as the new capacity drives out old. In Japan, for example, in the 1950s and 1960s, the industrial capital stock grew at 12.5% a year, three times as fast as the British capitalists managed. But far from meaning that employment grew slower, it grew at 3.7% a year in Japan and not at all in Britain, despite the fact that industrial productivity in Japan also grew three times as fast.
The crucial difference is that Japanese capitalists were able to expand their share of the world markets on the basis of this tremendous rise in productivity, and that their home market was propelled forward by the massive level of investment. So the basic reason for the rise in unemployment faced by British workers over the past four years is not too high investment; it is too low growth of production. In capitalist terms, this means just one thing: too slow a growth of a profitable market.
 
The world market
If the immediate factor behind the rise in unemployment is the slow growth of the market, is the solution simply to put pressure on the other capitalist countries to end their obstinate refusal to expand their economies, as Denis Healey suggests? The following table, however, shows that it is not mainly exports which have slowed down and are responsible for the slow growth of the last four years. The stagnation has predominantly come from workers’ living standards (private consumption), public investment and investment by the capitalists.



Rates of Growth


% per year




 


1961–73


1973–77




Exports


5.6


  4.1




Private consumption


2.8


−1.2




Government investment


4.9


−3.4




Capitalists’ investment


4.3


−3.4




Source: Economic Policy Review, 1978 [Appendix, Table 4]



These cuts cannot be blamed on the world economy. The basic factor behind these developments was the catastrophic fall in the rate of profit sustained by British capitalism – from 13.5% in 1960 to 3.5% in 1975 according to the Bank of England’s figures for the pre-tax rate of profit of industrial and commercial companies. In response to this the British capitalists demanded savage cuts in living standards which the Labour government has implemented through the various stages of the ‘Social Contract’.
With the take-home pay of the average manual worker having fallen by 8–10% since 1973, it is not surprising that ‘private consumption’ has fallen. Moreover, the capitalists have insisted that the government radically prunes its expenditure. It is no use, from the capitalists’ point of view, if the extra profits they can extract by driving down living standards are borrowed back by the government to finance the social services.
The public spending programmes for 1977 were cut by £2½ billion in the announcements of February and December 1976 and by a further £4 billion through the operation of the vicious ‘cash limits’ system, which meant that the local authorities etc. were given quite inadequate resources to cope with inflation.
 
Profits up 140%
The cuts in living standards, and downward slide in the value of the pound which increased export profits, have led to what is probably the fastest rise in profits in the history of British capitalism – by 140% between the summer of 1976 and 1977. But still investment has hardly increased. Investment in manufacturing industry after replacement of capital used up is now still lower in real terms than it was in 1951.
As well as increased profitability – and the capitalists are still ‘looking for’ the rise in profits to continue since it began from such a low base – the capitalists require an expanding market. But the very cuts in living standards and public spending, of course, lead to a decreased market. So all the investment which is going on is necessarily aimed at rationalisation, cutting costs and employment, since only an idiot would invest for an expanded market in conditions where there was no prospect of this happening.
 
Stagnation
The government’s whole strategy has been that an export boom would provide the growing market necessary to “justify” the capitalists ploughing back their higher profits in increased investment. But the reason for slow growth in the world economy is not some out-dated prejudice against expansion on the part of the German and Japanese governments. They are all holding back on expansion in an effort to hold back wages, restore their profits and prevent an acceleration of inflation. So instead of expanded openings for British capital there is stagnation and intense competition.
 




The Bonn Economic Summit between the heads of the seven most
powerful capitalist countries was the fourth annual meeting of its
sort. Taking place in a blaze of publicity and with statements from
individual leaders as to their ‘purposeful’, ‘frank’ and
‘constructive’ nature, these meetings are supposed to give the
impression that things are in hand, that the world economy is capable
of being controlled in an effective fashion.
But the ‘currency’ issue by these summits – statements about
the imminence of a sound recovery – has far exceeded their real
effects. Just like any other currency issued in excess of real
production, the result has been a devaluation – a scepticism about
the real value of these jamborees. The cynicism with which the
Financial Times greeted the Bonn get-together – “no real
harm may be done” (July 15th) – was matched by the Economist’s
verdict that “it steered just clear of disastrous failure” (July 22nd).
In 1976 they set a growth target of 5½% a year until 1980; the
increase in production in 1977 was 3Â¾%, and in 1978 will be about
3½%. Unemployment has stuck at around 5½% since 1976, and the
inflation rate has only inched down – from 9% in 1976 to a forecast
7½% this year.
In 1977 Japan committed itself to a 6.7% rise in output for that
year, but achieved 5%; West Germany reaffirmed a 5% growth target but
grew at 2½%.
This time they were more cautious. Federal Chancellor Schmidt
undertook to take measure to boost demand by 1% of GNP, whereas
Fukuda, the Japanese Prime Minister, said he was “striving” for
growth 1½% faster than the previous year. The Italian Prime Minister
undertook to raise growth by 1½% by, among other things, cutting
public expenditure – a highly paradoxical ‘solution’ which will
provide no consolation to the million Italian workers on the dole.
The Times (July 18th) summarised the prospects as follows:
“If all the stimulus measures go into effect and if there is no
downturn in other countries during the second half of 1979 it may be
possible to get the overall growth of the world up to about 4 or 4½
per cent by the end of 1979. This would be enough to stabilise
unemployment, although probably at a higher level than the 17 million
in the industrial world at present.”
The fundamental reason for the stagnation of the world economy is,
as explained many times in Militant, the world-wide refusal of
the capitalist to invest.
The recent report of the “authoritative” Bank of International
Settlements shows (p. 47) that in Europe investment in new
factories and machinery is one third below the level it would have
reached if the trend of the ‘Sixties has continued; in Japan it is
less than one half of the trend level.
The National Institute Economic Review (May 1978, p. 38)
shows that investment in the capitalist world fell by an
unprecedented 11% in 1974 and 1975, and that its recovery
subsequently has only been at half the 10% growth rate of previous expansions.
The capitalists themselves will not invest because their profits
are low, excess capacity is very high, and they are totally
demoralised about the prospect of a sustained recovery. The
governments of the major countries know that their last attempt in
1972/3 to drive the world economy forward through tax cuts and money
supply increases collapsed in a disastrous acceleration of inflation.
The cuts in living standards and public services have not been enough
to restore profitability but have further contributed to the
stagnation of markets.
The mass unemployment has not materially weakened the trade union
and labour movement, but together with the cuts has built up a legacy
of bitterness likely to erupt in major industrial struggles. The
prospect of ‘left’ governments in France and Italy has only been
postponed. All these factors are reflected in the capitalists’
profound ‘lack of confidence’, against which summitry has no impact.
The summit statement says “we are concerned, above all, about
worldwide unemployment because it has been at too high a level for
many years,” and that “we need an improvement in growth where
that can be achieved without rekindling inflation.”
But these are just crocodile tears and pious wishes. It was no
accident that when pressed on what had been achieved Jim Callaghan
hastily changed the subject to the agreement on terrorism.
NEXT WEEK: the competitive battle being fought out by the various capitalist countries.
 




Under EMS [European Monetary System] the currencies of all the EEC countries would be linked together and could only fluctuate within very narrow ranges.
A large chunk of the foreign exchange reserves of the participating countries, probably around £17 billion, would be pooled in a fund which would be lent to countries whose currencies were under pressure. Devaluations and revaluations would be possible, but only after consultation, and presumably the agreement, of the other countries.
The German capitalists in particular are in favour of it because of the rise of the Mark against other currencies. As the Economist (15 July) reported, “Mr Schmidt is worried that his country’s currency will become increasingly vulnerable to speculation against the dollar [as international investors move their funds out of sinking dollars and into rising Marks – ed.] and will become overvalued, which will hurt German exports [by making them more expensive on world markets – ed.].”
By tying the Mark to the pound, the lira and other weaker currencies, the German capitalists hope to be able to hold their export prices down and increase their competitiveness both in European markets and the rest of the world
For the utopian prophets of a united capitalist Europe, the ultimate development of the EMS would be European monetary union with a single euro-currency issued by a European Central Bank.
While the proposals to back the EMS with substantial reserves from richer economies may give the EMS more chance of success than the ill-fated snake, however, the fundamental national antagonisms rule out the development of an integrated currency. Conflicts between competing national capitalists will scotch such a process long before it could work its way to completion.
 
German gains
Under the floating exchange-rate system of recent years, British capitalists have to a certain extent offset their continued low productivity growth by the downward drift of the pound. Under a monetary union this would not be possible, and the twice-as-high level of productivity in German and French manufacturing could proceed smoothly to crunch up UK industry.
The only attraction of EMS for the other capitalists is the hope that it will somehow make them competitive with their German rivals.
Roy Jenkins, in his October 1977 speech, reviving the idea of European Monetary Union, stated that wages in different countries must “remain in some kind of reasonable relationship to productivity” (Lloyds Bank Review, January 1978). The Economist reported (November 4) that Irish ministers think that “EMS membership would help them keep down wages.”
As soon as Labour Party Conference voted against the 5% pay limit, The Times commented that this provided a good reason for joining EMS. Even the CBI appears to have shifted from initial hostility to EMS to general support (Financial Times, October 24). This is probably based on the desperate hope that with the pound in the EMS, they will be able to argue more convincingly to trade unionists that “excessive” wage increases (or an “unreasonable” relationship of wages to productivity, as Jenkins would put it) would cause loss of jobs through reduced international competitiveness.
 
Unemployment
But the likely effects of the UK joining were summarised by the National Institute as doing “not much to bring down the rate of inflation in the UK; it would weaken UK competitiveness and so lead to lower exports and higher imports, lower output and higher unemployment” (Financial Times, November 6).
The irony is that German capital would be lending British capital vast sums in order that the exchange rate of sterling could be kept up so that German capital could more easily penetrate British markets. A Tory government would almost certainly join in the hope of using it to batter down on wages and justify the “stern monetary policy within the system” called for by the Economist.







Direction
The chart shows the enormous variations in the exchange rates since the last ill-fated attempt to link the EEC currencies in the “snake”. In the last three years, the inflation rate has been 10% higher on average in Italy than in Germany – hardly a convincing basis on which to link the currencies!
It is very likely that as soon as the spectre of a left government in France or Italy is raised, or the dollar undergoes another bout of speculation, the whole edifice will collapse.
If Britain was involved, the EMS would be that much weaker, for whereas France, Germany and Italy have all achieved a similar productivity increase in manufacturing since 1973 (14% to 19%), the increase in the UK was only 3%. There is no way in the long run in which such a divergence in productive power could be contained within EMS.
While the need to plan their operations on a continent-wide scale forces the giant European companies towards breaking down the barriers between national states, at the same time the divergent national patterns of development of the productive forces and class relations make this quite impossible to achieve on a capitalist basis.
Would staying out of EMS solve anything? Obviously not, unless you think that the problems of jobs and living standards are being satisfactorily sorted out now.
In fact, there is a danger that discussion of the EMS will tend to divert attention from the capitalist crisis – world-wide and in the UK – which is the real source of these problems. Jack Straw (‘Tribune’. October 13) says of EMS that “at stake is Britain’s (our emphasis) freedom to decide its own economic policies, independent of the EEC.”
But Britain is not independent of the EEC, or more accurately, British capital is not independent of European capital inside or outside the EEC. The EMS is just one form of pressure from world capital.
The source of the pressure is the competitive nature of the capitalist system, which makes it utopian to try and opt out of it on a capitalist basis. Being outside the EMS does not preserve some ultimate “freedom” of British workers from the depredations of the capitalist class at home.
In his horror of EMS, Jack Straw seems uncritically to accept the “expansionist strategy the government is trying to follow”, as though the sovereignty of British parliament could guarantee a Labour government being able to achieve full employment if only it were not for “selfish foreigners”.
 
Devaluation?
Is it true, in any case, that the Labour government is following an expansionist policy? By raising interest rates by 2½% as it did recently, the government drew praise from the City for at last applying the monetarist brakes more vigorously – the very opposite of an expansionist policy.
Behing the Tribunites’ demand for “freedom” from EEC contrains, moreover, lurks their alternative “devaluation” strategy. As opposed to the pound being supported in the EMS, the favour the deliberate devaluation of the pound on the grounds that this would boost British exports and allow for the expansion of the economy.
Past experience under the Labour government, however, shows that devaluation offers no solution for the labour movement. Big business uses devaluation, not to increase its exports, but to push up its profits, and the fall in the pound (meaning higher import prices) inevitably pushed up prices in Britain. There was no real increase in investment and no significant expansion of production as a result of devaluation.
In other words, it is clearly futile to oppose the EMS on the basis of “financial and currency freedom” for the British economy.
British big business will decide on whether or not to participate in the EMS by weighing up the likely profit and loss involved on either side, and unfortunately their attitude will be the decisive factor in the cabinet’s calculations too.
But whether British capitalism goes into the EMS or boycotts the System will not make a fundamental difference to the working class of Britain. The labour movement should not become involved in a fruitless argument as to the pros and cons of EMS from a capitalist point of view.
It is certainly necessary to analyse and explain what EMS means, and warn of what it may mean for the workers. But our real task is to answer the desperate expedients of the European capitalists with a socialist alternative which would provide a real way of bringing together the workers of Europe in the fight for the democratic, socialist planning of Europe’s productive forces.
 




Denis Healey said that the “first purpose” of his Budget
was to “get unemployment moving significantly down.” This is most
unlikely to happen this year even on his own figures, and for the
longer term he contented himself with platitudes about the industrial
strategy and the need for world expansion.
Recent White Papers on Public Spending and North Sea Oil
(Militants, Nos. 398 and 400) show that the
government has no strategy for eliminating unemployment.
The Cambridge Economic Policy Group’s recent Review
has now come up with the chilly prediction that, if present policies
are continued, unemployment will rise towards five million by
1990. In fact you don’t need their elaborate computer model to
reach that figure if you assume that unemployment will continue to
rise at the recent rate of nearly 250,000 a year.
 
Idle Machines
The Group suggests that a 50% increase in manufacturing investment
is necessary to avoid mass unemployment. But it is absolutely wrong
to suggest that it is impossible to employ more workers in
manufacturing without an investment boom. Hundreds of thousands more
workers could be employed in existing manufacturing plant, if only it
were profitable to do so.
The industrial areas are littered with empty factories and idle
machines. Much of it may be old and inefficient but it could still
produce socially useful things. In the context of a socialist plan,
based on social need rather than profit, full employment would not
have to await an investment boom.
But granting that higher investment is desirable to raise
efficiency, how could new investment, plus rapid expansion, be
achieved? The Cambridge Group quite rightly points out that large
scale closures of factories, as in shipbuilding and electrical
engineering, have not brought recovery to those industries; nor have
government handouts.
But they conclude:
“In our view, there is no possibility of
carrying through such a programme without protection by means of
import controls or other means of discriminating in favour of home
industries, because this alone will provide an assurance that new
capacity can be operated at a high level of utilisation.”
As to whether the capitalists would really modernise, the Group
just puts its faith in ‘financial incentives or controls’ (type
unspecified, planning agreements perhaps), ignoring the fact that in
the past the capitalists have reacted to protection by complacency
and profiteering rather than expansion and modernisation.
 
Retaliation
But what of retaliation, which the Cambridge Group regards as the
one ‘really serious’ objection to import controls? All they say
is that if the refusal of other capitalist governments to “sanction
import restrictions is the major obstacle to industrial and economic
recovery in Britain, this should be made plain and the matter argued
out on that basis.”
This is just about as helpful as bluntly telling the Scottish fans
that their team won’t win the World Cup because the other sides
won’t agree to hop about on the field on one leg!
The failure of the Cambridge Group to face up to the reality of
the capitalist world system is strikingly revealed in the chapter by
Francis Cripps, adviser to Tony Benn. He proposes not simply import
controls, but discriminatory controls against the strong countries –
precisely those best able to retaliate.
So the Brazilian, Dutch and German teams are supposed to accept
being confined to hopping all the more readily as that handicap would
be restricted to those teams the Scots know they couldn’t beat anyway!
As The Economist (1 April) sourly notes, the Cambridge
Group do not “notice that every controlled import is a lost job in
the exporting country. And then it, too, could control its imports.
As the process spreads, balance of payments constraints would melt
away. Along with much else.”
Unlike most capitalist economists, they see that the capitalist
system, uncontrolled, means mass unemployment. They are quite right
to hammer the government’s complacency. But their own policy of
import controls is a fantasy, not a magic solution of a new Keynes as
Brian Sedgemore suggests (New Society, 8 April).
What the Cambridge Group, and Brian Sedgemore, cannot admit is
that it is impossible to control the capitalist system – other than
by replacing it with a socialist plan.
 




Andrew Glyn [Oxford Labour Party] assesses the government’s
White Paper, The Challenge of North Sea Oil
A small part of the promised bonanza from North Sea Oil has
already been squandered – on producing a White Paper on the
Challenge of North Sea Oil full of vague platitudes.
The document smugly refers to the participation agreements between
the nationalised BNOC and 44 oil companies. But it does not mention
their content:– agreement by the companies to sell 51% of their oil
to British National Oil Corporation, provided the Corporation sells
it back to them at the same price! It boasts that Petroleum Revenue
Tax, royalties, and Corporation Tax will get the government 70% of
the revenue from the fields. But it fails to mention the rates of
profit of up to 50% after tax received by the companies.
The flavour of the White Paper is brought out best by the
list of the uses the government has in mind for the oil revenues,
reproduced below (capital letters and all) from the introduction:

GUARANTEEING general investment incentives.
 
EXPANDING selective assistance (to particular capitalists).
 
SUPPORTING the NEB.
 
TACKLING the problems of Scotland and the development areas.
 
FURTHERING the industrial strategy.
 
REDUCING personal taxation to improve incentives.
 
BOOSTING investment in new sources of energy.
 
CONSERVING existing energy supplies.
 
SUPPORTING the planned expansion of communications, docks etc.
 
STRENGTHENING the programme for reinvigorating inner city areas.
 
DEVELOPING even more ambitious training programmes to prepare young people for the world of work.
 
HELPING people to continue education and training throughout life.
 
PROVIDING more and improved social services.

This is a pretty long list over which to spread the expected tax
revenues from the North Sea of Â£2 billion in 1980 or even the Â£4
billion hoped for in 1985. In fact, it is amazing that the government
has the nerve to include expansion of the social services as one of
its priorities when its own Public Spending White Paper plans for
school building in 1981 to be one third of the 1972 level and
hospital building only two thirds (Militant, No. 397).
All the talk of a ‘fairer and more compassionate society’ is
no more than a cover-up for a programme of restoring the position of
British capitalism. How else could you have the statement “many new
jobs should become available in the service sector, including the
public services”, followed by the sentence “The government
intends to retain a firm control over public expenditure so that it
does not absorb too high a proportion of the nation’s resources?”
The White Paper starts out by bemoaning the feeble performance of
British industry. It quite correctly says that “the inadequacy and
poor productivity of investment in a number of sectors of United
Kingdom industry has been an important factor”.
Strategy?
It goes on:
“It would be all too easy for Government to use the
extra revenue simply to finance a quick improvement in living
standards through tax reductions and increased social benefits to an
extent which left insufficient room for increased productive
investment ... It would be wrong to spend the benefits of North Sea
Oil this was. It will be recalled that a useful balance of payments
surplus was built up in 1969–70; but that this was rapidly
dissipated in a short lived consumer boom in the early seventies
leaving no permanent improvement in our economy ... Sustained
economic growth and a return to full employment would not be possible
if our investment strategy were to fail.”
Now it is rubbish to say that if living standards and the social
services were increased by the extent of the oil revenues, then there
would be ‘insufficient room’ for productive investment. The extra
resources from North Sea Oil are less than one fifth of the size of
the resources wasted each year in British industry due to the unused
capacity of 20% or more, as revealed in the National Institute’s
survey of last year.
The reason that capacity is not used is simply that it is not
profitable to do so. If it were mobilised there would be plenty of
resources for additional consumption, social expenditure and
investment. What the White Paper is really saying is that the
capitalists will not expand production and increase investment unless
the workers’ share of the wealth (‘living standards’ and
‘social benefits’) is held back to ‘make room’ for higher profits.
What then is the Government’s “investment strategy”? It is
summarised in the memorable sentence: “Investment can be planned
and executed only within industry itself.” The best the Government
can do is to ‘help’ by using the oil revenues to guarantee the
continuation of the present level of investment incentives (currently
worth more than Â£4,000 million a year), which the White Paper
concedes to be “already comprehensive and generous.”
Despite the CBI’s protests at the proposed expansion of
selective grants to particular industries and firms – their
objection is to the selectivity not the grants of course –
there is no question of the government really getting control of
profitable manufacturing investment as envisaged in Labour’s
Programme 1973 (or 1976 for that matter) through the NEB and
Planning Agreements.
True, the NEB has a “vital role” through its major
subsidiaries “exploiting important growth opportunities or
assisting industrial restructuring” (along the lines of Speke?) and
through backing “enterprising small firms in areas of high
unemployment” (which won’t disqualify any enterprising small
firms). Buried, though for good and all as far as the White Paper is
concerned is the idea of nationalising major, profitable companies in manufacturing.
 
Contradiction
There is also a ritual bow to Planning Agreements to “provide a
means of concerting action by Government and individual firms” but
there is no discussion, of course, of why only one has been signed;
that one, with Chryslers, showed that the only action the capitalists
will agree should be “concerted” is bailing them out when they
are bankrupt.
But will the government’s strategy of bigger handouts, combined
with its general policies of trying to hold down the exchange rate
and wages to maintain competitiveness (profitability), really work?
The White Paper admits that “no programme designed to stimulate
investment can succeed unless the economic background encourages
industrial expansion.” Simply giving the capitalists more cash will
not lead to increased investment unless they can see a profitable market.
But generating a rapid expansion by cutting taxation and
increasing social spending would not lead to an investment boom
either as the experience of the early seventies shows. Because of the
increased share of wealth which would go to the workers, the
capitalists would not foresee profitable investment opportunities in
private industry and would invest their profits in property
speculation and the like.
So the government faces a contradiction. Without an expansion of
the economy, the capitalists will not invest. With too rapid an
expansion, they will not invest.
If only other countries would respond to the Government’s urging
of “the need for effective action to bring the world economy out of
the present recession”.
But the very day before the White Paper was published The
Times reported from Brussels that Denis Healey had failed to
persuade the German government to take more expansionary action, and
the EEC was foreseeing growth of less than 3% this year as compared
with the target of 4–4½% set last autumn.
The fact is, that the Government has no coherent strategy for
North Sea Oil revenues, or anything else for that matter, to restore
full utilisation of society’s resources. All it can do ‘if the
world economy does not recover rapidly’, is to “start expanding
the economy through appropriate fiscal and monetary policies.”
 
Illusions
Presumably Dennis Healey’s Budget will contain measures aimed at
securing perhaps 3–3½% growth. But this with 20% excess capacity
would leave the extent of unemployment and wasted resources unaffected.
The government has totally abandoned Labour’s policies to get
control over the investment and production decisions of the private
sector, policies which Militant has always argued would be
insufficient, but which would at least be a step in the right direction.
The only useful purpose served by this White Paper would be if it
finally lays to rest the idea that the cuts of the past three years,
plus North Sea Oil, will see the economy right – and thereby brings
it home to those who had illusions in North Sea Oil as a magic
solution that socialist policies provide the only means of planning
the resources of the North Sea and the UK as a whole.
 




With all the jubilations from Denis Healey about his ‘financial
miracle’ and how we are about to reach the promised land of
economic recovery as North Sea Oil flows in, people are beginning to
ask where the oil money will actually go.
 
£££
The January issue of the magazine The Banker reported a
survey of the views of a sample of stockbrokers and bankers on the
decline of sterling and what should be done with North Sea Oil revenues.
More than three quarters said that the City had suffered from the
decline in sterling over the last ten years. They blamed the
uncertainty which it caused and also the fact that it reduced the
size of UK banks, measured by their assets in comparison with banks
in countries whose currencies had risen relative to the pound. This
meant a scaling down of the City’s pretensions to world financial dominance.
One third admitted that relaxing exchange controls to allow more
foreign investment, a process which the Labour government has already
begun and is under strong pressure to step up, would lead to a large
outflow of funds.
The most interesting answers, though, were in reply to the
following questions:



Question 7
‘Considering the benefits to the balance of payments to be
expected from North Sea oil, do you agree that they should be used
in any of the ways suggested below?’




 


Average score




To repay overseas debt


2.7




To allow increased investment overseas


2.3




To allow further increase in domestic demand


1.3




To allow the pound to rise


0.5




To build up the official reserves


0.4









Question 8
‘Turning to the government revenues from North Sea oil, do
you agree that they should be used fro any of the purposes
suggested below?’




 


Average score




To cut personal taxation


2.3




To reduce public sector borrowing


2.6




To cut corporate taxation


1.5




To be directed into British industry


1.3




To increase spending on welfare services


0.1



Repaying overseas debt and increasing overseas investment were
both rated as twice as important as expanding domestic demand to
reduce unemployment. This reflects the fear of the bosses that a
substantial reduction in unemployment would stoke up inflation and
lead to wage claims which would jeopardise the recent recovery of
profits.
The City does recognise the necessity of a strong industrial base
for their financial operations: ‘directing’ oil revenues into
British industry was rated as an important priority, and a quarter of
those asked also felt that the government should try to hold the
pound down, presumably to increase industrial competitiveness.
Of course their ideas of ‘directing’ probably involve greater
handouts from the government in the form of investment grants etc.
Obviously any realistic ‘direction’, that is nationalisation of
the banking sector and the major industrial monopolies to ensure that
extra funds made available actually were invested, is far from what
these financiers have in mind!
 
£££
Any thought that they might be going soft in the defence of their
interests is corrected by their attitude to public spending. Cutting
corporation tax and reducing public sector borrowing is evidently at
least fifteen times as important to them as increasing public
spending on the welfare services. For these well-heeled gentlemen who
send their kids to private schools and can afford the privilege of
private medicine such things as free education, the NHS, council
housing etc., are just a waste of money!
 




Andrew Glynn reviews the Government’s White Paper on public
spending.
After the cuts of the past three years, many Labour Party members
looked forward to a major expansion of the public services in the
late ‘Seventies, in line with the Manifesto promises. The
government’s public spending White Paper, published in the middle
of January, has dashed these hopes.
Broadly speaking, current expenditure, on keeping the health and
education services going and on social benefits, is planned to rise
in line with ‘demographic factors’ – the number of people
needing these services and benefits. Meanwhile, capital expenditure
on new hospitals, schools, roads, etc. will hardly grow from its
present, slashed level.
Overall, real public spending will rise at about 2% per year till
1980, but this will rule out practically any improvement in services,
and with staff having to cope in older and older buildings in many
sectors, further deterioration is inevitable.
Here are some ‘highlights’ of this wretched document:

In 1981 total investment by the public sector will be only
three quarters of the level of 1973; increases between now
and 1981 will make up for only about one sixth of the cuts made up
to now.
 
Subsidies made by the government to hold down the prices of
food, goods and services provided by the nationalised industries,
housing, etc. will be cut by a further Â£500 million from the
present level and by 1981 will be only slightly above one half of
the 1974 level.
 
Local authority capital expenditure on housing in 1981 will
be more than 10% below the 1974 level.
 
School building in 1981 will be less than one third
of the level of 1972.
 
Hospital building in 1981 will be two thirds of the
level of 1972.
 
Despite an increase in number of teachers employed of 9,500
as compared with previous plans, the total number will still fall by
21,000 between 1978 and 1981. So much of the potential benefit of
falling numbers of school children in reducing class sizes will be
lost.
 
Debt interest in 1981 will be double the 1974 level, and
about three times the level of spending on school and hospital
building.

No less horrifying than these details from the document, are the
underlying assumptions on which it is written. For the government is
planning for growth in the economy up to 1981 of no more than 3½% a
year. Not that this isn’t an improvement on the last four years
when there’s been virtually no growth at all.
But this should not hide the fact that the government is quite
openly budgeting for mass unemployment on into the ’Eighties. The
White Paper suggests that those receiving unemployment benefit will
fall from 710,000 this year to 510,000 in 1981. What it never makes
clear is how much of this fall is due to a fall in the total number
out of work, or to fewer of those unemployed being eligible.
Any conclusion from those figures that unemployment will fall by
almost a third would be quite wrong. With output only growing ½%
faster than capacity (according to the government’s estimate of 3%
capacity growth), and with current excess capacity around 20%
(according to surveys of industrial capacity), it would take twenty
years to reduce unemployment by one half.
No more obvious example of the bankruptcy of the government’s
policies is imaginable. Any programme for regaining full employment
rapidly must include a programme of public works to ensure the public
services have up-to-date facilities.
But without real control of the economy, and without fitting the
plan for public spending in a socialist plan for the expansion of the
whole economy, any gains in reduced unemployment would soon be wiped
out as firms took advantage of higher demand to restore profits to
the level investors are demanding.
That is why the campaign against the Labour government’s cuts
cannot be separated from campaign to implement a socialist economic programme.
 




In a second article, Andrew Glyn analyses the background to the
Bonn Economic Summit
The Bonn summit, as we showed last week, completely failed to come up with a programme for expanding the capitalist world economy and regaining full employment.
But expansion was not the only issue discussed at the summit
and other international economic meetings of recent weeks. For the
stagnation of the world economy has intensified the competitive
struggle for markets, and many of the measures announced recently can
only be understood against this background.
 
Fall of dollar hits European capitalists
At first sight, it seems extraordinary that the Japanese and
German capitalists have been pressurising the Americans to reduce
their massive current account deficit, forecast at $25 billion this
year. But most of this deficit reflects extra imports of oil, rather
than representing a market for Japanese and German manufactures.
In fact, the US deficit is highly damaging to its competitors
because it drives down the value of the dollar and drives up other
currencies – particularly the Deutschmark and Yen, the currencies
of the ‘strong countries’ with balance of payments surpluses.
This makes it less profitable for German and Japanese capitalists to export.
The president of the Keidanren, the Japanese CBI, was reported in
Business Week (24th July) as complaining that a record number
of exporters (1,500 per month) were going bankrupt “directly
because of appreciation (rise in the value relative to other
countries) of the Yen.”
Bankruptcy of exporting industries is not the only problem caused
by the weakness of the dollar. As the Economist explained (18
July) failure of the US to curb its deficit “is putting the world’s
whole monetary system at risk. For the dollar is the currency in
which most of the world holds its international resources. The danger
of a dollar slide, however well managed, is that at some point too
many holders may finally decide to cut their losses and push the
dollar of the precipice, sending unwarranted tidal waves of money
across the world’s exchanges.”
 
Carter fails to stem US oil imports
The pressure on the US also partly reflects the fact that it has
increased the use of oil by 1% compared with 1973, whereas the other
major countries have cut their consumption by 10–15%. The other
capitalist countries realise that continued rapid growth of US demand
for oil would soon eliminate the temporary glut of oil caused by the
reduced demand from the other countries. This would strengthen OPEC’s
power to raise the oil price.
Carter would like to reduce dependence on imported oil for
strategic reasons; and the US oil producers have less patriotic
motives for seeing a price increase of oil in the US to cut demand
and thus imports. But the price rise is bitterly opposed by those
sectors of American capital which have benefitted from cheap fuel,
and it is hard to see how Carter will be able to honour his pledge to
raise the US price to world levels by 1980 and to cut imports by 2½
million barrels a day 1985.
 
Strong economies want new “snake” to strengthen their position
The German and French proposals to relink the currencies of Europe
in a new “snake” which would then slide up and down against the
dollar, also represents an attempt to maintain the position of the
relatively strong countries. The fundamental advantage for them is
that, by linking up with the weaker pound and lira, the Mark would
rise less rapidly against other currencies (since March 1973 it has
risen by 36% against the dollar). Holding down the Mark would help
preserve the competitiveness of German exporters in relation to
American and Japanese firms. It would at the same time improve their
position against their weaker European competitors (UK and Italy especially).
Since March 1973 the pound has fallen 45% against the Mark, but if
tied in with the snake such a fall would be impossible. The low
productivity growth (0% in the UK since 1973 and ½% a year in Italy
as compared with 3% per year growth in Japan, Germany and France)
could no longer be partially hidden behind a falling exchange rate.
British and Italian capital would be unceremoniously bundled out of
European markets.
The German and French capitalists are offering as bait a huge 50
billion dollar fund to support the currencies of the weak countries.
But this “generosity” is simply aimed at speeding up the business
of taking over the weak countries’ markets. No wonder the British
Treasury reacted to the scheme with “deep suspicion that the system
is little more than a means of holding down the Mark and imposing
restrictive policies on Germany’s partners” (Times, 11
July). Only eurofanatic Edward Heath argued that “it could greatly
improve claims of more jobs” (Times, 13 July), – without
saying how, of course!
 
The “Tokyo Round”: under the shadows of trade war
Despite desperate efforts to secure a dramatic agreement on trade
in time for the summit, all that emerged was a “framework of
understanding”. After five years of bargaining, tariff cuts (cuts
in taxes on imports) between the EEC and USA of one third are
considered likely while “there is much discontent with the Japanese
offers of tariff cuts, and the Community has gone so far as to reduce
its own offer to Japan” (Times, 18 July).
But even the reductions between the EEC and USA are trifling,
being spread over eight years and amounting to a cut of tariffs from
about 10% to 6–7%. These will do nothing to counteract the host of
special tariffs, quotas, special marketing agreements etc., which
GATT estimates have been extended over the past three years to $50
billion worth of textile trade and another $50 billion worth of trade
in other commodities (steel, electronics etc.).
At the Tokyo talks the bitterest battle is between the USA which
wants many of the subsidies used to support ailing industries banned,
whilst the EEC is objecting to the USA’s use of import duties
against any commodity which is subsidised.
But Britain and France are in turn pressing for the freedom to put
selective import restrictions or any “disruptive” inflow of
imports from a particular source, this being aimed at low-cost Far
Eastern suppliers. Even Japan’s pledge at the summit to prevent the
volume of exports rising this year is empty as the rise in the Yen
has already caused a 5% fall.
 
The necessity of socialist planning
Whatever “agreements” on trade and exchange rates are patched
up over the coming months will only be compromises on the degrees of
protectionism as the capitalist world lurches towards full-scale
trade war. All the sweet-talking cannot hide the fact that economic
relations between states are fundamentally competitive under capitalism.
This becomes most obvious in the present situation of deep crisis
and highlights the necessity for a socialist planned economy to
overcome the anarchy of capitalism internationally as well as within
the individual countries.
 







The nationalisation of the major banks and insurance companies, carried overwhelmingly at Labour’s 1976 Conference, represents a major piece of unfinished business for the labour movement.
The 1931 Party Conference unanimously passed a resolution calling for the nationalisation of the banks and the direction of investment.





Banking was the only major sector included in Labour’s 1945 programme which was left in private hands, only the Bank of England being taken over. Now the Labour leaders are again ducking away from any confrontation with the City.
 
Socialist plan
The most important proposal of the National Executive’s Statement in 1976 was for: “A major publicly owned stake in the financial system comprising the top seven insurance companies (sufficient to account for 30% of premium income) a merchant bank and the four major private clearing banks.” (i.e. Lloyds, Barclays, Midlands, National Westminster). But this demand is missing from the TUC-Labour Party liaison committee document Into the Eighties.
The implementation of a real socialist plan of production for the economy is inconceivable without government control of the financial system. To produce for need rather than profit requires the whole financial system to be used for mobilising society’s resources wherever they can most usefully be put to work.
The weakness of the National Executive’s Statement, however, was that it tended to exaggerate what could be achieved simply by taking over the banks.
It stressed the low rate of investment in British industry and argued that the key to success in reaching the target of doubling manufacturing investment “lies in developing a publicly owned stake in the very areas of the financial system where critical lending and investment decisions are made: then banks and the insurance companies.”
 
Higher profits
But simply channelling more funds in their direction will not cause the capitalists to invest. In their evidence to the Wilson Committee, the banks pointed out that manufacturing industry was borrowing less than one half of what the banks had made available. The CBI said that:
“The clear conclusion of our members is that it has not been a shortage of external finance [for example bank credit] that has restricted industrial investment but rather a lack of confidence that industry will be able to earn a sufficient return.”
In other words, they did not require even more unused borrowing facilities, but rather higher profits.
The NEC’s statement contrasted the lack of government control of finance in the UK with the situation in other major capitalist countries like France, Italy and even Japan. But over the last four years fixed investment has actually fallen or stagnated in all these countries, just as in the UK.
Publicly owned banks by themselves will not generate investment where the economic crisis makes it unprofitable for the industrialists to borrow money to invest in new factories which will not have a market.
The real conclusion from this is that securing the full use of society’s resources requires nationalisation and planning not only of the financial system, but of industry as well. The two sectors are inextricably linked in the economy and have to be combined in a socialist plan of production.
The TUC-Labour Statement, however, abandons nationalisation of the financial system. It calls for the Bank of England “to act on behalf of the government in monetary affairs and not as an independent body; and for the Department of Trade and Industry to “take the lead in ensuring proper connection between the financial institutions and the industrial strategy.” These are both entirely vacuous suggestions while the financial system stays in private hands.
 
Equal terms?
It does see “a need to regroup certain institutions notably Giro and the National Savings Bank, so that a new publicly owned bank can compete on equal terms with the big four clearing banks.” But as a concession to those who voted for the NEC’s statement, this is derisory.
Look at the pathetic size of suck a bank! Whilst the Clearing Banks in 1976 controlled nearly £24 billion capital, other banks £8½ billion and Building Societies £33 billion, the National Savings Bank could muster £2 billion and the Giro a mere £176 million. Some competition!
The profit figures for the financial giants show how they have prospered despite the economic crisis. Conference must reaffirm the policy of renationalising the banks and insurance companies as a central part of a socialist plan of production, alongside nationalisation of the 200 industrial monopolies.
Moreover, it must instruct the NEC to launch a massive campaign to counter the fears of workers in the finance sector that nationalisation would mean loss of jobs and to explain how it is only a socialist plan based on such a programme of nationalisation that can end unemployment and provide necessary improvements in living standards and public services.





        Increases in Profits 1977–78        




Clearing Banks




Barclays


   569%




National Westminster


   321%




Midland


   525%




Lloyds


   514%




Insurance Companies




Commercial Union


   400%




Royal Insurance


   526%




Prudential


   351%




General Accident


   524%




Guardian


   248%




Sun


   895%




Legal and General


     34%




Merchant Banks




Guinness Peat


1,268%




Kleinwort Benson


   205%




Hill Samuel


   325%




Mercury


   255%




Source: Management Today, August 1978



 




A Review of The Conscript Army
Published by Routledge at £3.50
The Conscript Army, edited by Frank Field, provides lots of
information which completely refutes the lies of the Tory press about
‘scroungers on the dole’:
 
1: “Many of those on the dole really have jobs.”
A Department of Employment (DE) survey, concentrating on
occupations where scope for working on the side was greatest, found
that less than 3% of claims were fraudulent.
 
2: “The figures for unemployment exaggerate the numbers really
out of work.”
Census figures showed, in 1973, at least a quarter of a million
people out of work but not registered. (The Cambridge Economic Policy
Group puts the figure now at around one million.)
 
3: “Few people are out of work for long.”
In mid-1976 almost a quarter of a million people out of work for
at least a year, and nearly half a million for six months or more.
 
4: “Benefits are so high that people on the dole aren’t
badly off.”
About 200,000 were unemployed in July 1976 and receiving no
benefit of any kind. For every two people unemployed and receiving
supplementary benefit, there was one other person unemployed and with
an income below the state poverty line.
 
5: “Many people become unemployed just to get redundancy pay.”
In 1975 only 7% of those becoming unemployed got redundancy pay.
 
6: “Withdrawing benefit would force the scroungers back to
work.”
Between 1968 and 1973 the “four-week rule” was operating which
involved supplementary benefit being withdrawn from people not
finding work in that time. One survey estimated that one in ten of
those affected were forced into a position where they “resorted to
crime for the first time in their lives during the weeks following
withdrawal of benefit.”
 
7: “Lots of people don’t bother to look for a job since they
get more on the dole.”
A DE investigation in 1973 found that only 1% of those drawing
unemployment benefit were getting more than if they were at work. The
Supplementary Benefits Commission found that “well under 2%” of
unemployed claimants would get less if they were working.
 
8: “Anybody can get a job doing general labouring.”
In 1976 there were 56 general labourers out of work for every
vacancy.
 
Ironically the figure in the book which has received most
publicity (probably because it is on the back cover) is wrong. The
authors calculate that with full employment £15 billion more wealth
would have been produced in the three years 1974–76. But if the
figure of real unemployment of 2Â½ million is adopted, and taking
account of the higher productivity at full utilisation of plant, you
reach the figure of over £20 billion for 1976 alone.
 
“Tragic”
Confirmation of this comes from figures from a National Institute
survey showing 20% excess capacity in industry. The fact that the
cost to society from unemployment is so much higher than the level of
benefits (around £1.2 billion in 1976) should be rammed home to
anybody trying to excuse unemployment.
Given these devastating facts, the discussion in the book on the
reasons for unemployment, and on what should be done, is very feeble.
The decision of major capitalist governments to abandon full
employment is described as a “tragic miscalculation” (p. 102),
with no attempt to see it in the context of the world economic crisis
and the need to restore profits. One author even accepts the rubbish
put about by the bosses’ economists that the “full employment
level of unemployment” (!) has risen to 500,000.
Frank Field does point out that the elimination of overtime in
manufacturing would have provided more than 300,000 extra jobs in
1976. But apart from this, his main policy to bring down unemployment
is import controls.
His argument that German capitalists, for example, would not
retaliate because they sell more to Britain than they buy, is quite
wrong. It is exactly because Britain is such an important market that
there would be massive retaliation to really widespread and long term
import controls. The retaliation would not be from spite, but in
order to force abandonment of the controls through the threat posed
to export industries.
 
Obstacle
The basic question Frank Field never confronts is how a Labour
government, pledged to implement full employment, could actually gain
sufficient control over the economy to implement that pledge. He says:
“Over the last three years the whole community has
suffered cuts in living standards in order to raise company
profitability and thereby investment. If the private sector fails to
deliver with ‘our investment’ the case will be made for direct
intervention by the National Enterprise Board.” (Page 150)
But surely the incapacity of British capitalists to invest and
provide jobs has been demonstrated for far too long already. Nor
would more intervention by the NEB force them to do what they don’t
find profitable. Frank Field obviously wants a rational, planned
economy providing full employment. Where he goes wrong is in his
belief that such planning in the interests of society as a whole can
be introduced within a capitalist system which operates according to
the quite different law of private interest for the few.
These facts and figures add crushing weight to the arguments of
Militant that only the anarchy of capitalism is responsible
for unemployment and that the workers must not be made to carry the
can for the bosses’ failures. That’s why we demand the right for
very worker to get ‘work or full pay’; that the production of
wealth be increased by sharing out the work and reducing hours, with
no loss of wages, thus running industry at full capacity. Only the
need for profits for a handful of big bankers and employers stands in
the way of giving jobs to all – and only the nationalisation of
those banks and major industries under workers’ control and
management, allowing a socialist plan of production, can remove that obstacle.
 




Dear Comrades,
R. Adams [Militant, 11 November] raised the question of what has really happened to manufacturing production. These are the official figures [taking 1970 as 100].



January 1974


    


102.8




1974 as a whole


108.9




1976 as a whole


103.4




August 1977


103.4



Thus in 1976 output was 6% or so below the level of the YEAR of the three-day week [1974], as Peter Taaffe specifically said, [Militant, 30 September], whereas in August 1977, it was ½% above the level of the three-day week, measured by the MONTH most affected, January 1974, as I said in my article.
Both the statements were correct, if confusing, and together do not imply rapid growth from 1976 to 1977. As the table shows, in August manufacturing output was the same level as in 1976 as a whole.



 


Yours fraternally
Andrew Glyn



 




‘Reserves at record level’, ‘Britain’s trade out of the
red’, ‘Stock Exchange at all-time high’.
These typical headlines from recent weeks reflect a degree of
euphoria in the media that at last “things are going right for
Britain”. James Callaghan and the other Labour leaders have seized
on this mood as justification for their policies. But what is the
real significance of these developments?
 
The Reserves
The reserves of gold, dollars and other foreign currencies held by
the Bank of England have risen to nearly $15 billion, as compared
with just over $4 billion around the turn of the year at the height
of speculation against the pound.
This increase represents cash which the multinational firms and
banks have decided to deposit in British banks because interest rates
are relatively high. This, combined with less worry about an early
further downward slide in the pound, makes investment in one of the
City’s financial markets attractive.
The present level of reserves would allow Denis Healey to pay off
the borrowing from the IMF many times over. That is, if only he was
sure that the recent cash influx would stay in London. But at the
first sign of the government’s pay policy being decisively
breached, the money can be moved out of London instantly, and the
reserves would evaporate even quicker than they were built up over
recent months.
Far from being money which has been earned through higher exports,
it is all borrowed – in fact the current account of the balance of
payments has been in deficit to the tune of around £2 billion so far
this year.
The Bank of England could let the pound rise a bit more in the
face of this inflow of cash, and this would reduce import prices and
help keep down the cost of living. But it is a fundamental part of
the government’s strategy to increase exports and any rise in the
pound reduces their profitability.
So the Bank is preventing the pound from rising by buying dollars
for all its worth. The whole operation is like following the advice
of the Chicago moneylender who advertised his services with the
slogan: “We will lend you enough money to get you right out of
debt.”
 
Britain Out of the Red?
After the huge deficit in the first half of the year, the balance
of payments surplus of £316 in August was greeted with rapture by
the press. In fact the surplus was due to lower imports of “the
traditionally volatile items of diamonds, ships and aircraft”
(Financial Times).
And to put the surplus in perspective, if UK industry was working
at full capacity, imports would be about £700 million a month
higher. So August’s surplus would turn into a massive deficit.
But the most important point is that although the volume of
exports has risen by about 12% since this time last year, stagnation
is worsening in the world economy. Moreover, the competitive
advantage British exporters gained when the pound tumbled has been eroded.
The National Institute’s latest forecast is for exports to rise
by about 3½% over the next year. So any notion that August’s
surplus signifies that the economy is about to be launched into a
sustained export boom is completely wrong.
 
Stock Exchange Boom?
On September 14th the Financial Times 30-share index stood
at 549.2. This was 5.6 points higher than the previous record of May
1972. The FT index measures the average value of a representative
bundle of shares in leading industrial companies. On average, these
have risen by nearly 300% since the ‘low’ of January 1975, with
the individual shares rising from 107% (Spillers) to 852% (Lucas).
To put this rise in context it is necessary to go back a few
years. Between the mid-1960s and 1972 the share index stayed at much
the same level in real terms. That is, the rise in the price of
shares more or less balanced the rise in prices over the period. But
it was over this period that the downward slide in the rate of profit
in Britain really got going.
By 1972 profitability was only about half the level of the
mid-’60s (Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, June 1976,
p. 156). To some extent at least the capitalists were victims of
their own archaic accounting procedures. For the real decline in
profitability was masked by the inclusion of fictitious profits
resulting from inflation, and to a degree the Stock Exchange was
dazzled by these paper profits.
When Tony Barber’s boom of 1972 collapsed the stock market
collapsed with it and in real terms share prices fell to around one
quarter of the level of the Sixties and early Seventies. By the
beginning of 1975 shares were worth less in real terms than at the
time of the Dunkirk evacuation. The average company was valued on the
stock exchange at one third of what it would have cost to produce its
buildings and machinery.
But the rate of profit had again fallen by one half since 1972. By
1975 it was about one quarter of the level of the Sixties. So the
collapse of the stock market just about reflected the fall in
profitability over the previous ten years as a whole.
During the last year, the rate of profit has increased slightly,
helped by wage controls and profits from North Sea Oil. The rise in
the stock market represents a reaction to this rise in profits and a
hope that it will continue. Another factor is the fall in interest
rates which makes the return from holding shares more attractive.
The fact that the market moves in sudden lurches reflect the
sheep-like behaviour of the manager of the big institutional
investors (insurance companies, pension funds etc.) which dominate
the market. They can get into just as much of a panic about being
left behind when the market rises as they do when they fear it will fall.
Already much of the most recent rise in the stock market has been
wiped out, probably reflecting the fact that so far at least the rise
in profits has been quite small – in real terms they are only 14%
higher than in 1975.
Nor does the stock market boom, such as it is, mean that the
capitalists will soon follow Denis Healey’s exhortations to invest
more in plant and machinery.
The boom is in the price of old shares. It does not mean that
there is a flood of companies coming to the stock market to sell new
shares to finance real investment projects. This would only happen if
the rate of profit was decisively restored and if the capitalists saw
the prospect of expanding markets.
So far, neither of these conditions is present. The real state of
the British economy is shown not be the temporary waves of optimism
on the stock exchange; but rather by the fact that manufacturing
output is only ½% above the level of the 3-day-week, and that
investment in manufacturing industry, over and above replacement of
worn-out equipment, is only two thirds of the level of 1970.
 




Big business helps finance two economic institutes.
The Institute for Economic Affairs [IEA] is the propaganda centre for the ideology of the free market. A stream of pamphlets by the ‘monetarist’ Milton Friedman and his followers blame the state for every aspect of the economic crisis. Few people read them of course, but the arguments are taken up by the Tory press and mass media to try to discredit Labour as “the party of state intervention.”
The Tory Party adopts their arguments for mass unemployment (described as ‘natural’), for legal shackles on the unions (to make collective bargaining ‘free’) and for dismantling the welfare state (to increase ‘choice’).
But capitalists have practical interests as well. They need forecasts of what is likely to happen in the UK and overseas markets, if they are to make profitable investment decisions. So they also help to finance the National Institute for Economic and Social Research [NIESR] which makes these forecasts.
After their August forecast, Patrick Hutber, wrote to the Sunday Telegraph: “Do those British companies and banks, to whose contributions the Review greatly pays tribute, realise the damage they are doing to their own future prospects by giving it their support.” There were also rumours of the City setting up a “‘small committee’ which could have a talk to the economists.”
Has the NIESR suddenly become converted to Militant’s programme for nationalising the major monopolies? Not at all. The NIESR are out and out Keynesians who believe that spending cuts have only made the recession in the economy worse.
Figures they produce show that the government’s borrowing is £1 billion below the limit set by the IMF. They also show that the size of government borrowing (£7–7½ billion per year) is the result of the extent of the recession, for if there was anything approaching full employment, the extra incomes would mean higher taxation and the government would show a surplus (of £2–4 million).
So the reason for the deficit is not overspending by the government, but underspending by the capitalists, who do not find it profitable to invest sufficiently so that all capacity is used.
All that the National Institute suggests is that the government should expand the economy by 3½–4% during 1978. This is not some drastic proposal which would really cut unemployment. On the contrary, all it would do is to prevent unemployment rising by an additional 200,000 or so which the NIESR expects if no expansionary action is taken. Since faster growth would mean more markets, why are the capitalists so hostile?
Fundamentally, they know that without an upsurge in investment, any government-stimulated expansion will collapse in inflation – as happened with Barber’s boom in 1973. And they see mass unemployment as the only way of restoring profitability by holding back wages.
Now that Phase III has collapsed they are not even satisfied with unemployment being maintained at its present level. They actually feel it necessary that it should rise, in order to keep profits rising.
Since Phase II was introduced, profits have shot up. The latest figures show a 25% rise in company figures between the third quarter of 1976 and the first quarter of 1977. But profits had fallen so sharply that even this rate of increase would have to be maintained for another three years if the levels of profits of the mid-60s were to be maintained.



Industrial and Commercial profits % of net output




1965


1972


1975


1976


1977




 


3rd Quarter


4th Quarter


 




12.9


10.3


4.2


4.1


5.0


5.4




Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, June 1977 updated



Moreover, Economic Trends (August 1977) reports that more than half the increase in profits since the summer of 1976 has been in profits from North Sea Oil. This does not mean the higher profitability in industry generally which would be necessary for an investment boom.
Having seen the forecasts of manufacturing investment growth in 1977 scaled down from 20% a year ago to 5% now, NIESR still hope for more improvement in 1978. But without a big increase in profitability, this will not be sustained. Everybody in the labour movement would like to see really fast expansion to bring down unemployment. But without adequate profits for big business, there is no way the government could force the capitalists to invest.
 
Stark Choices
The latest idea of Tribune (September 2) is that the government should use the same tactics of threatening to blacklist firms not doing enough investment as it has been using against firms breaking the pay code. But there’s all the difference in the world between threatening sanctions (such as withholding government contracts) against a few tinpot firms and attempting to force the major monopolies to do what they regard as unprofitable.
The Labour government would certainly be faced with an intensification of the present strike of capital. If the capitalists regard even the National Institute’s feeble proposals for their expansion as “excessive” – and their representatives are even threatening it with extinction! – what would be the reaction of big business to government intervention in its investment decisions?
As when Labour government threatened any serious moves against big business in the past, they would be faced with a stark choice: either retreat and carry out the policy advocated by the CBI; or tackle the crisis with socialist measures and take over the big monopolies which dominate the economy.
 




North Sea Oil has come to be like Britain’s El Dorado: a
province of abundant wealth holding out the promise of golden
salvation – but unfortunately entirely mythical.
It is argued, both on the right and left of the labour movement,
that North Sea Oil will provide the means of solving Britain’s
economic crisis.
Jim Callaghan, for instance, speaking recently in Cardiff, said
that “Thanks to a combination of factors, including the great bonus
of our own oil, Britain is about to enter a decade of opportunity.”
But the hard-headed representatives of big business, having
overcome their initial enthusiasm at the unexpected field of profits
opened up in the North Sea, are now taking a more realistic view.
“While North Sea oil,” comments the Financial
Times (8.9.77), “is a fairly unambiguous benefit – one need
only imagine our present condition without it to see this – it does
leave most of our fundamental problems largely untouched.”
In other words, North Sea oil is a bonus without which British
capitalism would be in an even worse position than it is. But against
this “optimistic” view, other capitalist economists, notably
Wynne Godley of the Department of Applied Economics at Cambridge, are
now arguing (as we shall see) that North Sea oil will actually have
an overall adverse effect on the British economy.
From the beginning, however, this paper has pointed out that a
strategy for economic recovery based on the benefits of North Sea oil
must be illusory.
 
Marginal
Production of oil from the North Sea is now about 13m tons, or a
seventh of Britain’s present requirements. By 1980 it is estimated
that this will rise to between 95m and 115m tons, more than enough to
meet total home demand. It would be the equivalent of about 10% of
current exports on 2½% of Gross National Product.
While certainly easing Britain’s balance of payments problem,
the oil will have a marginal effect on other problems. Here we will
simply summarise six main reasons why the oil will not rescue British
capitalism from continued, catastrophic decline.

The improvement from North Sea oil will hardly be any
greater than the effect of the balance of payments that has already
come from North Sea gas. The balance of payments would now be much
worse without gas, but the benefits from gas have not led to any
improvement in the performance of British industry.
 
North Sea oil will do no more than offset the impact on the
balance of payments of the quadrupling of the price of OPEC oil in
1973. Only somebody who argues that there was no crisis in the
British economy before 1973, and that all the problems stem from
OPEC price rises can consistently argue that North Sea oil will
solve the crisis now.
 
In fact, overall, North Sea oil will not even fully offset
the rise in oil costs since 1973. This is because the offshore oil
has been developed by foreign, mainly US, oil companies using
largely imported machinery. This machinery will have to be paid for,
and the US companies will send home a large proportion of their
profits. As a result, North Sea oil will cost more in foreign
exchange in 1980 than OPEC oil cost in 1973.
 
Apart from repatriated profits and payments for equipment,
a further chunk of North Sea oil revenues will be required to pay
off the foreign debts built up in the last four years in a desperate
attempt to prevent the complete breakdown of the economy. According
to the Governor of the Bank of England, some $20 billion falls due
by 1985.
 
The profits resulting from North Sea oil will be very big:
around £2½ billion in 1980, or 1½% of Gross Domestic Product.
This compares with company profits at the moment of £9 billion. If
all the North Sea oil profits were invested in British industry –
something implied by those who argue that the oil will benefit the
rest of industry – that would go over half way towards doubling
manufacturing investment.

But there is no likelihood of
this happening. Nearly two-thirds of these profits will go abroad to
foreign oil companies which took the biggest share of the licences.
They will have no reason to invest these profits back into British
industry with its low level of profits. Nor is there any guarantee
that British firms making profits from the North Sea will invest
their profits here. The big monopolies, whether British or American,
will invest wherever they find it most profitable.
 
Tax gains from North Sea oil profits will be very small. It
is estimated that in 1980 taxes from the oil (even including about
£300m revenue from the British National Oil Corporation) will be
less than 10% of current revenue.

Although Labour’s
Manifesto promised “full government participation with
majority public participation”, under pressure from the oil
monopolies the government retreated even on its taxation proposals.
The Petroleum Revenue Tax is set at the comparatively moderate rate
of 45% and is not charged at all if it would drive profits from a
particular oil field below 30%!

The recent “participation
agreements” do little more than guarantee British access to North
Sea oil, at market prices, in case of emergency. Thus while the oil
companies are going to be able to reap super profits, the BNOC will
get only about a tenth of the profits from North Sea oil in the
early 1980s.
 

Pessimism
In addition to these points, however, a number of economists have
now come to the conclusion that the improvement in the balance of
payments resulting from North Sea oil will not at all be an unmixed
blessing for British capitalism. They fear that the consequent
strengthening of the pound will lead to an overvaluation of sterling
internationally which will actually further undermine the
competitiveness of British exports and, far from giving a boost to
British manufacturing industry, will actually accentuate its decline.
This view has recently been put forward by Wynne Godley of Cambridge:
“Foreign earnings from North Sea oil could result in a
failure of the external value of sterling to fall sufficiently ...
Domestic unemployment, on extremely plausible assumptions would reach
3m by 1985 ... Industrial profits would be eroded, and our industry
become derelict ...” (Financial Times, 8.9.77)
It is surely clear from all these points that, in any case, if
North Sea oil is to make any real contribution to the recovery of the
British economy, its development and production must be taken out of
the hands of the big oil companies and be placed under public control
through nationalisation under workers’ control and management.
But the fundamental point here is that North Sea oil, even in the
short run, can be no substitute for socialist measures to tackle the
crisis created by British capitalism.
 




With inflation running at 20 per cent a year or more agreements
which tie wages to the cost of living may appear an excellent way of
maintaining living standards. This seems to be in line with the TUC’s
plan for wage bargaining after Phase Three ends in the autumn. The
simplest arrangement would be for wages to rise by 1% for each 1%
rise in the cost of living.
This amounts to a 1% “Threshold” with no initial wage
increase, except presumably for groups of workers not covered by cost
of living deals under Phase Three. It compares with the 7% initial
increase, and the 7% threshold before rises in the cost of living
triggered off wage increases, which were allowed under Phase Three.
But whatever the details of such a scheme such deals are quite
unsatisfactory for a number of reasons:

The Retail Price index used by the government to measure
cost of living is quite inadequate as a measure of inflation for
workers. For example, it leaves out interest which many workers have
to pay on their HP or mortgage commitments: if interest rates
continue to rise the real purchasing power of the wages of workers
making such interest payments is reduced in just the same way as for
any other rise in the cost of living. For example the weekly
mortgage repayments on an average house bought in 1971 rose from
about Â£8.50 per week in 1971 to about Â£11 by the end of 1973.
 
Since the Retail Price Index is published about one month
after the prices are gathered it always lags behind the actual cost
of living. When inflation is only a few per cent this hardly
matters. But at present with inflation running at about 2 per cent
per month a delay in compensating for cost of living rises of, say
six weeks (allowing a couple of weeks for the firms to get around to
paying them) means that real wages will be reduced by about 3 per
cent throughout the period for which the agreement runs.
 
For most workers all the extra they receive under cost of
living agreements will be taxed at the standard rate since the tax
allowances are not raised. This means that a higher and higher
proportion of their income will be taken in taxation. So that even
if real wages, before taxation, were maintained by the cost of
living agreements then real take-home pay will be falling.
 
No account is taken in cost of living agreements of
reductions in living standards caused by cuts in the social
services. For example the Tory public expenditure cuts of last
December will mean a reduction in Government speaking on health,
housing, education etc. of around Â£1.50 per week for a married
couple with two children.

Since it is not the weekly wage packet which is compensated for by
cost of living increases, but only wages paid for hours worked, the
standard of living of many families will be reduced if there are less
opportunities for overtime, or for the wife to do part-time work.
Worst hit will be those families where a full-time breadwinner is
thrown out of work – they will be hit again as unemployment benefit
is whittled down by inflation.
Even the semi-official National Institute is forecasting that in
the next six months unemployment will rise by about 100,000 more than
the normal seasonal increase. And many predictions are of over one
million by the end of the year.
The impasse in which British capitalists find themselves makes it
all the more urgent for them to try and cut costs through
rationalisations of old plant, redundancies etc. If living standards
are held down all the extra productivity will go to profits;
relatively to the capitalists, then, there is a reduction in workers’
living standards.
The union leaders must fight to defend their members living
standards. They could, and should, demand that cost of living
increases be paid six weeks in arrears; that they be based on Trade
Unions’ own cost of living index, worked out by committees drawn
from the movement. Real wage increases could be built in by demanding
an initial increase plus full cost of living compensation.
But expenditure on the social services, tax allowances and overall
policies to deal with unemployment and inflation lie outside
collective bargaining. This demonstrates the limitation of Trade
Union action to protect living standards in a period when the crisis
is pushing the Government to use the weapons at the disposal of the
state to hold them back.
The only lasting protection is action by the whole Labour Movement
to ensure that the Labour Government does not bow to the dictates of
capitalist logic, but implements a real socialist programme for
taking over the major industrial and financial companies.
 




Since the election, the representatives of Big Business have raised a hue and cry about “their money” being taxed away. What is the reality behind this campaign?
Socialists would of course point out that the money which the Government takes in taxes from the capitalists is not theirs in the sense of coming from the efforts of the shareholders and directors. Rather it comes out of the unpaid labour of the ordinary workers they employ.
But in any case the idea that the government is raking in huge sums in company taxation is nonsense. In 1973 industrial companies actually paid tax on less than one third of their gross profits, so great were the tax concessions for investment and interest payments. So out of gross profits of more than £9000 million, less than £2000 million was paid in tax including both the corporation tax paid by the companies directly and the income tax paid by those who receive interest and dividends.
To be set against this, companies received £800 million from the government in direct investment grants, employment subsidies etc. Also, much of the £700 million subsidies to the nationalised industries will have swelled company profits by keeping down charges for fuel, transport etc.
Further, capitalists reaped most of the benefit of the £1,000 million expenditure on roads, £300 million on research, £200 million on the employment service and many other forms of Government expenditure.
It is perfectly clear from these figures that Big Business got very much more from the Government in various forms of handouts than it paid in taxation. If we just take the direct subsidies, grant and extra depreciation allowances then Government handouts to industry run about £5 million per day (rather than Tony Benn’s figure of £2 million).
 
Workers Taxed More
In fact, the weight of taxation has been transferred to the working class. The proportion of manufacturing profits taken in taxation fell from 41% in 1956 to 25% in 1972, while at the same time the proportion of the income the average manual worker taken in income tax and national insurance contributions (net of the family allowance for one child) rose from 2% to 17% over the same period: a 15% fall for the capitalists; a 15% rise for the workers!
But even this shift in taxation has not been anywhere near sufficient to offset the huge fall in the pre-tax profitability of British industry. In the second quarter of 1974 the profits of companies, before taxation but after taking off depreciation and that elements of profits which represent simply a higher price of stocks they hold and which is not available for any expansion of capacity, were only 4.1% of the value of what the companies produced. This is one fifth of the level of 1964.
With the stock market paralysed companies have been forced to make up for much of this fall in profits by financing investment through borrowing from the banks. But the banks have doubled the amount they are owed by industrial companies in the space of only two years and are now reluctant to further expand their lending while profitability stays so low.
So on the one hand Harold Lever has been going round his friends in the City trying to arrange some form of Government guaranteed loan to industry while the CBI demands relaxation of price controls and massive tax cuts.
This mean emphasis is on tax cuts (£3,000 million) rather than relaxing price controls (which the CBI hopes would boost profits by £1,000 million). For though cuts in company taxation must eventually be paid for by even more taxation of workers and cuts in social services they might cause less immediate opposition than the fast inflation which would follow the easing of price controls.
But however it is done, restoring profitability to, say, the 1964 level, which is needed if the economy is to prosper on a capitalist basis, would require a reduction in the living standards of ordinary workers of around 15%. Nothing could show more clearly that a planned socialist economy, far from being an idealist’s Utopia, is an absolute necessity if the conditions of the working class are not to be brutally slashed.
 




“The Trade Unions have it in their power to price their
members or fellow workers out of a job”. With words like these
Sir Keith Joseph laid it on the line that capitalism in its present
crisis can only provide sufficient jobs on the basis of a deep cut in
living standards for the working class.
He and many other capitalist “economists” are speculating
about 1½ million or even more unemployed becoming the new
“acceptable” level.
The boom period of the 1950s and 1960s, with relatively low
unemployment (less than 1% in the middle of 1955 for example) was, he
said “a cruel deception on those whom it was designed to help”.
When the inevitable crisis and recession developed, they were to
be put out of work. This was a clear, if unintentional, indictment of
the whole system’s inability to provide work on a continuing basis.
In the face of Joseph’s attempts to smear many of the unemployed
as shirkers, unemployable, or in some way ‘voluntarily’
unemployed, the Labour Movement must reply that all unemployment is
the result of the capitalistic nature of the system. In a unplanned,
anarchic labour market, it is inevitable that many of those who are
sacked, or who find their existing job intolerable, will have to go
on the dole before they find another.
Anxiety about whether a job will turn up builds up from the first
day of unemployment. This often forces workers rapidly into wretched
jobs (half those signing on stay on the unemployment register for
less than two weeks) but this is no justification for Joseph to
assert that anybody who has been on the dole for less than two weeks
is not really unemployed!
The other side of this rapid turnover is that each year there
are between 3½ and 4 million registrations of unemployed people
seeking work according to Department of Education (DEP) figures.
Though a number of workers will be on the dole more than once a
year (20% of the unemployed at any one time have had more than one
job in the previous year) the level of job insecurity shown by these
figures is horrific.
The fact that in the past there were often more unfilled vacancies
than registered unemployed does not imply that there has been
“negative real unemployment” as Joseph says. Rather, it shows
that pursuit of private profit means that capitalism is incapable of
providing jobs where workers live, or to provide training in the
necessary skills. This is despite the huge bribes which Governments
have used to encourage firms to move to regions of high unemployment
and to stimulate private training.
Particularly scandalous is the fact that unemployment of lads
under twenty grew twice as fast as male unemployment as a whole
between 1959 and 1972.
And this was in a period when increasing numbers stayed on at
school beyond the statutory leaving age.
 
“Unenthusiastic”
Staff in DEP local offices, reckon according to a recent survey in
the DEP Gazette, that about one third of the unemployed have
poor prospects of finding work because of old age and ill health.
This does not show that they are “unemployable” as Joseph would
have us believe.
Capitalism, having exploited and abused their capacity to work,
has no further need for them. Indeed, many of the quarter million who
are out of work due to sickness, but are not registered as
unemployed, should also be counted as being out of a job due to the
ravages of capitalist living and working conditions.
In 1971 there were 5,000 accidents per week in factories which
caused absence from work of more than 3 days.
The same survey reported that the DEP offices regarded one third
of the unemployed as “somewhat unenthusiastic for work”. To
argue, as Joseph does, that these people are “voluntarily”
unemployed is ludicrous. No doubt the majority of those with a job
are “somewhat unenthusiastic” about it! They, like more than one
in ten of the unemployed, show “reluctance to accept the discipline
of work”, that is, of the capitalist factory.
Another survey showed that only 14% of those out of work had left
their job voluntarily; most of these would immediately take up a
reasonable job offer.
Joseph’s suggestion that unemployment has been increased by a
larger dole finds no support in the survey. Only 7% of the unemployed
were judged by the DEP to be liable to earn as low sum as the dole if
employed, and only half of these were thought to be ‘unenthusiastic’
as a result!
In any case it is a miserable reflection on the system that
anybody’s prospective pay is no more than the disgracefully
inadequate dole.
As well as those out of work due to sickness there is another
large group who have no job but who do not register as unemployed for
one reason or another. From the 1971 census it was estimated that
there were 300,000 in this category (230,000 women). The report
recognised that this is probably a large understatement.
 
Over One Million Now
Number of people who know they have no hope of a job, particularly
in areas of high unemployment – won’t bother even to tell the
Census that they are looking for work.
If we add to the official figures all those who the workings of
the capitalist system keep out of a job, the total of unemployment
even now is certainly over one million (or about double the official
figure).
All this is mild in comparison with what might lie in store.
The spectre of mass unemployment is now held out by the
capitalists. They have talked about a figure in “the low millions”
for some years. What does that mean in human misery and degradation?
The rich regard it as a small price to pay to “stabilise” their
system.
Labour must wage a remorseless campaign against redundancies.
There can be NO “acceptable” level of unemployment. If the bosses
cannot provide work then they must provide full pay.
If they will provide neither then that must be used as a
rallying point for Labour to take them over and finish the system
that breeds the horrors of unemployment.
 




The Labour Government’s intention to introduce a wealth tax has caused consternation amongst the ruling class. The leading firm of Tax Consultants has reported (The Times, 11/7/74) that “people are very worried”. The Institute of Economic Affairs has produced a pamphlet attempting to dispute the “oft-repeated slogans about the extent of the inequalities of wealth” whilst the CBI says that “in practice the rich may be made poorer but the poor cannot be made richer”.
The conventional definition of personal wealth included houses, furniture and household effects, cars, cash, life insurance policies, government bonds, stocks and shares and so forth. According to the Inland Revenue, in 1970 the richest 1% of the adult population owned 31% of personal wealth, the richest 5% owned 56% and the richest 10% owned 70%.
Polyani and Wood, in the IEA pamphlet How Much Inequality, which attempts to refute any suggestion of ‘massive inequality’ point to a number of factors which they claim tend to exaggerate inequality.
For example, all the wealth of a family may be attributed just to the husband since it is in his name: the wealth of some people with very small holdings is ignored, and some of the more evenly distributed assets, like houses, may be undervalued. However, they make little mention of defects in the figures which tend to lead to inequality being underestimated.
 
Tax-Dodging
These probably outweigh those they mention. For a large proportion of the wealth of the very rich is not held in their own names, but in the name of discretionary trusts – tax-dodging devices which have made death duties almost voluntary! – and so does not get counted in the figures for personal holdings.
Also omitted are the holdings of very rich people who live a sufficient part of the year outside the country in tax havens like the Channel Isles.
Apologists for capitalism attempt to make the figures appear more acceptable by claiming that much inequality is simply due to disproportionate amounts of wealth held by those in their late fifties and early sixties who have saved up for retirement. A leading advisor to the Labour Party on the Wealth tax, Professor Atkinson, refutes this idea in his book Unequal Shares, where he shows that there is almost as much inequality within any particular age-group as there is in the population as a whole. The importance of inherited wealth, as against saving for retirement, is emphasised in another study which found that half the people leaving £100,000 or more had inherited £100,000 or more.
Unfortunately Atkinson himself sows confusion by arguing that the Inland Revenue’s figures should be adjusted by adding to every person’s holding of wealth the value of the state pension he can expect to receive. Since these are evenly spread throughout the population such an adjustment would knock the share of the richest section down by about 8%.
This is seized on by the IEA authors who want to include in a person’s wealth the value of all his prospective state benefits – unemployment pay, health service benefits etc. But though such benefits constitute an income which is not received directly in return for providing labour, entitlement to them in no sense constitutes ownership of part of society’s stock of assets, and it is totally mystifying to include this entitlement in with wealth. And anyway, social services payments come from money taken from the workers out of taxes, NI contributions etc.
For Marxists, the central feature about the ownership of wealth is that it gives the capitalist not only unearned income, but control over the whole productive system. From this perspective the broadness of the Inland Revenue’s definition of “wealth” can in fact be misleading. The majority of workers own negligible amounts of wealth – in 1970 almost 70% of the adult population owned less than £1,000.
But over the period of struggle for higher living standards during the “boom” numbers of wage, and particularly salary, earners have acquired modest “asset holdings” in the form of owning at least part of their house, some life insurance, a car, and perhaps some cash in a bank or building society – in 1970 another 20% of the population owned between £1000 and £5000 and a further 8% between £5,000 and £10,000. Although individually not enormous, the sheer number of these holdings mean that they make up almost half private holding of wealth. It is the build-up in this size and type of holding which has caused the share of the richest sections to appear to fall over the last sixty years – the IEA pamphlet suggests the share of the top 5% fell from 86% in 1911 to 56% in 1970.
However this tendency towards “greater equality” has in no way dislodged the rich from their control over the productive system. For the available figures show the richest 1% of the population holding 80% of the privately owned stocks and shares in the companies which control the productive system and extract the lion’s share of the profits from the working class.
The fact that some workers own their homes and a few other assets, while affecting the wealth statistics, in no way alters this monopoly of the means of production.
A common answer to these figures is to say that nowadays private holdings of shares are not very important since most shares are owned by Life Insurance and Pension Funds. This is completely false, for these institutions only hold one fifth of the shares and the remainder have stayed in private hands.
Moreover it is nonsense to think that most people in the country have an equal share in those funds; in fact the richest 1% have more than a 10% stake in both these types of institutions. So if we include the shares which the rich hold indirectly through these institutions, we arrive at the richest 1% owning around two thirds of all shares – this being a considerable understatement given the deficiencies of the figures – and controlling a good deal more through their domination of the institutions.
The question immediately arises as to whether the Labour Party’s wealth tax would seriously challenge this monopoly of ownership of the means of production. Precise proposals have not been made public, but presumably they will be fairly close to the 1969 plan in Labour’s Economic Strategy, which called for a tax of 1% on holdings of wealth between £50,000 and £100,000, rising to 5% on holdings above £400,000.
In the first instance the reaction of the rich just to the talk of a wealth tax has been one of horror. There can be no doubt how they would fight it. A profusion of tax avoidance companies would spring into existence. To some extent that process has already started.
But even supposing taxes were levied, it would, at the levels talked about in this document, amount to £250 million. How is this to be financed.
If the rich really had to pay it, they would respond by cutting investment in proportion. That would only intensify the crisis in the system. In political terms a Labour Government with such policies of clipping at the edges of wealth faces the old problem: either carry the measures right through to completely expropriating them, or they will resist to such an extent that the Government is left powerless.
Even if the tax was levied at much more penal rates than at present contemplated, it would be decades before the capitalists were forced to sell all their stocks and shares to the Government to pay the tax. The working class cannot afford to wait for such a gradual process of nationalisation! Nor will the rich wait while they are ‘gradually’ taken over!
Outright nationalisation of all the major industrial and financial companies would eliminate the capitalists’ control over the economy “at a stroke”; and with compensation based not on the stock market valuation of the firm, but on the basis of proven need, the working class would not be lumbered with a gigantic burden of interest on the bonds given in exchange for the companies nationalised, as occurred after the post-war nationalisations.
Such a programme is the only one which would effectively challenge the inequalities in our society, it must be taken up by the whole Labour Movement in response to the capitalists’ opposition to the present modest proposals for the wealth tax.
 

