

On the Campaign
OUR PARTY was the only party that pointed out during the election that in the present period of the decline of capitalism there is no alternative for the working class other than socialism. It was primarily because of that factor that left wingers could and did participate in the campaign without being too greatly embarrassed by a platform which, to put it mildly was not all that a revolutionary Socialist platform should be.
It should not be necessary at this time to repeat that what revolutionary Socialists meant, when they said that the fundamental issue of the campaign was socialism versus capitalism, was not that the campaign was to decide that question but that the working class must be taught that the problems confronting them could not be solved in a fundamental manner except through the destruction of the capitalist system; that fighting to retain democracy as against fascism was like struggling to cure the symptoms and not the disease. The Communists of course did their best to distort the meaning of our campaign slogan by attempting to ridicule us for “trying to usher in socialism” in this campaign, thereby showing that the Communist conception of an election campaign is to get something that is practical and achievable.
But we must confess that at times the accusation levelled against our party by the Stalinists to the effect that we made a lifeless abstraction out of the slogan “socialism versus capitalism” struck home. An election campaign must serve as an educational campaign but an educational campaign that is based simply on contrasting the alleged benefits of socialism as against the miseries of capitalism has very little educational value. The campaign must take the fundamental issue as its guiding thread and utilize the current issues of the day for the purpose of mobilizing the masses for struggle and at the same time connecting those current issues with the fundamental issue. One can shout from now till doomsday that socialism; is necessary and that it is better than, capitalism but to educate the advanced workers one must explain the significance of great events that agitate the minds of vast numbers of people.
Enough has been written to convince every left wing Socialist that the party leadership failed miserably in the great task confronting it during the campaign. Its failure to take a correct position (it did not even take any position) on the great events that absorbed the interest of every class conscious worker has been repeatedly mentioned. I shall mention some minor matters which indicate that as far as the party leadership was concerned the central slogan of the campaign was more or less a meaningless accident.
Towards the end of the campaign the National Office of the party flooded the branches with a magazine full of pictures, which were intended to convince the American workers of the superiority of socialism over capitalism. It is not necessary to deal with the character of the pictures although it could be truthfully asserted that some of the dwelling places shown in the pictures would not induce many American workers to struggle for socialism.
Now there is absolutely nothing wrong – in fact quite the contrary – in showing pictures of future apartments under socialism. But a picture book which has as its purpose winning workers over to the socialist movement which does not contain a word about the class struggle and which indicates that all the workers have to do, in order to get these nice things shown in the pictures, is to vote the socialist ticket, is worthy of the worst type of reformism. The Old Guard might have hesitated before issuing such nonsense.
And where did we get the nice picture book? From the British Labor party. And so the most revolutionary party of the Labor and Socialist International must depend for its propaganda on the most decrepitly reformist party of the same International.
*  *  *  *
“If we only had more money,” was the complaint of many a comrade who sought for an excuse why so little literature was given out by the party. Tremendous effort was exerted to collect money but mainly on the plan of a mail order house. Party members and sympathizers were exhorted to contribute but there was very little in the way of literature to show the contributors that their money was used for effective propaganda. A revolutionary party during the period of struggle under the capitalist system will always be short of funds but the lack of money is not an excuse for any failure to bring out good propaganda literature dealing with events of the day. Not only will comrades and sympathizers gladly give their last penny to publish such literature; sufficient money can be derived from its sale to defray the cost of printing. Collecting money is. largely a political task. If a party holds meetings on burning issues; if its speakers give a revolutionary interpretation of those issues, if, in other words, it convinces the advanced workers that it is a revolutionary party, the problem of raising money is more than half solved.
*  *  *  *
The fact of the matter is that there was enough money to publish the Call. And unfortunately that was money thrown away. An awful sensation comes over me when I think of what a wonderful opportunity was completely missed by the national campaign paper of the party. The Call was alone in the field. It could have harnessed the tremendous enthusiasm of the Yipsels and the revolutionary comrades of the party. Had it dealt with the world-shaking events of the day in a competent manner, from a Marxist point of view; had it given the lead to the comrades on all the perplexing questions confronting them; had it answered the attacks of our enemies vigorously and effectively it would now be sitting on top of the world.  Its supremacy as the organ of revolutionary socialism would be unquestioned.
Instead – but what is the use ? Who does not know the pictures, relevant and irrelevant; the dreary, didactic editorials (it must be admitted that they were all against capitalism)? Pictures, sermons on socialism – that is petty bourgeois Utopian socialism.
*  *  *  *
The Wisconsin Socialist party was swimming in familiar waters during the campaign. Running on the Progressive ticket and burdened only with the “production for use” platform of the Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation about ten members of the party were elected to office and undoubtedly as far as some of them are concerned socialism has been achieved. I have been unable to find out whether there is such a thing as a Socialist party in Wisconsin. The party members went into the Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation as individuals and since the platform of the Federation contains the famous “production for use” clause the Wisconsin Socialists are more than satisfied and it is quite certain that they do not see any distinction between the Wisconsin Socialist party and the Federation. And in truth there is none.
Unfortunately the “left” wing of the Wisconsin party was composed of liberal Stalinists with Mrs. Berger as its god-mother and nothing could be expected of such a “left” wing. There must be many a real Socialist in Wisconsin and one of the tasks of the left wing will be to find them; and organize them to struggle for the principles of revolutionary socialism.
*  *  *  *
Socialists Supporting Spanish Democracy
IN THIS country our party states that not bourgeois democracy but socialism should be the objective of the workers’ struggles. Quite correct. It follows that in Spain where the struggle has reached an infinitely higher level than in this country, where the workers are no longer participating in an election campaign with ballots but are deciding questions on the field of civil war, the idea that the workers must struggle for socialism is a thousand times more applicable than here. The Stalinists persist in fighting for bourgeois democracy even in Spain but I presume that the leadership of our party would not accept the Stalinist contention, at least in theory.
Let us see how some of our party comrades who consider themselves left wingers fail to draw necessary conclusions from the theory that our objective must be socialism and not bourgeois democracy. Even before the National Executive Committee resolved to support the North American Committee for the Defense of Spanish Democracy, the question of supporting a meeting held under the auspices of that committee in Chicago came up before the Chicago Executive Committee of the party. Since it is necessary to clear up a great deal of confusion on this point in the minds of loyal left wing Socialists it is necessary to treat this question in some detail.
The Chicago Executive Committee made a peculiar decision on the question. It would not participate officially in the meeting because the committee under whose auspices the meeting was held accepted a political line contrary to the one accepted by revolutionary Socialists. At the same time it permitted individual party members to participate in the Committee and instructed all party members to distribute leaflets for the meeting. So that the party in Chicago was both in and out of the Committee and the meeting.
The confusion arose from the failure to make the simple distinction between a united front on a programmatic basis which we cannot accept unless the program is our program, and a united front for a specific objective.
In the struggle against the Spanish fascists revolutionary Marxists will fight side by side with every other group bourgeois or proletarian; they will offer aid to every group struggling against the fascists. If for reasons of his own a Basque Catholic priest is willing to take a rifle and shoot a Fascist Catholic priest there is no reason in the world why a revolutionary Socialist should refuse to buy the rifle. We aid and fight together with every person involved in the struggle against fascism.
But that is as far as it goes. Our political program is peculiarly our own and we make no compromises with any other group. It is true we are struggling against fascism but with a different purpose; we are struggling to establish a Socialist Spain while other groups are fighting to retain the bourgeois democratic republic. There can be unity of action between these groups but no unity of program.
There is no reason in the world why a joint committee should not be created for the purpose of collecting funds to send arms, clothing and other necessities to the Spanish fighters against fascism. And in that committee could be represented Communists, Socialists, anarchists and even liberals. But the joint committee should have as its purpose the collection of funds and nothing else.
As soon as the committee proclaims it to be its duty to collect funds to defend Spanish bourgeois democracy it enters into the political arena; it thereby formulates a program and one which is absolutely unacceptable to revolutionary Socialists. Under these circumstances revolutionary Socialists (except as a matter of discipline when higher bodies of the party decide) cannot lend their names to and cannot participate in the calling of such a meeting. Called under the auspices of a committee to defend Spanish democracy a meeting has a political character and it is not permissible for revolutionary Socialists to further the cause of such a meeting.
I do not mean that if a Socialist is invited to speak at such a meeting he should refuse to accept. A Socialist should always take advantage of any invitation to speak before a crowd of workers. But he must make his position crystal clear before the audience of workers. There is then no longer a question of a united front but simply one of accepting a chance to educate those who either do not agree with us or else do not know our position.
United front meetings on Spain have only a symbolic significance, representing the unity of the workers in the common struggle against fascism. Of far greater importance are the political meetings on Spain where the workers should be educated in the political significance of that struggle and be informed of the attitude of the various parties in the Spanish civil war. Such meetings can be held only under the auspices of the Socialist party.
And they should be held with much greater frequency than heretofore.
 
Regional Conferences
THE DECISION of the National Executive Committee to hold regional conferences for the purpose of discussing the problems of the convention would be of great benefit to the party provided it is carried out properly. To these regional conferences should be invited all active comrades; leading comrades representing different tendencies in the party should be invited to discuss the situation in the party and the tasks confronting the convention, Adequate notice should be given and preparations made for these conferences so that comrades from more distant parts could attend.
I fear however that with the exception of a few states the kind of conferences that will be held will not be very valuable in the sense that the active comrades “will be able to listen to an intelligent discussion of party matters from all viewpoints. I fear that what the party leadership has in mind with reference to these regional conferences are the kind of campaigns which in the Communist party are called “enlightenment campaigns.” And by that euphemistic term is meant an attempt to convince the membership that the leadership is correct.
 
Leon Trotsky in Mexico?
AS WE GO to press the newspapers carry the announcement that the Foreign Office of the Mexican government will grant comrade Trotsky permission to enter Mexico if he applies for entry. The Mexican petty bourgeois government is anxious to show its liberalism by granting asylum to the one revolutionist whom the capitalist class of every 
country fears more than any other person.
Will Stalin succeed in changing the decision of the Mexican government? That he will try his utmost to do so is certain. The Mexican Stalinists have already begun a vicious campaign and there is no telling what can happen before Trotsky is actually on Mexican soil. Fortunately for Trotsky Stalin cannot exert economic pressure on Mexico as he did on the Norwegian “Labor” government. And the Communists are not such a strong force as to wield a powerful influence on the Mexican government, although they support Cardenas.
The vital interests of the revolutionary movement demand that Trotsky be given political asylum and that he be permitted to instruct the revolutionary workers the world over by his interpretation of the events of the day. The committee which has been recently organized for the defense of Trotsky is not left without work to do. It must continue its existence to guard his rights and to defend him; against the vile calumnies of Stalin and his henchmen.
 



There are enough major mistakes in the resolution on the Farmer-Labor party passed at the Call conference held in New York and published in the Call of March 7, 1936, to make it absolutely unacceptable to any revolutionary Socialist. The closer we come to the actual formation of a Labor party or a Farmer-Labor party the more careful must we be and consequently, in drawing a resolution at the present moment when all kinds of Farmer-Labor parties are springing up, great care should be taken to stress fundamental principles which should under no circumstances be forgotten by any Socialist.
In the state of Wisconsin the Socialist party has joined the Wisconsin Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation; in Terre Haute the S.P. has made a pact with the Communists to work for a Labor party; in many sections of the country our party is contemplating joining some kind of a Farmer-Labor party. The question, in other words, has been taken out of the realm of mere theory and in entering the world of practice, we might find ourselves confronted by monstrosities which will set our party back rather than advance its interests and the interests of the labor movement.
Every resolution dealing with the formation of a Labor or Farmer-Labor party, passed at any Socialist conference, must stress the point that we do not believe that a Labor party will solve the problems of the working class.  It is just because there is so little understanding of that simple but fundamental idea that it is so necessary to emphasize it. It is safe to say that most Socialists, even amongst those tending to the left are in favor of a Labor party either because they believe that a Labor party is the one thing necessary to solve the problems of labor or because they have lost hope in the ability of the Socialist party to lead the working class to socialism.  It is one thing to look upon the Labor party as a step forward in the struggle for socialism; it is quite another thing to consider it as able to solve any important problem confronting the working class.
The resolution published in the Call states that the S.P. should not “become submerged in the Farmer-Labor Party” and also states that eventually “only a revolutionary party with a Socialist program will be in a position to lead the masses to a working class victory.” But the whole tone of the resolution is that “eventually” we should think of building a revolutionary party. Whereas throughout the resolution the idea that it is NOW our main task and will be at all times to build a revolutionary Socialist party should be as clear as crystal. The task of building a Labor party is at most a subsidiary one and is not aimed primarily to gain a concession or two but to set the workers into motion on the road of independent political action.
At the present period of the development of capitalism it is inconceivable that a reformist Labor party can gain much in the way of reforms from the capitalist class. We are living in a period of the decline of capitalism and not of its upswing. And in such a period it is necessary to wage a revolutionary struggle in order to achieve any substantial reforms. It is as safe as anything can be to say that a real Labor party will not wage a revolutionary struggle. Our attitude to workers in trade unions who want a Labor party should not be the one which would deepen their illusions with reference to such a party. We must frankly tell them that we do not believe that a Labor party will solve their problems; that only socialism can do that and socialism requires a revolutionary Socialist party. We must tell them that we favor such a party simply because it is a step in the direction of independent working class action and that we are willing to go along with them so long as they are not convinced that our party offers the correct solution.
“Either a Labor party or fascism” is the threat that is made by many a Socialist speaker who has not given any too much thought to the problem. And what reason is there to believe that a Labor party will be able to defeat fascism?  If the Socialist and Communist parties of Germany could not defeat fascism will a reformist Labor party in this country be able to do so? You will say that the working class of Germany was divided. Was the Austrian Socialist party, who had under its banner practically the whole working class of Austria, able to defeat fascism?   Unity is necessary to defeat fascism but it takes more than unity alone to achieve that result. We shall admit that in so far as the formation of a Labor party at the present time would raise the morale of the workers the struggle against a possible fascism would be made easier but it is the possibility of fascism. The struggle against fascism is essentially a struggle for socialism and this demands a revolutionary Socialist party. To accept the alternative of a Labor party or fascism is to fall right into the same error of the Stalinists who have accepted the idea of fascism or bourgeois democracy. They have forgotten that fascism springs out of conditions as they are and to do away with the possibility of fascism one must destroy these conditions.
While the resolution passed at the Call conference is way above the ordinary Socialist resolution dealing with the question of a Labor party in the recognition of the need of a revolutionary Socialist party, still the necessity of building such a revolutionary party is not sufficiently stressed. We must remind our comrades that it would be infinitely better for the working class if the growth of the Socialist party. And it is not at all excluded that our party can grow to a point, before any Labor party worthy of the name is formed, where the formation of a Labor party would be a detriment rather than a step forward.
*  *  *  *
It should need no extensive argument to convince anyone in he least acquainted with the elementary principles of Marxism that we should strive with all our might to favor a Labor party rather than a Farmer-Labor party. It is axiomatic with al Marxists that the class struggle which will transform capitalist society into socialist society is a struggle primarily between the industrial wage-working class and the big capitalist class. A revolutionary Socialist party is a party which represents the historic interests of the working class and stresses the importance of the independent action of the working class as against other classes. This does not mean of course that the working class is not interested in the support of the middle class including the farmers.  It must strive to win the support of large sections of that class and neutralize other sections. It does mean however that the party of the working class can make no permanent alliance with organizations purporting to represent the middle class or the people in general. The party of the working class must attempt to win the middle class masses away from the middle class parties and not unite with such parties. It can do so by fighting for the demands of the middle class masses to a greater extent than the middle class parties.
There are comrades who are so enamored with the false idea of a two class party that even when there are, practically speaking, no farmers’ organizations joining with labor organizations to form a party they insist upon creating a Farmer-Labor instead of a Labor party. There can be no objection to an organization of farmers accepting the program of the Labor party and becoming part of that party. But there should be decided objection to the idea of having a two-class party in the sense of organizations representing farmers getting together with labor organizations to form one party.
The formation recently of the Wisconsin Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation where the Socialist party joined with the LaFolette group to form a party (together with other groups) is a classic example of what kind of a party revolutionary Socialists should avoid if at all possible. This is a party where the petty bourgeoisie will have the complete hegemony instead of vice versa. But of course nothing else could be expected of a Socialist party such as the Wisconsin party which essentially is a “people’s” party.
While Socialists should exert all their efforts against the formation of a Farmer-Labor party, a different question arises where one is; formed in spite of their opposition. To join such a party is permissible and necessary under certain circumstances; to help create one is impermissible and harmful.
If the above analysis is correct it is obvious that the resolution of the Call conference is quite defective. To be sure it intimates that the “wage-earning working class is the spearhead of the attack against capitalism” but it flatly comes out in favor of a Farmer-Labor party.
*  *  *  *
It is on the programmatic position which the Call conference resolution outlines for a Labor party that the greatest confusion exists. After the resolution correctly enumerates the five characteristics of a Labor party it proceeds to lay down a nine-point program which from a Socialist point of view is thoroughly incorrect. In the first instance the resolution declares that the Socialist party shall favor certain programmatic provision?. Then it goes on to say what the Labor party must contain in its program. And it docs not distinguish between those points which we must simply favor and those which must be included as an absolute condition to our entry. But a more serious objection to the whole program is that it is an indication of a fundamentally wrong approach to the idea of a Labor party.
If we view the Labor party as an instrument which will set the workers into motion on the road of independent political action and not as a party which will solve the fundamental problems of the working class the important factors must be considered to be the composition of the party and its independence of middle class organizations and domination. As far as the actual program is concerned the more it confines itself to immediate demands, such as the six hour day or unemployment insurance, the healthier it will be for the Labor party and for the Socialist party. Not that we should prevent the Labor party from coming out with the idea of the socialization of the means of production but that we should not consider such a point in the Labor program as essential. If we should consider it essential then we are close to the concept of substituting the Labor party for the Socialist party.
And that is exactly what is happening in Wisconsin. The fact that the Wisconsin comrades fought so strenuously for the inclusion of the idea of production for use in the program of the Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation and are so enthusiastic about their “victory” should not prevent us from seeing clearly that it is just that point which will practically destroy all signs of demarcation between the Wisconsin Socialists and the other groups in the Federation. That “victory” is somewhat dimmed by the fact that “production for use” is defined as the public ownership of “the basic monopolistically controlled industries.” It would have been a thousand times better had the Wisconsin Socialists fought against any alliance with the LaFollette group. But then they would not have been Wisconsin Socialists.
The Socialists in going into any Labor party must fight for their full program. It may be that we shall be unable to wage a successful struggle for the adoption of our full program but we must not create the impression that we are satisfied with anything but our full program. We shall accept a lesser program not because we want to but because we are in a small minority. There may be some points in the program which would prevent us from joining and we should struggle strenuously against such points. But we are not in a position as Socialists to be satisfied with anything less than our complete program.   We should “favor” including in the Labor party program everything that we stand for. To do otherwise; is creating illusions for ourselves and the workers.
Judging by the standard set forth above the whole nine-point program for a Labor party should be thrown out. What does the third point of the program mean? “The program shall be based on American conditions.” Does that mean that we Socialists must be against inserting into the program some demands dealing with international problems? Consider the sixth point, favoring taking over power through the ballot box. Does that mean that if the Labor party should adopt a revolutionary philosophy we Socialists should oppose that? There was obviously no thought given to the whole theory of a Labor party. Otherwise there would have been the simple declaration that the Socialist party will participate in a Labor party the heart of which is organized labor and that, since it is out of the question that a Labor party will accept the full Socialist program, it will attempt to keep that program to such demands as are not inconsistent with the program of our party provided further that we be given the unconditional right to propagate our own program.
Probably the best method to furnish a program for a Labor party is first to write a good platform for a Socialist campaign for 1936 and then present the document to any conference for the formation of a Labor party and let that conference choose that part of the platform acceptable to the representatives of organized labor.
*  *  *  *
No one can quarrel with that part of the resolution dealing with a Labor party in 1P36 and with local Labor parties. Organized labor is not yet ready, in the main, to leave Roosevelt. Consequently there can be no talk in forming anything but a caricature of a Labor party. The possibility (or better the certainty) that the dominant sections of the Wisconsin Farmer-Labor Progressive Federation will support Roosevelt and that, the Socialists will support Thomas in the national campaign is not anything to be enthusiastic about. And that possibility is almost certain with every local Labor party where organized labor will be represented in substantial numbers. It should be an invincible rule with Socialists that where the Labor party is not yet ready to break with Roosevelt we must not encourage or enter into such a party.
The threat of the Communists to do something desperate if we do not unite with them to form a Labor party in the immediate future should be completely ignored. There is something to be said in favor of an agreement between Socialists and Communists to support each other’s candidates but nothing at all in favor of launching a Labor party on the basis of a union between these two parties.
Taking all the factors into consideration the Socialist party by conducting; an independent campaign all over the country, on correct revolutionary principles, has a great opportunity to strengthen itself in numbers and morale. To play around with Labor Tickets or with local Labor parties will in the vast majority of cases do great damage to the party.
But the correctness of the resolution on the points dealing with a Labor party in 1936, with Labor tickets and with local Labor parties is more than outweighed by the incorrectness of the fundamental approach to the whole problem of a Labor party. The resolution therefore should be completely rewritten.
 



Yipsels in the American Student Union
IMPORTANT problems are involved in the formation of the American Student Union and the role which Yipsels should play in that Union. George Mann raises some of those problems in his article on the Student Union convention held at Columbus. They should be discussed thoroughly until both the problems and the possible solutions are clear. It seems to me that several serious mistakes were made at Columbus and they should not be repeated.

Accepting the advisability of creating a united organization on the student held, it was wrong for the Yipsels to make the acceptance of any kind of a war program as a condition precedent for amalgamation. There was a strong tendency in that direction although in the end the SLID correctly joined the Student Union in spite of the incomplete program. If unity is justified at all it is to be accomplished primarily on the basis of immediate demands for students and not on the basis of a theoretical program on war.
 
It was wrong for the Yipsels, through the SLID, to advocate a program on war which was incomplete and incorrect. The Yipsels must at all times propose a theoretical program on war which shows the connection of war with the capitalist system and clearly states the necessity of the overthrow of that system in order to abolish war. The Student Union might not accept such a program but then it would be clear that the YPSL does not accept the pacifist program of the Student Union. This does not mean that the SLID should refuse to join but should remain as a minority in the Student Union agitating for its program. There can be no class A and class B theoretical program on war. There can be unity in action against war but not in theoretical program on war.
 
No discussion was carried on amongst the Yipsels as to the character of the program which they should stand for at the unity convention.  Such a discussion should have been carried on for at least six weeks before the actual convention. Because of this lack of discussion the Yipsel delegates came unprepared to grasp the fundamental issues involved.
 
The approach of the N.E.C. of the Yipsels to the Yipsel caucus at the convention was a purely bureaucratic one. The National Organization Committee appointed a steering committee the duty of which was. to all intents and purposes, to tell the caucus what to do. Had there been a discussion conducted before the convention and a decision arrived at as to main policies the caucus, would have known what those policies were and should have been empowered to carry out those policies without a steering committee appointed by the national organization coming down to dictate to the caucus. Discipline does not mean commanding and blind obedience. This Communist conception of discipline must be fought. Because of the lack of discussion and because of the bureaucratic approach some comrades made the mistake of openly breaking Yipsel discipline. But the blame must be traced to the wrong method of treating the whole problem.
 

No Scheme Can Bring Peace Under Capitalism
IF ONE is interested in peace, without seeing that only the destruction of the capitalist system by the revolutionary action of the working: class is the only effective way of assuring peace, he is liable to accept all kinds of Utopian ideas that have as their object the prevention of war under the present system. A League of Nations, a Kellogg peace pact, sanctions, neutrality and what not will be advocated as a means to bring peace to a troubled world. A revolutionary Marxist who accepts the position that war is inevitable under the capitalist system and wants to use the desire for peace that exists amongst the masses simply as an aid in the struggle to overthrow the capitalist system rejects all schemes to bring peace to a capitalist world. A revolutionary Socialist does not argue whether this or that particular policy of the capitalist class will ensure peace. And from that follows the necessary policy of a revolutionary party to retain the independence of the working class in any question involving war under the capitalist system.
Comrade Norman Thomas in his anxiety to bring some measure of peace into a warlike world suggests that the Ethiopian war be settled “not at the expense of Ethiopia but on terms of giving Italy better access to trade, especially to raw materials.” And he adds “that it is not likely that capitalist nations will make such an adjustment except under pressure” of the working class. This idea he presents in his column in the Socialist Call of Nov. 30, 1935.
A militant pacifist, with logic on his side, can object to such an idea on the ground that at the present time to suggest giving Mussolini access to raw materials would mean to reward a wrongdoer and to set an example to all other imperialist nations that are not satisfied with what they have. He can readily argue that an aggressor should be punished and not rewarded.
But that would be far from the position of a revolutionary Socialist. Such a Socialist would simply say that the working class has nothing to do with the division of the world amongst the imperialist powers, that it is interested in destroying imperialism and not in seeing that the different imperialisms have their “just” share of the spoils.
But are we not interested in peace and should we not do something to prevent a horrible war? That is the argument of all those who do not accept the Marxist position on war. It is the argument of those who favor the League of Nations and those who favor sanctions.
It is the argument of those who will not see that to destroy the possibility of war capitalism must be destroyed. All other proposals are Utopian and create illusions.
Let us attempt to follow out the logic of the doctrine that the working class must exert pressure on the capitalist governments to give Italy access to raw materials. If it means anything at all it means that Italy must be given colonies that now belong to some other powers. It could not mean that Italy be simply permitted to purchase raw materials from other nations. She has that privilege now. And if it moans that colonies at present under the domination of an imperialist country be turned over to Mussolini, then how in the wide world can a Socialist party deal with colonies in the same way as imperialist powers deal with them, that is, treat them as the property of the capitalist countries? A revolutionary Socialist party can do only one thing with reference to colonies. It must demand the right of .self determination for them; it must fight for their independence of all imperialisms.
Access to raw materials for all nations without enslaving any backward people is possible only after the destruction of capitalist imperialism.
 
Stalinists Teach Revolutionary Socialists
(From the report of Tom De Fazio at the November Plenum of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, U.S.A.) I THINK Comrade Weinstone should tell the Socialists of Detroit to join the Second International and then they will probably find out something about sanctions because the Second International is in perfect agreement with sanctions.
I take it that Tom wants to be sarcastic. Aside from that the attempt of communists to teach the left wing of the Socialist party to be loyal to the Second International is perfectly in order. I mean loyal to the ideas of the reformist leaders of the International. As a matter of fact there is no reason why the Stalinists should not join the Second International and teach loyalty inside of that International. Between them and the reformist leaders there is so little difference that they would find little difficulty in making a bloc against the revolutionary anti-sanctionists.
But if the Stalinists move in will the revolutionary Marxists have to move out? At present, at least, we have freedom to express our opinions, an idea which the Stalinists arc no longer capable of tolerating.
 
And This Is Going to Defend Us Against Fascism
“Ministers, rabbis, a member of the Canadian Parliament, two war-bitten generals – one American, the other Chinese – musicians, actors, and World War Veterans, all are taking part in the Third U .S. Congress Against War and Fascism, which opens on Friday etc. etc. ...” (Special to the Daily Worker, Jan. 2, 1936)
And the fascists are undoubtedly shivering in their boots when they read about such a conglomeration of “valiant fighters.” But the Communists are great at creating noise, sound and fury.
The only justification for the Socialist party to enter the League would be the desire to put our program before people who know nothing about it. But the question remains: Are there any people in the League which would justify the least bit of lime and energy necessary to expend in working in the League?
 
Left-Wingers Must Be Invited to Join Party
NOW that the old guard is about to make its exit from the Socialist party there is no room in this country for revolutionary individuals or groups outside of the S.P. The only excuse such individuals or groups can possibly have for remaining isolated from the main stream of revolutionary activity is that the old guard would refuse to permit them to join the party.  Soon there will no longer be that excuse. The realistic revolutionists, not in any way influenced by any desire to join the Stalinists, must come into the party. This applies especially to the Workers’ party.
The N.E.C. of our party should extend an invitation to all revolutionists and revolutionary groups, who are anxious to build a revolutionary party and who will abide by discipline, to join the Socialist party.
 



IT IS AN open secret that influential members of our party, members who consider themselves and who are considered to be left wingers (of a sort) were skeptical about the advisability of the party’s running Norman Thomas as its presidential candidate in the 1936 campaign. Rumor had it that some of these members were convinced that the Socialist party should run no presidential candidate altogether.
Two main reasons were advanced to justify such a position. One was that organized labor in the persons of its progressive leaders such as Lewis and Hillman were anxious to re-elect Roosevelt and any vigorous campaign on our part which would tend to draw votes away from Roosevelt would be frowned upon by these “progressive” labor leaders. And since it is the duty of the party to keep close to organized labor, especially its progressive wing, it would be a mistake to antagonize those of the labor leaders who were moving in the direction of a labor party.
Another reason given was that the chances for Thomas to poll a large vote as presidential candidate, as large even as during the last campaign, were very small. As a matter of fact, so ran the argument, Thomas would obtain a very small vote and this would injure the prestige of both Thomas and the party. Interesting is it to mention that some of the protagonists of such a viewpoint are very close to Lewis and his Committee for Industrial Organization. Nor is it out of the way to take notice of the fact that quite a number of prominent Socialists who are active with the CIO are not in the least active in the Socialist campaign.
That the proponents of abstention from the campaign, or of conducting a nominal campaign, did not dare to come out into the open with their ideas speaks volumes for the active membership of the party. It is a sure indication that the vast majority of the membership would have decisively voted down any such proposal. The healthy attitude of the majority of delegates to the Cleveland convention and of the vast majority of the active members of the party is easily recognized in the decision to conduct a vigorous campaign with Norman Thomas as the party candidate.
 
Useless to Compete with Reformism
Clear as it is that the active membership of the party was determined to conduct an independent Socialist campaign, it is not so clear that there is a correct understanding as to the exact nature of a Socialist campaign and as to the methods of carrying on such a campaign. All circumstances point to the fact that once having decided on an independent campaign it would be folly and utterly useless to conduct any kind of a campaign other than a revolutionary Socialist one. And that means a campaign the fundamental purpose of which is to teach the necessity of the destruction of the capitalist system and the substitution therefore of a socialist society. Failing that there is no conceivable justification for the participation of our party in this campaign.
To go out amongst the masses and try to get them to vote for our candidates merely because we promise them some immediate reforms is to enter into competition with Roosevelt, with the Farmer-Laborites, with the Union party and with the Communist party on their own ground and there is no earthly reason why the workers should prefer our brand of reforms to those of the others. We can offer the masses no more and no better reforms than can any other party and the workers would be entirely correct if, on the basis of an appeal for reforms, they would turn their backs to us and vote for the more “practical” parties. To distinguish ourselves fundamentally from all reformist groups by carrying on a campaign for revolutionary Socialism is not only theoretically correct but in this case also coincides with the demands of “common sense.”
This is not to claim that if we do conduct a campaign on revolutionary socialist lines our vote will be a huge one. It must be clearly recognized that if we don’t conduct such a campaign there is no use having one at all.
 
Purpose of Immediate Demands
Nor does conducting a revolutionary socialist campaign signify a campaign where all immediate demands are disregarded and emphasis placed only on the ultimate goal of the destruction of the capitalist system, in the manner of the Socialist Labor party or of the Proletarian party. Both reformists and sectarians see a contradiction in advocating immediate demands and at the same time stressing the necessity for socialism. The reformists solve that “contradiction” by concentrating exclusively on the immediate demands as a bait for getting votes; the impossibilists refuse to have anything to do with immediate demands. The task of revolutionary Socialists is to utilize immediate demands such as social security, the reduction of the number of working hours, etc. for the purpose of attempting to mobilize the workers for an extra-parliamentary struggle during the election campaign and to teach the workers that the capitalist system is responsible for their miserable conditions and that the destruction of that system is essential for the solution of all their problems.
There is no contradiction in presenting a revolutionary socialist platform which points out the necessity for a struggle to achieve socialism and at the same time including in the platform those immediate demands which are most likely to rally the masses in a struggle against the capitalist class.
A revolutionary socialist platform might not differ in the least from a reformist one in the character of the immediate demands. Social security and reduction in the number of hours are demands included in both platforms. A revolutionary platform distinguishes itself from a reformist one in that the former gives the workers an idea of the whole nature of the capitalist system and the necessity for its destruction. And what is more important by far, is, that a reformist party simply asks that its candidates be elected on the promise to fulfill the immediate demands while a revolutionary party asks that the workers organize and struggle for the immediate demands. A revolutionary party resolves whatever contradiction there is between immediate demands and ultimate goal in the actual conduct of its campaign.
 
Election and Political Work
To many comrades political work is confined exclusively to and is synonymous with election activities. Very frequently some party member asserts with great conviction that we either must or must not be a political machine, thereby meaning that we must or must not transform the party into a vote-catching machine. For a revolutionary Socialist political work is every kind of party activity which sharpens and deepens the consciousness of the working class, A demonstration for some vital demand of the workers during a period when there is no campaign is political work and may be far more important than election activities.
An election campaign is only one part of our work and is not and can no-wise be a substitute for any other activities. It is true that during a campaign our party must, in addition to all other activities, carry on work which is peculiar to election campaigns, such as getting signatures for petitions, guarding polling booths etc. But it would be disastrous for our whole work if we were to consider our campaign in that light. The issues around which our activities must center in non-election periods are the issues which form the basis of our activities during an election campaign and it is only necessary to connect them up closely with the campaign.
A functioning revolutionary Socialist party should be active on behalf of the unemployed at all times, election or no election. Part of our campaign should be to organize demonstrations on behalf of the unemployed. Should strikes occur in any industries during a campaign period our “election” work should consist of involving our members on behalf of the strikers. In this way the election does not become a simple vote-catching proposition but a means of teaching and mobilizing the workers.
At the present moment one of the great opportunities for Socialist propaganda during a campaign is being almost completely ignored by our party. One would think that the tremendously important struggle in Spain is not part of our election campaign. It is true that our platform says nothing about it but that does not mean that for the moment we should not make it the center of our whole propaganda. Every local, every branch should be busy with meetings and discussions about the life and death struggle between the workers and fascists; our press should be full of news and interpretive comments on the heroic struggles of the Spanish workers and peasants. Would our “election” work suffer? Ridiculous! It would strengthen the party and its influence tremendously.
Were we to conduct an active campaign thousands of workers would be convinced that our party is not simply a party which offers a program for the workers but is part of the working class and is active in all its struggles.
 
Criticism of Other Parties
Of necessity our campaign involves a criticism of every other party asking for the support of the working class. No Socialist would for a moment question the necessity of attacking the Republican party as a party representing the interests of the capitalist class. It is really astonishing that at the present time the Socialist Party must even attempt a justification for its implacable hostility to Roosevelt and the Democratic party. The activities both of the Communists who emphasize the reactionary character of the Republican crowd as against the liberalism of Roosevelt “who only yields to the reactionaries” and of the labor leaders anxious to gather in votes for the “humanitarian” Roosevelt, have created a situation where it is necessary to concentrate our attacks on Roosevelt and the Democratic party.
And in doing so we must of necessity criticize sharply the attitude of the Communists and the labor leaders of the Non Partisan Labor League. Will we antagonize these labor leaders? Will we cause a decrease in the number of our votes? What of it? It is necessary to tell the truth about every group and party misleading the working class.
No one can deny that there is a tendency in our party to soft-pedal on the Communists, the Farmer-Laborites and the leaders of the unions involved in the Non-Partisan Labor League and the American Labor party. It is scandalous that our party campaign platform, amongst other serious weaknesses, has omitted a criticism of the Communists, the Farmer-Laborites and the labor leaders supporting Roosevelt.
If our campaign is to be a campaign for what our party represents, a campaign of education for socialism, then it follows that we must show why every other party is wrong and cannot solve the problems of the working class. We must distinguish ourselves from those parties that claim to represent the interests of the working class as well as those parties that are openly against the idea of socialism. Especially in those sections where the Communist or Farmer-Labor parties have any influence is it incumbent upon us to criticize their position on every problem. And that is also true of the labor leaders who are trying to deliver the workers into the hands of the New Deal.
 
Amending Constitution Not Central Issue
A tendency is already manifest which would concentrate our campaign around an amendment to the constitution, “to make democracy constitutional.” Should our campaign center merely on that issue and especially in the manner it is treated by most party members, it would fall flat and would not serve the interests of socialism.
It is true that revolutionary Socialists are not indifferent to the nature of the capitalist state and must struggle constantly to democratize that state. We too are against the power of the Supreme Court to declare laws unconstitutional; but we are decidedly against the idea that the Supreme Court is something separate and apart from the capitalist apparatus; that the Supreme Court is bad and that Congress is good. This idea is expressed in such asinine phrases as “judicial Hitlerism” or the “dictatorship of the nine old men.” In advocating the immediate demand for a constitutional amendment to permit Congress to pass laws for the benefit of the working class and to prohibit the Supreme Court from interfering with the legislation of Congress it is essential that we create no illusions in the minds of the workers. It is necessary to give the workers an idea as to the actual purpose of the constitution as expressed by such founding fathers as Madison; that a constitution created by people who were interested in protecting wealth and chattel slavery is not the kind of a constitution that can be of any benefit to the working class. It is essential to show that in spite of the constitution millions of workers are disfranchised, especially the Negroes of the south and that should the capitalist class be threatened it will have recourse to all the violence at its disposal. To demand an amendment to the constitution should not mean, by any means, an endorsement of the constitution; on the contrary, the real character of capitalist democracy should be laid bare.
 
Campaign to Increase Party Membership
The election campaign affords us an opportunity to teach thousands and tens of thousands of workers the meaning of socialism. Our success will be measured only partly by the number of votes cast for our candidate. In this present election there is no doubt that a great many workers will be deceived by the argument of Lewis, Hillman and the other devotees of Roosevelt that the latter is a friend of the workers. A great many will be deceived by the argument of the Communists that the Liberty League and the Republican party are the greatest fascist menace. In the present campaign our appeal will be listened to by the more advanced workers and because of that we must make a serious attempt to strengthen our party by utilizing the campaign for the purpose of increasing our membership.
Our party membership has decreased by virtue of the departure of the old guard from our ranks. We can confidently expect that those sympathizers of the old guard who are still in the party will take their leave in the not too distant future. Possibly they will use a decrease in the number of our votes to claim that the Socialist party has been rejected by the American workers. There is absolutely no need for alarm. A party of five thousand revolutionary Socialists can do a hundred times more effective work than a party of fifty thousand members of the old guard variety. Nevertheless we cannot be satisfied with a small party. Our aim is to become a mass party both in the sense of mass influence and mass membership. And to increase our membership during the campaign two and three fold is more valuable in the long run than getting the same number of votes as we obtained in the last election. It is because of this that our branches can best judge the effectiveness of their campaign work by the number of new members they succeeded in enlisting. All our campaign meetings must be membership drive meetings. The party will have waged a successful campaign if it can show a substantial increase in its membership at the end of the campaign.
 
Revolutionary Socialists Handicapped
Not that revolutionary Socialists are to be indifferent to the number of votes cast for our candidates. That is exceedingly important and we should do our utmost to convince voters to vote for socialism. We should make every effort to get local candidates elected to office. A revolutionary Socialist in Congress or in a State legislature would be tremendously valuable to our work of propaganda and education. But it must be remembered that a huge vote can be piled up by a reformist party more easily than by a revolutionary party under non-revolutionary conditions. And to be disappointed or disheartened by a comparatively small vote is not to understand the nature of a revolutionary Socialist campaign.
Votes obtained by a campaign conducted on revolutionary lines mean that those persons who voted can be counted on in a revolutionary crisis; votes obtained by offering all kinds of promises, if Socialists are elected, are votes of those who will vote Socialist today and shift to some other party the next election.
It would be folly to ignore the fact the left wing Socialists are handicapped by many factors. In the first place the platform adopted by the convention is a document of a reformist nature, no different than any document that Waldman and Oneal would have drawn up had they been permitted to do so. Then the appointment of Hoan as chairman of the national campaign committee does not augur well for the type of literature that will be issued by the campaign committee. But in spite of handicaps revolutionary Socialists are in a position to conduct a revolutionary Socialist campaign and thereby increase the prestige and membership of the party.
The revolutionary activities in the Socialist party must see in this campaign a glorious opportunity to increase their numbers and influence.
 



A CONVENTION in the life of a revolutionary working class party that believes in and practices the principle of democratic centralism is an extremely important occasion. It affords an opportunity for the membership of the party, through elected delegates, to express their views on questions confronting the party members and the working class and permits the reaching of a final decision on such questions. A convention is a convenient and necessary institution, giving a revolutionary party a chance to look back upon its progress or lack of it, evaluate the policies followed, correct mistakes and gather its forces for the march onward with substantial or slight changes in direction and tempo.
No one in the least acquainted with the life of the Communist party in this country or anywhere else expects any discussion prior to a convention or during a convention or expects any new policy to come out of a convention. That is, no one who thinks independently and is not a blind devotee of the “beloved leader.” A convention is as necessary and useful for the Communist party as is the calling of Parliament by Hitler. A perfectly superfluous gesture to deceive the naive and credulous who think that to discuss whether a policy handed down has been executed correctly is identical with a discussion on the correctness of the policy itself.
Examine the publications of the Communist party and you will find no trace of any view contrary to the official viewpoint on any of the problems raised at the convention. All the policies were already decided upon before the convention by the “beloved leaders” great and small, and all there was left for the followers was to accept with great enthusiasm. And the members of the C. P. have come to take the system for granted. In the “Party Life” column of the Daily Worker of July 17, a worried comrade writes: “There is an attitude which we have to break down in our educational work. The comrades in the Units feel that all the questions of the Party are settled in the higher Party bodies. Therefore they don’t have to worry about it in the Unit; there’ll be a statement in the Daily Worker on it anyhow. So why discuss it.” We can assure the comrade that the attitude will not be broken down.
 
Convention Adds Nothing New
Every one of the ideas embodied in every one of the resolutions placed before the agreeable delegates were contained in the utterances or writings of Browder long before the convention took place. The august gathering was simply for the purpose of placing a formal stamp of approval upon those ideas. Was it very difficult to predict that the convention would declare that the Farmer-Labor party is the task of tasks confronting the American revolutionary movement? Nor did it take great prophetic powers to foresee that the convention would “establish the fact” that the Republican party-Liberty League-Hearst combination is the anti-Christ against whom alone the efforts of all good people should be concentrated and that we are at present faced with the alternative of democracy or fascism and not of fascism or socialism. Nor would it have been a marvel of prescience to indicate that the delegates – all seven hundred and fifty of them – would declare that it is necessary to rally all peace-loving people around the peace policy of the Soviet Union in order to abolish wars from this turbulent world.
That which was or should have been expected happened. Browder’s report followed the lines indicated in his speeches and writings in the last few months and the resolutions followed Browder’s report.
In the speeches of Browder, in the resolutions of the convention, in the articles explaining the meaning of the convention it is proclaimed over and over again that “our main immediate political task ... is to win the masses ... for a Farmer-Labor Party.” And why should the masses spend the energy necessary to build a Farmer-Labor party? In the words of the Communist platform: “to fight for and establish a People’s Government, a government of, for and by the people.”
Quite a task! Abraham Lincoln thought it could be done but then Abraham Lincoln was not and never claimed to be a Marxist. The writings of Marx, Engels and Lenin and even of the disciples of Stalin were not referred to with reference to the possibility of creating a classless people’s government.
There are some comrades who incline to say that this is too much; there will be a revolt amongst the intelligent Communists. But these comrades underestimate the power of a bureaucratic apparatus that has succeeded in establishing its authority over the minds of people who in all other respects seem to be of normal intelligence. Until the line is changed we can expect all the Communists even those who might read Lenin’s State and Revolution, to preach the formation of a people’s government.
Falling in with the fundamental idea of a people’s government is the main slogan of the convention embodied in the Communist platform and that is: For a Free, Prosperous and Happy America! And of course the inference is that such an America can be brought into existence without any proletarian revolution – simply through the creation of a Farmer-Labor party.
 
A Combination That Terrifies
Until such time as the American people can take over the government for themselves they must concentrate on that really dreadful combination of the Republican party, the Liberty League and Hearst. “The chief political center of extreme capitalist reaction, which carries the threat of fascism today is the Republican Party–Liberty League–Hearst combination.” Again: “The Communist Party declares that the struggle against reaction and incipient fascism demands the utmost unification and concentration of all forces of the working class and its allies against the Republican–Liberty League–Hearst combination.” (Daily Worker, June 16, 1936).
Does that mean that the C.P. has come out for supporting Roosevelt? Not in so many words. The Communists insist that Roosevelt is not fighting that combination as he should and that is why, it is to be presumed, they are not calling upon the masses openly to support Roosevelt. Of course Browder, in his report at the convention, was bold enough to state that there is no principle connected with refusing to vote for a bourgeois candidate like Roosevelt. And to support his boldness he had the temerity to cite Lenin on the necessity of the proletariat to support the democratic bourgeoisie in a bourgeois democratic revolution. Perhaps he thinks we need a bourgeois democratic revolution in this country.
Lenin pointed out that after the death of a great revolutionist the real essence of his revolutionary theories is emasculated and vulgarised by opportunists. And Lenin is now suffering the same fate. And out of seven hundred and fifty delegates there was not one with spirit enough to cry “Shame” upon this disgusting effort to enlist Lenin in the work of betrayal.
It is true that the Communists formally are not endorsing Roosevelt, but in concentrating their attack on the Republican party as the bearer of fascism and in mildly chiding Roosevelt for his failure to come out more aggressively against the Liberty Leaguers they are practically advising the workers that to vote for Roosevelt is to vote for the lesser evil. The Stalinists have changed their policy since the German catastrophe but only to substitute the policy of the Social Democrats for the sectarian polices of the Third Period.
Recently they have called for a conference to stop Landon and have urged Lewis and Hillman to take the lead in such a conference. Since these labor leaders are heart and soul for the election of Roosevelt what would be the meaning of such a conference if not to whip it up for Roosevelt?
 
Bourgeois Democracy versus Fascism
The theoretical justification for concentrating the attack on the Liberty League – Hearst combination is the theory that the working class is at the present time faced with the alternative of bourgeois democracy or fascism. This theory of course is not the product of Browder’s hard thinking but it goes back to Dimitroff and back of him to the beloved Stalin. Enunciated with great profundity at the Seventh Congress it is used to justify the most opportunistic policies.
In this respect the Socialist party is one hundred percent correct. To defeat fascism one must attempt to mobilize the masses for the destruction of the very system of capitalist democracy which gives rise to fascism. This does not mean that we urge the workers to be indifferent to their democratic rights. On the contrary we must mobilize the workers for a struggle for every democratic right which they possess and do not possess under the capitalist system. But that is simply for the purpose of strengthening their forces for the destruction of the capitalist system. When we say that the real alternative is fascism or socialism it does not mean that unless we get socialism in this election fascism will result. This is the way the Communists attempt to pose the question.
It means that revolutionary Socialists recognize that the development bf capitalist society has reached a point where the capitalist democratic regime cannot function and if that regime is not destroyed by the forces of the proletariat it will be destroyed by the forces of fascist reaction. With that as a perspective we do not struggle to save the bourgeois DEMOCRATIC REGIME but we struggle for the DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS OF THE WORKERS. The Communists also claim that they are struggling for democracy in order ultimately to bring in socialism. Whatever the intention of the Communist leaders may be, the effect of their incorrect theory is to demoralize both the workers and the middle class and open the way for fascism.
Much has been said and written about the reformist attitude on war which the Communists have adopted within the last year. The slogan of collective security accepted by the Stalinist regime as a safeguard for the Soviet Union and subsequently adopted by all the Communist parties was augmented in the Communist platform by the immediate demand for the “complete prohibition of the sale or delivery of goods, or the granting of loans to nations engaged in a foreign war contrary to the provisions of the Kellogg Peace Pact.” The Marxist interpretation of the nature of imperialist war with its rejection of the idea of an aggressor nation is thrown over-board and in its stead we find ourselves scrutinizing a document drawn up by a former Republican Secretary of State to determine our attitude to a particular capitalist nation. Exactly who shall determine the question as to which particular nation was guilty of violating the Peace Pact is not stated. We presume the Communists will be guided by their investigators and lawyers.
The Socialist party has many amongst its members v/ho are sincere pacifists and consequently bring forth the most grotesque ideas as to the method of stopping war but we have yet to see such Socialists produce anything so idiotic as the above idea of the Communists.
 
Comparison with 1934 Convention
It is difficult to imagine that only a little over two years ago the same party held a convention in Cleveland at which convention ideas were expressed which are the exact opposite of the ideas presented at the last convention. The 8th convention of the C.P. held two years ago issued a Manifesto and the ideas found therein cannot possibly be harmonized with the concepts propounded at the 9th.
“There is no possible way out of the crisis in the interest of the masses except by breaking the control of the State power now in the hands of this small monopolist capitalist class. There is no way out except by establishing a new government of the workers in alliance with the poor farmers, the Negro people and the impoverished middle class.
There is no way out except by the creation of a revolutionary democracy of the toilers, which is at the same time a stern dictatorship against the capitalists and their agents ... There is no way out in short except by the abolition of the capitalist system and the establishment of a Socialist society.”
We can accept this portion of the Manifesto without qualification.
The eighth convention was held after Hitler came to power; after the brave struggle of the Austrian workers against Dolfuss; even after the general strike against the fascists of France. But the theory of social-fascism was still accepted. At that time a non-Communist was either a fascist, or a semi-fascist or a variety of social-fascist. That convention “established the fact” that the New Deal was a “program of fascization” that the “fascization of the trade unions” had reached a dangerous stage and that “in this trickery of the masses Roosevelt has the utmost support of the A.F. of L. bureaucrats, Socialists and liberals.” The Socialist party was at that time the “third party of capitalism” and a possible Farmer-Labor party would be a “new left social-fascist party.”
 
Revolutionary Phrases Retained
Ideas, however, are very easily discarded in the life of the Communist movement. Without the slightest explanation and certainly without the least preparation in the form of discussion, the old stand-bys were dropped; the Socialist party became a brother party of the working class; the Farmer-Labor party the only hope of the working class; Roosevelt a mild liberal who was not calling upon the Communists in his struggle against the American fascists organized in the Liberty League.
It would be folly to expect that the old revolutionary phrases would disappear entirely from the resolutions and speeches. The tremendous appeal which the Communist movement has for the revolutionary workers lies in the fact that these workers sincerely think that the Communist International is still the revolutionary International of Lenin and that it is devoted to the effort of overthrowing the system which every advanced worker hates. For the Communists to discard altogether the revolutionary phraseology and cling to a consistent system of reformist ideas would mean the complete loss of their influence.
Not only can they not afford to get rid of the revolutionary word but they must actually assume the pose of critics of the Socialists as reformists. This fundamental necessity of playing a dual role in order to keep the good will of both .the liberal bourgeoisie and the revolutionary workers explains the tactics of the Communists in France and in Spain. They have to talk “left” once in a while; they must appear as the supporters of the workers’ struggles ever so often. But in reality their activities have nothing at all to do with the interests of the proletarian revolution. And it is hardly likely that they will ever come out in the open as avowed revisionists of Marx and Lenin. They would thereby lose all their influence with the revolutionary section of the working class.
And so in the resolutions of the last convention and even in the platform there are tucked away suggestions about the necessity of establishing Socialism through the Soviet power. “Such policies,” states the resolution, “will create favorable conditions for the overthrow of capitalist rule altogether, the establishment of Soviet Power and the building of Socialism.” A necessary insertion which has no relationship to the actual policies pursued.
 
Zig-Zag Policy
How long will this change last? There are Socialists who doubt the “sincerity” of the Communists. Alas they are terribly in earnest. Their opportunism is not a cloak which is to be put on and taken off to please the liberals and some Socialists. It is basic to their whole conception built around the theory of building socialism in the Soviet Union – and only in the Soviet Union. Their previous sectarian ultra leftism is but a different form of their basic reformism. What attitude the Communists will take to the bourgeoisie of their own country will depend entirely upon the relationship of the Soviet Union to that particular country. The foreign policy of the Stalin regime will determine the particular garment which the Communists will don to cover their opportunist nakedness.
It is not at all excluded that in the future there will be a swing back to the most insane sectarianism. The alliances between the different imperialists are not yet stabilized and it is possible that the different imperialist rivals might succeed in making a temporary bargain, with the Soviet Union left out. In which case to “protect and defend the Soviet Union” it might be necessary to designate every one who thinks it essential for the workers to develop their consciousness before calling on them for revolution – to designate such a person as a left or right social fascist.
The exigencies of Soviet diplomacy will determine the tactics of the Communist parties. And not the need for a revolutionary overthrow of the capitalist system to solve the problems of the whole working class including the workers of the Soviet Union.
 
Communists Weep for Socialists
This was the first convention where the Communists showed so much solicitude for the welfare of the Socialist party. No wild attacks, no name-calling; only a note of regret that the Socialist party does not see eye to eye with the C.P. on the questions of war, of the united front, of struggling for bourgeois democracy against fascism, for our failure to leave Roosevelt alone and concentrate our attacks on the infamous combination of the Liberty-League and Hearst. Weeping and wailing were on the order of the day. “The Socialists were isolating themselves from the masses by their sectarian tactics.” And of course the Stalinists could not refrain from pointing with alarm at the entry of the “pernicious” Trotskyists into the S.P. For are the latter not the protagonists of the class struggle; are they not opposed to the People’s Front and to the idea of supporting good capitalist nations against bad capitalist nations in any war?
And above all are they not opposed to the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. That is an unforgivable crime. The C.P. must henceforth dedicate its efforts to save the Socialist party. And on the other hand the revolutionary Marxists in the Socialist party must attempt to save the revolutionary workers from the corroding influence of Stalinism.
 







The Daily Worker recently reported the expulsion of Albert Goldman, long standing party member and leading counsel of the International Labor Defense in Chicago, from the official party ranks. A whole series of charges were filed against him. In a statement issued by comrade; Goldman and reprinted below, the expelled comrade discusses the merit of these charges on the basis of fact and his own view of the expulsion. Comrade Goldman has held a public meeting on the whole affair in Chicago, an account of which is given below. – Ed.





Chicago, Ill. – Three hundred party members and sympathizers attended a meeting on June 28, called, by comrade Albert Goldman, on his expulsion from the Communal party. The expulsion of comrade Goldman, who has been a party member for many years and whose activity in the courts of Chicago on behalf of the revolutionary workers is the talk of the movement, caused a surprise and resentment, unexpected by the local Stalinist bureaucrats.
The subject of the meeting Criticism by Expulsion was an extremely timely one. Comrade Goldman traced the origin of his conflict with the party leadership on the question of the united front and on other fundamental questions relating to the revolutionary strategy and tactics of the Communists. His attempts to iron out these differences within the confines of the party were rendered impossible because of the strangulating hold that the bureaucrats maintain. Goldman pointed out that in every dispute he had with the party, his position was distorted and violated, simply because he was never given the opportunity to make his point of view public so that the membership could understand it.
This bureaucratic control of the Party and the lack of inner democracy or discussion, Goldman pointed out, was not a local phenomenon, but arose directly out of the conditions in the Russian party and can be traced back to the struggle against Trotsky and the Left Opposition, over the fundamental questions of the revolution. Goldman showed that his attempts to invoke a discussion on the question of the united front in general, and specifically on the defeat in Germany, was prevented by the party leadership, that exists by retaining the rank and file in state of ignorance and blind obedience. The speech had a profound effect upon these present and a lively discussion ensued. In the discussion comrades Poindexter and Becker spoke, together for forty minutes, on the party position. The speeches were a defense of the party bureaucracy. Extremely tragic was their view on Germany – where they indignantly refuse to regard the victory of Fascism in Germany as a defeat for the German working class. The essence of their remarks was that Goldman had entered the ranks of the renegades.
The meeting closed with over fifty names collected as those interested in the organization of a Communist school this coming fall, and wishing to participate.

* * *
The Statement of Comrade Goldman
Even a cursory analysis of the statement of district eight with reference to my expulsion shows that the main reason for the expulsion is my view on the united front tactic, especially as applied in the Chicago united front action of the unemployed workers in October 1932; my opinion of the tactics of the German Communist Party in the struggle against Fascism; and my criticism of the method of the calling of the Free Tom Mooney Congress.
My violation of discipline at the Mooney Congress, the factor that led to my expulsion, is really incidental. I was opposed to the joining of the Scottsboro issue with the Mooney issue. I was not given a chance at the Congress to explain my position. The joining of the two issues in such a mechanical manner was harmful both to the Mooney issue and to the Scottsboro issue. But I would have voted with the party had I been asked to attend the fraction meeting and given a chance to make my position clear.
But the expulsion had to come. The violation of discipline at the Mooney Congress was but the pretext. My views on the various problems confronting the American movement and the world movement are such that a conflict between myself and the party leadership was inevitable. If the party permitted freedom of discussion, that conflict would run its natural course within the party; but without freedom of discussion a breach of discipline is inevitable. [Line of text missing] typical example of the dishonesty that characterized the district eight leaders in my whole conflict with them. There is practically not a single, whole sentence in the statement which is not either a downright distortion of the facts or a wilful misinterpretation. Without claiming that there is a sharp line of demarcation between a plain misstatement of fact or, in plainer English, a downright lie and an answer, for the purpose of convenience, will deal with these two types of falsehoods under different headings.
The answer does not assume to enter into a detailed explanation of the various problems which I discussed in articles and speeches within the last eight months. It confines itself merely to a simple denial and a short explanation of all the distortions contained in the statement.
 
I. Distortions of Fact
(1) “He (Goldman) was previously expelled from the Party for his opposition to the policy of the Communist Party in the Trade Unions.”
I was never expelled from the party for that reason or any other reason. I was not opposed to the policy of the Communist party in the trade unions, during the years 1920–25 when I was active in the underground party. I was opposed to the policy of some of the party leaders of those days in their tactic of the united front from above with the Hillman-Levine gang of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, a tactic which, at that time, killed the Left wing in the Amalgamated and which to a large extent explains its pitiable weakness at present.
The above falsehood has a source which, to those who are acquainted with events of that period, is quite obvious. Undoubtedly the secretariat accepted the word of that ignorant confusionist par excellence, Robert Minor. It was he who asked me not to attack the Hillman leadership at the 1922 Amalgamated convention. It was he who was most completely taken in by the shrewd and slippery Hillman. It was he who fought me bitterly at the fraction meeting of the comrades in the needle trades, subsequent to the convention. There was a complete united front between him and Hillman against the Left wingers. As a result of this unholy alliance, Minor took advantage of the vicious frame-up of Hillman and Levine against me, on the basis of which I was expelled from the Amalgamated as a spy.
Rumors pointing the finger of suspicion against me began to be circulated in the party two years after everyone knew about the frame-up and during which time I was very active in the underground party. I demanded an immediate investigation, and refrained from activity in the meantime. A committee to investigate was appointed, and not until the united front between Minor and Hillman was broken up did the committee come out with a statement branding the action of Hillman and Levine as a frameup to get me out of the Amalgamated. I was then studying law and did not go back to party activity, but I was never expelled.
(2) “... Goldman at that time (during the united front conference held in October 1932 in Chicago) defended the leaders of the Socialist Party against the Communist Party position.”
After a stupid and violent attack on Borders and the Socialist Party leadership by Williamson of the Communist Party, an attack which alienated all the rank and file of the non-party organizations, I was called upon to make a collection speech. I stated that I, for one, would accept the Socialist leaders who came into the united front at their word, and would criticize them only on the basis of their action in the united front struggle. In an article in the December issue of The Communist, (an article which was not listed in the table of contents, and which was printed immediately after Williamson’s reply – all for the purpose of giving as little prominence to it as possible) I developed my position and criticized my own statement. I refer everyone to this article which will give the lie to the statement that I defended the leaders of the Socialist Party.
(3) “On the occasions he defended the position of the Second International and that of the counter-revolutionary renegade, Trotsky ... He slandered the Communist Party of Germany” ...
I challenge anyone to find a single sentence in anything I wrote or to point to any statement that I made, indicating that I defended the position of the Second International. I have said many things about the united front, and about the German situation which were in agreement with Trotsky’s ideas. I do not apologize for that. Is there any party rule saying that one must first find out what Trotsky has said, and then say the exact opposite? The claim is constantly made that Trotsky was expelled for violation of discipline and not for his ideas. If that is so, (and I am not naive enough to believe it) is it not possible to agree with Trotsky and still be a good party member?
In the course of a discussion with the District Committee on my views. I explicitly stated that I do not consider Cannon and Lovestone counter-revolutionaries. I am still of that opinion. By virtue of what rule in the party or the Communist International, is one liable to expulsion for such an opinion? If there is such a rule, let it be made public immediately!
In what way did I slander the Communist Party of Germany? By saying that its united front tactics were incorrect? Let me call attention to the fact that when the party leaders were grandiloquently proclaiming that the Communist Party of Germany will crush the Fascists, I was warning everyone of the impending calamity. It gives me no satisfaction whatever to say that I was right. The real truth of the matter is that when one criticizes the leaders of the party, it is called slander; and when the party leaders slander everyone who disagrees with them, it is called criticism.
(4) “He developed a theory that only a united front with leaders is possible.”
What a shameful untruth! One must lose all hope in the possibility of a successful Communist movement when leaders can stoop to such misrepresentations. Fortunately we understand very well, that the Communist movement is only temporarily burdened with such “leaders”, who depend upon lies and repression for their control of the Communist party. All I can say is, where and when did I say or write anything justifying this slander?
(5) “He persistently resisted the independent role of the party in the united front, objecting to every political criticism of the American Federation of Labor or the Socialist Party leaders.”
I did not object to political criticism, but I did object to vile and stupid attacks which had the inevitable result of alienating all the non-party people from us.
(6) “The letter of the Executive Committee of the Communist International, he interpreted as agreeing with his position.”
This charge is exceedingly humorous. I did not, as a matter of fact, make that claim. How could I make that claim, when my position was that we should criticize the socialist leaders, but mainly on the basis of the issues involved in the particular united front action, whereas the Communist International came out with its advice to the various parties to refrain from criticism? It seems that many party members were of the opinion that my position was endorsed by the Communist International, and to counteract that opinion, the district leaders attributed it to me.
(7) “At the ‘Free Tom Mooney’ Congress, he made a speech in which he held the Communist Party and the Tom Mooney Molders’ Defense Committee responsible for the absence of delegates from the Socialist Party.”
I did not say a word about the Communist Party. In short, my criticism of the method of calling the Congress was that it was called under the auspices of one organization, whereas it should have been called by a provisional committee representing all tendencies in the labor movement. This very idea was advocated by the party about eight weeks before the Congress. I said that the ones who called the Congress thought of the united front tactic as something which permits one organization to invite all other organizations to its affair. One organization decides to have a congress or a hunger-march or what not, and then graciously sends an invitation to all other organizations to join it. I pointed out that the proper way is to make all organizations feel that they are participating in the calling of the united front conference. Had this been done, we would have been able to swing many more Socialist party locals and American Federation of Labor locals away from the reactionary leadership. The criticism was levelled at the Tom Mooney Molders’ Defense Committee and not a word was said about the Communist party.
 
II. Wilful Misinterpretations
(1) “Goldman developed a theory ... that there can be no united front of unorganized workers, therefore laying down a Right wing theoretical justification against any activities in the shops where the masses of workers are unorganized.”
A real gem of logic, worthy of the leaders of district eight! How the conclusion follows from the premise is a mystery which only the logicians of district eight can solve.
The statement I made in an article which was not published for one reason or other, but which the district eight bureaucrats misquoted and misinterpreted was that the united front presupposed the existence of organizations differing on fundamental principles, but agreeing to act together on some immediate issue; that the necessary attempts to organize the unorganized workers around some immediate issue would not by any stretch of imagination be considered a united front. Where, then, does the idea that there should be no activities in the shops come from? Ask the leadership of district eight! They will tell you that to invite workers to one of our dances constitutes a united front that when Negro and white workers struggle together, it is a united front; and will probably furnish you with similar examples of their conception of a united front. Can we not, must we not, establish a school where district eight leaders and similar leaders could be compelled to attend classes in the ABC of Communism?
(2) “He also developed a ‘Leftist’ theory against the united front campaign of the Communist party in election campaigns, declaring that in the elections there can be no united front of the workers since the workers already support different political parties ... He sharply opposed the policy of the Workers’ Ticket charging that this is a reformist policy to appeal to the members of the American Federation of Labor and Socialist Party to join with the Communist Party in the election struggles.”
What a jumble of misrepresentations and half-truths! Had the article which I wrote on the subject been published, I could easily refer the reader to it and the whole issue as to what I wrote would be settled. But the article was not published, so that all I can do is to give its leading ideas.
I said in that article that the united front has as its main purpose the involving of large masses of workers of different organizations in a struggle against the capitalist class on the basis of an immediate issue. I further stated that the main purpose of our parliamentary campaign should be the education of the workers in the principles of Communism; that this can best be done if the Communist party has its own candidates and conducts its campaign on its own platform; that a united front for the purpose of electing someone to a capitalist legislature is opportunism. I did not altogether exclude the possibility of a united front on the parliamentary field, but very severely criticized the tactics as pursued in Chicago.
Why then deliberately lie in attributing to me as the reason for my opposition to the united front on the parliamentary field, “since the workers already support different political parties”?
Why give the absolutely false impression that my opposition to the Workers’ Ticket was based on the fact that this is a “reformist policy to the appeal to the members of the American Federation of Labor and Socialist Party, to join with the Communist Party in the election struggles”?
Of course the lies and distortions have only one reason. To discredit with the workers who will never get a chance to read my reply to the slanderous statement.
(3) “He did not participate in any mass activity, and abstained from work in mass organizations, confining his activity to that of a lawyer, appearing in a number of cases in court, and occasionally as a speaker for the ‘Friends of the Soviet Union.’”
I do not of course claim that I did the most important work in the party. I did not organize any party units, nor did I organize any unemployed councils or industrial unions. But the statement above quoted leaves the impression that I handled very few cases and did practically nothing else besides.
For the last four years I have handled hundreds of cases for the International Labor Defense. There were times when I appeared in court every day for weeks and weeks. I spoke at least an average of three times a week, before different branches of various organizations.
I do not say this with any feeling that I did a lot for the movement, but simply to show the dishonesty contained in the above statement of the secretariat.
 
III.
If freedom of discussion were to exist in the party had I been given an opportunity to talk to the membership on the various problems that I raised in my articles; had two articles which I wrote dealing with the united front on the parliamentary field and with the slogan of amalgamation of the unemployed workers’ organizations been published; had I felt that the district leaders were honestly opposed to me but were willing to permit me to discuss all the vital issues before the membership, I would now feel extremely vexed at myself for my breach of discipline at the Mooney Congress. I do not think that expulsion would have been merited, but I would feel that almost any other punishment would be well deserved. Communist discipline is something that cannot be taken too seriously. But when Communist discipline is used to trap a comrade who has ideas, it assumes a formal and obnoxious character, far removed from the ideas of Communist discipline as taught by Lenin.
Everyone knew I was a delegate to the Mooney Congress, I am quite positive that the fact that I was a delegate reached the ears of the leaders of district eight before the Congress convened. Why was I not invited to the fraction meeting where I should have been given a chance to present my views on the conduct of the Congress and on the advisability of joining the Scottsboro and Mooney issues? On the one hand, I am kept out of the fraction meeting and on the other hand, if I say anything contrary to the decision of the fraction, I violate discipline. “Heads I win – tails you lose!”
Yes, I violated discipline, but under the circumstances expulsion is not justified, and since expulsion was decided upon, it is obvious that the real reason is not my conduct at the Mooney Congress, but the fact that for the past six months or so I have dared to come out with theories of the united front tactic and with an explanation of the German situation not to the liking of the district eight leadership.
I cannot deny that expulsion would be a terrible blow. No real Communist would take expulsion from the party calmly. On the other hand, no real Communist surrenders the most cherished possession of a revolutionist, intellectual honesty and independence and integrity. Party membership and intellectual honesty should never conflict. If there is a conflict, if the party does not permit freedom of discussion within the limits of Communist discipline, if a party member must conceal his views in order to remain in the party, the expulsion is no longer a disgrace, but a badge of honor.
Woe to the party that must resort to repression and expulsion to compel members to agree with the leadership! Has it come to such a stage in the Communist movement? My expulsion indicates that it has The affirmance of the expulsion by the Central Committee of the party will prove conclusively that there is no room for a thinking revolutionist within the party.
Albert Goldman
 



As far as the Left Opposition is concerned the necessity for a new Communist party has been accepted and has passed the stage ot discussion. Though the idea of a new party came as a surprise to many members of the L.O., its advisability and necessity became so clear as the discussion developed that practically not a single voice was raised in opposition.
But, having accepted the idea of the necessity of a new party, we are immediately faced with the question: with whom and how to build the party. This question of course was partly involved in the discussion on the necessity of a new party but only incidentally. At present some more or less clear and definite answer must be given. Otherwise there is danger of our wasting valuable effort and energy without achieving any noticeable results.
If we answer the first part of the question – namely, with whom – the answer to the second part – how – will readily follow.
The temptation is to take the easiest road. We want to organize a new party. There are several groups with strong leanings towards Communist principles. Why not enter into a discussion with such groups, win over as many of them as possible to our viewpoint and form the new party? Such a solution has a certain plausibility and, moreover, the path suggested by it presents no serious difficulties
But to depend upon discussion with and winning over of those who claim to be Communists or those who are traveling in that direction for the formation of a new party is to invite sad disappointments.
In the first place, the membership of the various Communist or near-Communist groups in this country is insignificant. So that, even if we should succeed in convincing a good; proportion of that membership of the correctness of our ideas, we would not be much better off than we are at present.
In the second place, the existing Communist and near-Communist groups have definite viewpoints of their own, viewpoints which they have clung to for quite a long time.
It is folly to expect that because we change our position from that of considering ourselves a fraction of the official Communist party to that of a Communist group anxious to build a new party, we should thereby almost immediately succeed in winning these groups over to our point of view. Not so easy as all that.
The only possible method of organizing a new party in the near future on the basis of the existing Communist and near-Communist groups is to permit all groups joining in the formation of a new party to lead a more or less independent life in the new party. This of course is out of the question. Whatever it might be it would not be a Communist party. It may be that some kind of a federation of Communist groups would be advisable as a step towards the formation of a new Communist party. This is exceedingly doubtful but not by any means ruled out altogether. At any rate, it would not be a party. Does it follow then that we should cease discussing questions of principles, and tactics with other groups for the purpose of ironing out differences and winning these groups or some of their members to our viewpoint? Decidedly not! We must merely recognize the limitations involved in such a method and recognizing these limitations emphasize another method which is more difficult but will in the long run yield far greater results.
The turn to a new party means a turn to mass work for the immediate purpose of gathering revolutionary workers for the building of a new party. Needless to say recruiting workers for the building of a new party cannot be successfully accomplished merely by explaining to them the correctness of the theory of permanent revolution in contradistinction to socialism in one country. Winning over workers to our side means participation in the workers’ struggles. It means not only struggle but struggle on a correct basis with correct slogans. It means the gaining of the confidence of the workers in our ability to lead.
The superiority and correctness of our theories can be convincing to the workers through our successful activities in mass work. By this time this proportion should require no argument. A logical presentation of the incorrectness of the theory of socialism in one country, if not accompanied with practical revolutionary work in the trade unions, amongst the unorganized or amongst the unemployed will be met by a mere shrug of the shoulder. Effective work amongst the employed and unemployed workers will make them very sympathetic to the idea of building a new party.
To use comrade Trotsky’s phrase of the two levers, one can say that here are two levers which we must use in preparing the groundwork for the new party. One is the short lever of discussion with those who have already accepted most of the fundamental principles of Communism and with those who are traveling away from the social-democracy towards Communism. The other is the long and more important lever of organizing employed and unemployed workers, participating and leading in their struggles and by such activities winning over new forces with which to build the new party.
A turn to real mass work will be a very valuable training for our members. It will mean that they will no longer confine themselves to the study and discussion of what might be termed purely Communist and international questions. Our members confronted with the task of talking to workers will learn a new language and will concern themselves, in addition to questions of Communist theory, with questions affecting the everyday life of the worker. Our members will learn the intimate connection between international and highly theoretical questions on the one hand and the more immediate problems of the working class.
 



In joining the Left Opposition I am doing that which every thinking revolutionary Marxist should not fail to do. That the Stalinist bureaucracy has forsaken the idea of the world revolution and uses the phrase only in the ritual on holiday celebrations should by this time be clear to everyone who keeps fairly well informed with ideas and events.
What it is incumbent upon every revolutionary Marxist to assert and emphasize is that the abandonment of the world revolution represents the greatest danger to the Soviet Union. To the middle class intellectuals Stalin gives evidence of his great “statemanship” by concentrating on “building socialism in one country”. To them comrade Trotsky is the wild revolutionary without a sense of “realism”. To the working class revolutionist Stalin’s path means inevitable disaster and betrayal of the international working class, including the Russian. This explains why so many of the New Republic and Nation enthusiasts are flocking to the banner of Stalinism at the time when revolutionary Marxists are expelled from the Communist parties.
When in the early part of 1930 [1] I became acquainted with Trotsky’s Criticism of the Draft Program I immediately knew who represented the truth of revolutionary Marxism. I hoped, however, that the Communist International would be compelled by the force of events to change its policies. I was not convinced that it was necessary to follow comrade Trotsky in making an open and intransigent struggle against the destructive ideas and tactics of the Comintern. Only my very closest friends knew where my sympathies lay. The party functionaries knew that I followed Trotsky’s writings very closely and expressed some displeasure but attributed my interest to the fact that I was not a worker but an intellectual.
My five months in the Soviet Union in 1931 left me more disturbed than ever. On the one hand I saw the successful building of huge factories, while on the other hand I saw evident signs of degeneration in the party, and working class and peasant dissatisfaction. Fortunately in the last month of my stay I came in contact with an American-Jewish worker in Kharkov, and my first enthusiasm engendered by the appearance of huge factories was tempered by a more intimate knowledge of the life of the Soviet worker as revealed to me by the New York machinist who left the United States because he heard Olgin, in a lecture, describe the Soviet Union as a veritable paradise.
 
Testimony of Russian Party Members
The economic hardships for the workers and peasants, however, were not in themselves sufficient to cause one to change his views on basic principles. Difficulties and hardships are to be expected. In 1931, the effect of the adventurous policies of the “liquidation of the kulak as a class” and “the five year plan in four” was not yet fully apparent. There was a great deal of hope that the end of the five year plan would witness a marked improvement.
What was most disturbing was the intellectually stifling atmosphere in the party. Several times party members, when with me alone, asked me in a whisper concerning the whereabouts of Trotsky. They did not even know that he was in Turkey. The party members had a grotesque picture of conditions in capitalist countries. Discussion in the party units revolved around how best to carry out the party line. It was no longer a Communist party – that is, a living, thinking, functioning group of class-conscious workers but a huge machine unthinkingly carrying out the behests of “the leader”.
Upon my return to the United States I was determined to give the Chicago workers who were interested a more realistic picture of the Soviet Union. Though more convinced than ever that Trotsky was right in his criticism of Stalin’s economic policies in the Soviet Union, I was not yet prepared to begin a struggle in the open. I therefore omitted many things in my lectures on the Soviet Union. I simply warned my listeners not to go to the Soviet Union for the purpose of remaining there.
 
The German Lesson
It was the German situation and the insane policies followed by the C.I. bureaucrats that convinced me of the necessity of an open fight against these policies. It became obvious that not to struggle against the Comintern “line” amounted to an actual betrayal. Comrade Trotsky was absolutely correct in his open and uncompromising struggle against the revisionism of Stalin and his fellow-bureaucrats. No longer quiet, but speaking openly against the C.I. line, I was immediately expelled.
I knew, of course, that I belonged to the Left Opposition. Nevertheless 1 would not join without getting in touch with the “Lovestoneites” and reading their literature over again. The more I read of their position, the more I talked with their representatives, the more disgusted I became. The two-Stalin idea – one the correct Stalin for the Soviet Union and the other the incorrect one for the capitalist countries – was sickening. Herberg’s article in the Modern Monthly explaining the position of the “Lovestoneites” was the last straw. It is pitiful for anyone to attempt to make such a sharp distinction between Stalinism in the Soviet Union and in the capitalist countries. It is a denial of Marxism for anyone to say: the principles are correct, only the tactics are wrong.
 
The Principles of Marx and Lenin
I have joined the Left Opposition because it represents the interests of the international revolutionary working class. It is clear to me that the principles upon which it stands are based upon the teachings of Marx and Lenin and free from the filth and revisionism of Stalin and his obedient satellites in the Soviet Union and in the capitalist countries.
He who understands the principles of revolutionary Marxism and who is not afraid to struggle for those principles has only one road to follow – to build a new party and a new international under the leadership of the Left Opposition.

Note by ETOL
1. In printed text “1903”, which is obviously incorrect.
 



Hitler’s victory in Germany was a blow which should have brought the official communists back to consciousness and sobered them up. The bureaucratic apparatus had lost the power to think straight and had consequently taken that power away from most of the members. If the “theories” of social-fascism united front from below, and dual revolutionary unionism had been a result merely from a state of temporary derangement the Nazis should have succeeded in bringing the Stalinists back to their senses.
But it became apparent after the German catastrophe that the insane tactics of the bureaucracy of the Communist International were not due at all to anything temporary but were part of the bureaucratic organism and, since Hitler’s terrific blow did not destroy that apparatus these theories and tactics remained in all their purity.
What is more, the fascist juggernaut deepened the confusion and senselessness of the official communists. The German working-class was not defeated; the tactics of the Communist Party were, are and ever will be correct; the victory of fascism indicated not the weakness but the strength of the workers. Such was and continues today to be the burden of the Stalinist song celebrating Hitler’s ascent to power. Every word of protest, even of doubt, was denied the light of day and persistence on the part of any member determined to keep quiet no longer meant inevitable expulsion.
 
Impetus to Revolutionary Elements
The socialist bureaucracy has not the coercive power of the apparatus of the Comintern. It has no Soviet Union giving it the tremendous prestige and power that the workers’ state lends to the communist bureaucracy. It controls no purse strings. As a consequence the members of the various socialist parties are freer to think as they please and the German situation caused a great many of them to do some hard thinking and set them into motion towards the left. The struggle of the socialists in Austria, though utilized by the socialist leaders for showing how brave they were and what a militant organization the Socialist party of Austria was, gave a further impetus to the revolutionary elements within the socialist parties. The result has been that all over the world socialists have entered into discussion of socialist theories and tactics and a definite drift to the left is apparent. As against the fatalistic, religious acceptance of the dogma of infallibility by the communist priesthood and Its followers the ferment in the socialist ranks is like a fresh breeze and has great revolutionary significance.
It must be said clearly that insofar as members of the socialist parties have shown that they can think independently of the leadership they are more important for the building of a new revolutionary party than the docile, unthinking followers of the Stalinist bureaucracy.
 
No Attraction in Comintern
That the Comintern has practically no attraction for the leftward-moving socialists speaks volumes for the present character of that organization. The fact that the left socialists, instead of going over to the Communist International, are attempting to reform the Socialist International shows conclusively that revolutionary currents In the labor movement do not and cannot flow in the direction of Moscow. The failure of the Third International to attract the socialist workers is both cause and effect of the German catastrophe.
The Socialist party of America like its brother parties the world over finds itself in the throes of a serious discussion. Left-wing groups are challenging its fundamental principles of bourgeois democracy and gradualness; some of the left-wingers are making a determined bid to obtain control of the organization. It is necessary for those of us who are interested in the formation of a new revolutionary party and a new international to study the tendencies of the various groupings, to differentiate between them and to enter into very close relationship with those left-wing elements most likely to come all the way over to our position and thus play an important role in the coming political readjustments in the labor movement.
 
Heterogeneous Elements
Nothing is more necessary than to understand clearly that the left wing in the Socialist party ss composed of heterogeneous elements united only in their opposition to the old reactionary guard now in control. There is a world of difference between the “left winger” Norman Thomas, a really sincere individual who has faint academic doubts about bourgeois democracy and the fighting rank and file coal miners of southern Illinois who are in reality communists who were driven away from communism by the Communist party and are reported by reliable persons to hate everything connected with the Communist party.
Thomas has a powerful influence in the Socialist party, especially over the petty-bourgeois liberal elements in it. Essentially a Christian pacifist, having less than a superficial acquaintance with revolutionary Marxism, his being counted a left-winger merely indicates the depths to which the old guard has fallen. He is a sincere reformer overflowing with a desire to help the downtrodden. His honesty leads him in some questions – as in the united front and in the struggle against the racketeering leadership of the American Federation of Labor – to take a position to the left of the official leadership of the Socialist party. All his writing, however, show conclusively that he could be correctly characterized as a “left-winger” only if he were in the Democratic party. As far as the revolutionary movement is concerned his very sincerity and ability constitute dangers because of the influence they give him over the rank and file socialists.
 
The Middle-West Group
The group that is making a real bid for the leadership of the Socialist party is the one now in control of Illinois and led by Maynard C. Krueger, professor of economics at the University of Chicago, and Clarence Senior, national secretary of the Socialist party. Biemiller of Milwaukee is part of this group, known as a left-wing group and wanting everyone to recognize that it is left.
But it is difficult indeed to discover the platform upon which it lays claim to being left. It has taken great care to conceal its principles from everybody, even from itself. What is its program? Not a soul knows! At the state convention of the Socialist party not a single theoretical question was discussed. To all intents and purposes the delegates were not concerned with any of the problems agitating the minds of the membership.
The theory of Krueger and Senior seems to be that to struggle for the basis of theory, on the basis of a theoretical program with definite principles and tactics is inadvisable. They lead one to infer that what they want is first to obtain control of the organization and then to show their left color.
False to the very core! No principled left-winger would dare permit himself such an opportunistic course. Unless a group is composec of simple careerists, the first necessity is to formulate a program and the second, to make it public and try to win over members upon the basis of the program. A real left-wing group must attract to itself the more advanced elements in the party and must educate the backward elements.
 
A Typical Centrist Group
How can that be done without a clear-cut program? Where is the group going? What does it want to do? Krueger and his followers must asnwer these questions. Else the accusation that all they are interested in is the getting of power will have more than a semblance of justification.
Simply pointing to the fact that Krueger and Senior supported the minority resolutions at the International Socialist Conference held in August 1933 is not at all sufficient. Vaguely intimating that one is in favor of revolutionary principles and tactics is still less satisfactory. The whole attitude of the Illinois group is typically centrist. It stresses action and tends to ignore theory. And above all it is impatient with the demand for exactness in theory and for a struggle on the basis of theoretical formulations.
The Illinois group will probably point to articles by Biemiller and Kantorovitch in the American Socialist Quarterly dealing with the problem of socialism and democracy as proof of their interest in theory. Aside from the fact that what is necessary is a well-rounded program of a group and not isolated articles by individuals, the articles themselves leave much to be desired. One must admit that both Biemiller and Kantorovitch take a step forward – but a very hesitating one.
 
Reformist Theories
When Kantorovitch asserts that “the way to political power in democratic countries will, in all probability, be the way of an electoral victory, if fascism will not intervene and make an end to democracy” (American Socialist Quarterly, Autumn 1933) he is very close to pure reformism. The reformists also threaten to gain power in fascist countries by revolutionary means. It is one’s attitude toward the use of revolutionary means to gain po-itical power in bourgeois-democratic countries and not in fascist countries that distinguishes a reformist from a revolutionist.
And to say, as Kantorovitch does in the same article, that “the problem is not so much how to get power as how to hold it, how to use it” is almost putting the cart before the horse. One must presume that power must be gotten first before it can be used and to emphasize the latter in contradistinction to the former might leave the working class in a position of never struggling to obtain power. Both problems are of tremendous importance and must be tackled diligently and solved without hems and haws.
Biemiller repeats almost the same idea in his article in the American Socialist Quarterly (Spring 1934) when he says “under such conditions ... it is probable that socialists can be voted into control in those countries where bourgeois democracy exists”. The use of force is limited only to the end of retaining control. We repeat: It is a step forward but is is by no means a revolutionary Marxist position.
 
Revolutionary Policy Committee
The only group that assumed the obligation of putting its ideas publicly before the membership of the Socialist party and gaining adherents for those ideas is the Revolutionary Policy Committee. Its appeal to the Socialist Party membership is a serious though not quite adequate document. To the extent that everyone knows its principles, it is miles ahead of the Illinois left-wingers.
An effective critique of the program of the Revolutionary Policy Committee was made by Comrade Cannon in the Militant of May 5th and 12th, 1934. It may be pointed out that on the problem of the revolutionary overthrow of the capitalist class the minority resolution proposed by Ronald Deval (New Leader, National Convention Agenda, April 21, 1934) is more specific than the section dealing with the same problem in the Appeal of the Revolutionary Policy Committee. In its position on the Labor party, trade-union policy and the Soviet Union the influence of Lovestone is visible. But it is hardly likely that leftward moving socialists capable of independent thinking should get oft on a track leading nowhere.
 
Struggle for Leadership
At the national convention of the Socialist party to be held in June in Detroit there will undoubtedly be a struggle against the present reactionary leadership. That struggle will in all probability not be led by the left-centrist elements represented by the Revolutionary Policy Committee but by the right-centrist elements represented by the Illinois leadership, helped by Norman Thomas and his followers. The general tendency of the working class elements and the youth is to the left. Consequently it is not at all unlikely that the Illinois group with its left-front will ride into power. The greater likelihood, however, is a compromise involving the present leadership, the Thomas following and the Illinois group.
The agenda for the convention gives promise of a highly interesting ideological struggle provided the sponsors of the revolutionary resolutions are represented. The agenda clearly mirrors the existence of the irreconcilable groupings in the Socialist party. How can a group announcing the fact that “the Socialist party seeks to attain its end by orderly methods” and a group insisting that “we must be prepared for violence if necessary” remain in the same party? How can a group clinging to bourgeois democracy remain in the same party with a group openly advocating the dictatorship of the proletariat? The answer is that the two groups cannot remain in the same party and in the same international if those who see the necessity of the dictatorship of the proletariat mean what they say and are ready to draw the inevitable conclusions.
 
Gist of the Question
And therein lies the whole gist of the matter. The revolutionary socialists must think things through to the very end. Even if they do not openly state it, they must ask themselves some very pertinent questions: What if the party does not accept our principles? (And we can assure them that it won’t!) How long shall we remain and keep on trying to transform the party?
Many of the left-wingers point to the degeneration of the Independent Labor Party in England as a warning not to leave the parent organization. But that degeneration is not due to the fact that the I.L.P. left the Labor Party, but that after leaving, it did not resolutely take the road of building a new party and a new international.
No matter what happens at the convention the real socialist left-wingers who are inarticulate, the miners of southern Illinois, the revolutionary youth who are in the Socialist party by virtue of the stupidities of the Communist party will, and not in the very distant future, find their rightful place under the banner of International communism.
 



In Belgium we now have another example of the miserable role which the leaders of the Socialist and Stalinist parties play in the struggle for such an important immediate demand as the abolition of the monarchy. In Italy the Socialist and Stalinist leaders claim to be fighting for a democratic republic but do not find it inconsistent to take an oath, as a condition to being permitted to accept a post in the government, not to raise the institutional question (the question of the monarchy) before the meeting of a constituent assembly.
By taking an oath not to raise the question of the monarchy, Nenni and Togliatti, leaders respectively of the Italian Socialist and Stalinist parties, afford the monarchy an opportunity to mobilize all possible support. No one knows when the constituent assembly will meet and it can be taken for granted that the forces in favor of the monarchy will prevail upon the British and American governments to postpone the calling of such an assembly to enable the monarchy to gain additional support.
In Belgium, the Socialist premier, Achille van Acker has recently resigned because King Leopold announced that it is his intention to return to Belgium in his role as king. We must assume that the leaders of the Socialist Party are responsible for van Acker’s decision to resign. We must also assume, since there has been no report to the contrary, that the Stalinist Party supports the Socialist Party in this maneuver.
Why resign? This is the question every militant worker of Belgium must be asking himself. Since van Acker is the head of the government, why does he not announce that Leopold will not be permitted to cross the Belgian border? The government is strong enough to prevent the entry of any undesirable individual. The masses consider Leopold such an individual and the Socialist and Stalinist leaders claim to have the same opinion of Leopold.
Leopold is not coming with a huge army to force his entry into Belgium. As far as we know he has simply stated that he intends to come to Belgium with his family and a few supporters, by plane or train. What is there to prevent the government from appointing a few dozen workers as police officers to invite Leopold, when he appears at the border, to return where he came from? And if van Acker requires more than a few policemen he can surely obtain the help of thousands of Belgium militant workers.
It may be argued that the British reactionaries are really behind Leopold’s move to return. If that, is so, then a Socialist minister worth his salt would compel Churchill openly to intervene in the matter. With the help of the English workers, the Belgian workers could defy Churchill.
The threat to call a strike in case Leopold returns is, under the circumstances, a completely empty one. What do the Socialist and Stalinist leaders expect to achieve by means of a strike? Do they expect Leopold to resign? But if he will resign, as the result of a general strike, after he returns, he can surely be kept out of the country by the threat to use the necessary force to prevent his entry. A general strike is not a plaything. It is a very serious matter and to utilize it when it is unnecessary is a sign of light-mindedness.
The fact is that the Socialist and Stalinist leaders are bluffing. They do not really want to struggle against Leopold and the threat to use the general strike is a threat and nothing else. This does not mean that the workers will not go out on strike if Leopold is permitted to return. It means that the Socialist and Stalinist leaders will sabotage the strike if it is called.
Should the contention be advanced that there are elements in Belgium that will revolt if Leopold is prohibited from entering the country, then the answer is, that it becomes all the more necessary to keep him out and to that extent behead any reactionary movement on his behalf. On the assumption that a considerable section of the population will fight for Leopold’s return, it must be concluded that this section will also fight against any general strike to compel Leopold to resign.
My argument against the resignation of, the cabinet is not to be construed as an argument in favor of the participation of Socialists and Stalinists in a capitalist government; it is intended to show that the Socialist and Stalinist leaders are unwilling and unable to use their government positions to defend the interests of the masses.
The fundamental weakness of the Socialist and Stalinist leadership in their fight against Leopold lies in the fact that they are not struggling to liquidate the monarchy as an institution. They are fighting against Leopold but not against the monarchy. To the capitalists of Belgium, of Great Britain and the United States it is not Leopold who is important, but the monarchy as an institution around which the reactionary forces can rally and possibly obtain the support of a large section of the population. It may well be that Leopold will abdicate in order to save the monarchy.
For the Belgian workers it is not only important that Leopold be kept out of Belgium but that the monarchy as such be liquidated as an obstacle in their path to a socialist victory. The liquidation of the monarchy will not automatically bring to the Belgian workers relief from the terrible misery which is their lot. Only a Socialist United States of Europe can undertake the task of solving the problems of the European masses. But in liquidating an institution which will fight bitterly against the socialist revolution the workers have everything to gain and nothing to lose.
In putting up what is essentially a sham battle against Leopold the Socialist leaders are in reality saving the monarchy. This kind of a fight is treachery to the working masses. It is for the militant Belgian workers to insist that the fight against the return of Leopold be transformed into a fight to liquidate the monarchy. In this way the revolutionary workers will convince the masses that the Socialist and Stalinist leaders are not willing to fight to abolish the monarchy.
And if the Socialist and Stalinist leaders are not even willing to abolish the monarchy, the conclusion is inescapable that they cannot be trusted to fight for socialism. At present the task of the Trotskyists in Belgium is to tear the masses away from the Stalinist and Socialist parties. A struggle for the liquidation of the monarchy will help convince the masses that their desire for a socialist revolution and a Socialist United States of Europe cannot be realized if they follow the Socialist and Stalinist parties.
 



Far be it from us to lay the least claim to a martyr’s
crown. Imprisonment is a terrible thing under the best of conditions.
It is terrible to hear the noise of the locking of a door behind you
and feel that you are actually treated like some wild beast.
But in comparison with the lot of those in Hitler’s or
Stalin’s concentration camps, in comparison with the conditions
that the Indian revolutionists have to endure in the prisons provided
for them by British imperialism, our lot was quite an enviable one.
It is not, however, because of our treatment in prison that you
and thousands of others have protested and are protesting. It is
because we were imprisoned for propagating ideas which we believe
offer the only path to the liberation of mankind. Very few of those
who supported us agree with our ideas but they understand that to
permit reactionary forces to imprison people for preaching ideas that
have as their aim the achievement of true liberty and equality for
all men is dangerous indeed for everyone who is dissatisfied with the
world as it is.
Our agitation against the Smith Act becomes part of our struggle
to preserve and extend democratic rights for the people. For we live
in a period when those rights are constantly threatened. The economic
dislocations that are bound to follow the war, will bring with them
serious conflicts between groups and classes. The answer to such
conflicts on the part of the privileged and powerful is invariably
the same: prisons and violence for those who are in the forefront of
the struggle against the suppression of every democratic right. We
must be prepared to guard those rights.
To you who do not agree with our political ideas I can say: Be
absolutely certain that just as you have supported us, we shall
support any one who is attacked by the forces of reaction, regardless
of his disagreement with us. We accept and act upon the great
principle which should prevail in the labor movement – an
injury to one is an injury to all. Against the capitalists and all
their tools the unity of all labor must be considered absolutely
essential. The struggle on behalf of the defendants in the
Minneapolis Case did not keep us out of prison. But it was certainly
worth while to spend 13 months in prison to see that the spirit of
solidarity lives in the hearts of tens of thousands of workers.
 



To explain why we supported the struggle of the Greek masses under
the leadership of the EAM-ELAS, against the British imperialists and
their Greek puppets, it is necessary to analyze the character of that
struggle.
In the Spanish civil war the Trotskyists gave material support to
the Loyalist government in its fight against Franco because we
considered that fight to be one for bourgeois democracy against
fascism. Every one who read our literature knew that we were opposed
to the Loyalist Government and would not have hesitated to replace it
with a workers’ and peasants’ government had we had a
majority of the people behind us. But our opposition to the Loyalist
Government did not prevent us from giving it material support as
against Franco. Bourgeois democracy is an evil which we want to
replace with workers’ democracy but it is to be defended
against fascism.
Was the struggle of the EAM-ELAS one that can be said to have
been similar in character to the struggle of the Loyalist Government
against Franco? On the side of the EAM the leadership was certainly
fighting for no more than bourgeois democracy. Undoubtedly there were
fascists supporting the Greek Government and its British masters.
But it would be stretching the meaning of fascism far too much
to say that the British imperialists and their Greek puppets
represented fascism. As events showed they were perfectly willing to
cover their rule with democratic promises, later to be fulfilled or
not, depending on the militancy and power of the masses. While they
used the methods of fascist dictatorship, the language was bourgeois
democratic in character. The British masters and the Greek servants
represented reaction in general but not that specific form of
reaction which we designate by the term fascism.
* * *
Since the dominant role in the civil war against the EAM was
played by the British imperialist army, it is very easy to fall into
the error of considering the struggle to have been predominantly a
national liberation struggle. That it had aspects of such a struggle
is undeniable. For a long time Greece has been a semi-colonial
country dominated by British finance capitalism. The fact that the
Greek monarch, of German origin, remained loyal to the British
imperialists shows how closely the Greek ruling class is connected
with the class represented by Churchill.
 
National Liberation
The Greek masses had just gotten rid of the German imperialist
yoke and consequently were very sensitive to Churchill’s
attempt to decide the fate of Greece. It is undoubtedly true that
many joined the EAM because they wanted the Greek people to be free
of any alien control.
Revolutionary Marxists support struggles for national liberation
except where they are submerged in an imperialist conflict. Under the
particular conditions of the Greek civil war we could readily support
those aspects of the EAM struggle which can be said to have been part
of a struggle for national liberation. But it would be wrong to
consider the struggle of the EAM as primarily a struggle for national
liberation. One need only consider a struggle of the masses of India
against British imperialism to realize the difference between the
character of a struggle which is primarily one for national
liberation and a struggle like the one waged by the Greek masses, in
which the aspects of national liberation are present but are
secondary in importance.
* * *
The essential nature of the Greek civil war was a struggle of the
masses against all the reactionary capitalist forces represented by
the monarchy and supported by British imperialism. When the
Papandreou Government, under Churchill’s orders, directed the
ELAS troops to surrender their weapons, the masses realized that it
could only mean an attempt to reinstate the monarchy and the
reactionary forces behind it and thus to prevent the workers and
peasants from establishing a government devoted exclusively to their
interests. In a certain sense the action of the Greek masses is
analogous to the action of the Russian masses in February 1917, when
they overthrew the Czar, and in September 1917 when they fought
against Kornilov who organized the reactionary monarchical and
bourgeois forces in an attempt to overthrow Kerensky. The Russian
masses did not want the monarchy and all that it represented and the
same is true of the Greek masses.
 
Popular Front
The struggle of the EAM was not one which had as its aim the
establishment of a workers’ and peasants’ government
determined to do its part in organizing a Socialist United States of
Europe. The masses followed the EAM at the head of which was a
combination of Stalinists, Social-Democrats and liberals. The
leadership of the EAM is similar in character to the Spanish Popular
Front Government. The Greek masses undoubtedly want a fundamental
social change. That was also true of the Spanish masses in the
Spanish civil war. But the Greek masses were following a leadership
which limited itself to a struggle against the reactionary forces
represented mainly by the monarchy and supported by British
imperialism, just as the Spanish masses followed a leadership which
limited itself to a struggle against fascism and for bourgeois
democracy.
A common factor in the Russian Revolution of February 1917, in the
struggle of the Russian masses against Kornilov, in the Spanish civil
war and in the Greek civil war, is that objectively they can all be
considered a stage in the struggle of the masses to establish their
own workers’ and peasants’ government. The victory of the
Russian masses in the February Revolution and against Kornilov
permitted them to go on to the October Revolution. The defeat of the
Loyalist Government was a set-back to the workers’ revolution
in Spain. The compromise between the EAM and the reactionary forces
in Greece, disarming the ELAS soldiers, constitutes a terrible blow
to the Greek workers and peasants.
On the part of the masses the struggles I mentioned above were'
struggles to make possible the victory of the workers’
revolution. As revolutionary Marxists we were obligated to support
those struggles.
 
* * *
Attitude Toward EAM
At present we do not know to what extent Trotskyists participated
in the struggle on the side of the EAM. We can take it for granted
that there were many doing their utmost to defeat the British
imperialists and their Greek puppets. Participating in that struggle,
they undoubtedly explained to the worker-soldiers of the ELAS why
they gave material but not political support to the struggle of the
EAM. Their explanation must have been in somewhat the following
manner:

We are fighting with you for the defeat of the reactionary
forces represented by the monarchy and supported by British
imperialism. We give material support to the EAM because the
struggle it is waging is a progressive one.
 
We give no political support to the EAM because at the head
of that organization is a Popular-Front combination that is
satisfied with capitalist democracy. What the Greek masses need to
solve their vital problems is a government of workers and peasants
dedicated to the task of aiding in the establishment of a Socialist
United States of Europe.
 
We warn you that the leadership of the EAM will make some
compromise with the British imperialists and their puppets. Take
power into your own hands and call upon the working masses of Europe
and America to come to your aid.

 



Stalin’s ruthless and treacherous act in arresting sixteen representatives of the Polish underground affords an opportunity for the representatives of American and British imperialism and their hangers-on to shed copious tears and incidentally prepare the masses for a possible conflict with the Soviet Union. The cynicism of the Kremlin dictator in first inviting the Polish leaders to a conference and then arresting them is surpassed only by the hypocrisy of the spokesmen of American and British imperialism, who have not lifted and will not lift a finger on behalf of the thousands and tens of thousands of Polish and Jewish workers who have been deported by Stalin to the concentration camps of Siberia.
Where were the protests of the official representatives of the United States and Great Britain when Erlich and Alter, leaders of Jewish socialist workers, were arrested and murdered by Stalin? These Jewish socialist leaders with a record of many years of service to the cause of socialism were charged with being fascists by the cynical GPU. Only their immediate friends and the revolutionary workers rejected the charge as a slander and accused Stalin of murdering two of his conscious political opponents. The officials who are now protesting the arrest of the sixteen Polish leaders of the official underground were then silent as the tomb.
When Stalin, by agreement with Hitler, seized the eastern part of Poland he deported tens of thousands of Jewish and Polish workers to the Soviet Union. Most of these deportees are still in his clutches. The capitalist press writes nothing about their fate; there is no hue and cry about their whereabouts. It is absolutely certain that when the Stalinist army drove the German army out of Poland more thousands of Polish workers were arrested by the GPU and deported. Stettinius and Eden did not see fit to lodge any protest in favor of the unknown workers who were dealt such cruel blows by Stalin’s GPU.
* * *
Stalin’s Motives
The Stalinists and their fellow- travellers are shouting to high heaven that the sixteen arrested Poles are guilty of “diversionary activities.” It was to be expected that the Stalinists would accuse any one they want to arrest for political reasons of being guilty of sabotage or some other crime allegedly committed against the Stalinist army. But if the charges are true why did it take the Stalinists so long to make them public? Why did they conceal the fact of the arrest for several weeks? As a general proposition it is safe to reject as a falsehood any charge made by the Stalinists against political opponents where the Stalinists are unwilling to permit an impartial investigation of the charges.
Why should Stalin act in such an arbitrary manner at this time? He is evidently determined to retain complete control of Poland and he chooses this method of openly flouting the Allies to notify them that he intends to be master of Poland. It is not of course excluded that Stalin will compromise with the Allies but the compromise will, nevertheless, leave him in control of that country. Arresting the sixteen Poles who, at his invitation, came to discuss a possible settlement of the Polish situation, gives Stalin an additional trump card.
Stalin acts on the hypothesis that to grab as much as he possibly can, including Polish officials, can do him no harm in the final settlement. He will have that much greater bargaining power. Creating a provisional government in Austria and seizing, through Tito, the city of Trieste, can serve the same purpose of giving him something to yield, in order to assure that he keeps what he really wants.
 
Allied Opposition
On the other hand British and American imperialism are deeply concerned with Stalin’s highly independent attitude. There seems to be no limit to his ambitions. It appears that both the British and American Governments have determined to show Stalin that he should not count on their continued yielding. That is the explanation of Churchill’s warning that he will not tolerate totalitarian governments in Europe. (Churchill will of course only tolerate his own kind of dictatorships.)
The firm note sent by London and Washington on the question of Trieste is another indication that British and American imperialism are not going to permit Stalin to have his own way everywhere. The incident of Stalin’s arrest of the representatives of the Polish Underground has aroused a good deal of popular resentment. London and Washington are not slow to exploit this resentment in order to mobilize popular sentiment against the Soviet Union.
* * *
Class-conscious workers should follow a course that is absolutely independent of, and against, both Stalin and the British and American imperialists. We do not in the slightest approve Stalin’s treacherous arrest of official representatives of an underground movement, some of whom represent socialist workers. If there are any fascists among those arrested let Stalin prove it in an open trial, where labor representatives can be present.
If London and Washington concern themselves with the sixteen Polish officials let the world labor movement demand an accounting of Stalin about what has happened to the thousands of Polish and Jewish workers who have been deported from Poland to the Soviet Union and are now in the clutches of the GPU.
Let the world labor movement demand that the peoples of Poland be given the right to determine their own fate. We have to trust in the Stalinist bureaucracy and its puppet, the Lublin Government. We have no trust in British and American imperialism and in the London Government-in-exile. We are for the masses of Poland and for their unconditional right to choose their own government.
 



In The Militant of March 17 there was published the program of the Workers Communist Party of Italy, the party of Italian Trotskyism. The first demand of that program was the abolition of the monarchy and institution of a democratic republic.
I am of the opinion that our Italian comrades are absolutely correct and have followed the best traditions of revolutionary Marxism in making the demand for the abolition of the monarchy and the institution of a democratic republic, at the present time, one of the basic demands of their platform. The American party has taken no position on the question and since there are differences of opinion among the party members, I wish to emphasize that I am speaking only for myself and those who agree with me in giving whole-hearted support to the slogan for the abolition of the monarchy and the institution of a democratic republic.
Accepting, as we do, the term “democratic republic” as indicating a capitalist democratic republic, is there not a contradiction between the fact that the Italian Trotskyists stand for a Soviet republic in Italy and for a Socialist United States of Europe and their demand for a democratic republic? Absolutely no contradiction whatever. Just as there is no contradiction in fighting for the abolition of the capitalist system and at the same time struggling for higher wages under the capitalist system.
* * *
When the German army was driven out of Naples in October 1943 and when Rome fell to the Allies in June 1944 the Italian masses clearly showed their hostility to the monarchy. The capitalists, the church, the Allies rallied to the support of the monarchy, basing themselves on the proposition that the monarchy would constitute a rallying center for all the conservative and reactionary layers of the population to struggle against any possible revolution.
 
Relic of Feudalism
To the masses the monarchy was especially hateful because it was closely tied to their hated enemy, fascism and Mussolini. The King had supported Mussolini and only when he saw that the war was lost did he consent to the ousting of the fascist regime. The masses had to tolerate the monarchy only because it was supported by the bayonets of the Allies.
That Trotskyists fight with the masses against such a reactionary institution as the monarchy must be taken for granted. We are for greater and ever greater democracy for the masses. The institution of an hereditary monarchy is a relic of feudalism and contrary to all principles of democracy.
If a democratic demand is important for us under normal circumstances, how much more important does it become when the masses are aroused over it and are willing to struggle to achieve it? That our Italian comrades gave the demand for a democratic republic first place on their platform is an indication that the Italian masses deeply resent the continued existence of the monarchy. Our comrades in Italy, understanding the mood of the masses, had no hesitation in raising the slogan for the abolition of the monarchy and the institution of a democratic republic. It is undoubtedly one of the most important slogans from the viewpoint of setting the masses into motion to struggle against the capitalist class and all its open and veiled supporters.
* * *
The Stalinist and Socialist parties also claim that they are against the monarchy. But ever since the fall of Mussolini they have taken an equivocal attitude, one which is against the monarchy in words but not in deeds. If a serious party is against the monarchy it refuses to enter a cabinet which supports that institution. The Bonomi cabinet is that kind of a cabinet. Less hypocritical than the Stalinists, the Socialists have refused to enter the present Bonomi Government. In reality however they play the same deceitful role as the Stalinists, but not so openly and brazenly. Supported by the prestige of the Soviet Union the Stalinists are bolder in their support of reactionary institutions.
 
Expose Reformists
The slogan and struggle against the monarchy and for a democratic republic can very well serve the purpose of exposing the reformist parties for what they actually are – supporters of the capitalist system. If a party claims that it is socialist how does it come that it tolerates a monarchy that once worked so closely with Mussolini?
* * *
But some may say to the Italian Trotskyists: we are with you when you are against the monarchy but why do you ask for a democratic republic? Why don’t you limit yourselves to demanding a Soviet republic?
Answering such critics the Italian Trotskyists would undoubtedly say: Of course we are for a Soviet republic and for the Socialist United States of Europe, but unfortunately we do not have a majority of the masses behind us. We say to the masses that we are for a Soviet republic but we also say to them that the majority of the workers are not with us as yet but they are for the abolition of the monarchy and for a democratic republic. We must ask them to fight with us at least for a democratic republic. We do not create any illusions that such a republic will solve their problems but it is a step forward insofar as it mobilizes the masses for struggle and will help them go forward to the establishment of a workers’ republic.
These critics would place us in the position of saying that we are for the overthrow of the monarchy only on condition that a Soviet Republic replaces it immediately. And since the majority of the workers arc not with us it would in effect mean that we would be willing to let the monarchy continue. This would be far from the political tactics as practiced by Lenin and Trotsky.
* * *
Slogan Correct
As I write the German army is rapidly evacuating Northern Italy. Millions of industrial workers will enter upon the scene of Italian politics. They do not want the monarchy and they may settle that question very quickly. They may settle it in the best way possible – by establishing their own power. The situation may develop to a point where our comrades in Italy will no longer give the slogan for a democratic republic the important place they have given it up to now.
The slogan may be dropped altogether, for under conditions when the masses are ready to take power, the slogan can acquire a reactionary content. But all that is a matter for the future – even though the immediate future.
When our comrades adopted the slogan in favor of the democratic republic they were correct in doing so, under the conditions then prevailing. They have thus shown the ability to judge events and conditions and to adopt the correct slogans at the proper time.
 



The results of the recent municipal elections in France clearly indicate that the French workers are ready to struggle for a Socialist France. It also indicates that the French workers are still unaware of the fact that the party which they are supporting is the greatest obstacle to the victory of the European masses.
Forty percent of the voters of Paris supported the Stalinists. The industrial suburbs of Paris gave the Stalinist party a solid vote. There can be no explanation for the support the workers of France are giving that party other than that they still believe that this party is a revolutionary party representing the program of socialism for France and Europe.
That the victories of the Soviet army have brought the Stalinists great prestige can be admitted; that the valiant struggle which the Stalinists carried on against the German army of occupation, after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, attracted the support of many workers, peasants and lower middle class elements to them can also be taken for granted. But it is difficult to believe that the French workers are voting for the Stalinist party simply because it is connected with the Stalinist army and fought against the German army of occupation. The main reason is that the French workers believe that the Communist Party stands for a struggle for socialism and for the solution of their problems in a socialist manner.
* * *
Upon the shoulders of the French workers rest the responsibility and burden that rested on the shoulders of the German workers in 1918. At that time Germany was the key to the European revolution. It had a wonderfully organized working class with tens of thousands of militants trained in the traditions of revolutionary socialism. Its industry was hardly touched by the war and although food was not plentiful there was enough to satisfy the hunger of the masses.
 
Germany Today
On the east of Germany was the Soviet Union. Its Red Army was not powerful and its industries were undeveloped. But its masses under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky were ready to fight and die for the German Revolution as they fought and died for the Russian Revolution. So powerful was the German working class, so mighty was German industry that a revolution in Germany would have been followed immediately by revolutions in all of central Europe and in all probability in western Europe as well. Germany was indeed the key to the European revolution.
But now Germany can be said to be the key to the European Revolution only in the sense of its potential industrial capacity. German industry is ravaged, a great many of its militant worker-leaders dead, its land occupied by American, British and Stalinist armies. For the immediate period one can hardly expect Germany to be the key to the European revolution in the sense that one can expect a revolution in Germany and thus set into motion the workers of all of Europe.
* * *
France is the country which can be said to be the key to the European revolution in the sense that the workers in that country have the best opportunity to take power and to spread the revolution to the rest of Europe. A great number of French workers have fought in the resistance movements against the German army. In that struggle the workers have acquired militancy, experience and above all confidence in themselves. Everything indicates that they are anxious to proceed farther and take power into their own hands.
What stops them? The answer is clear. It is the Stalinist Party. In 1918, at the end of the First World War the Social-Democratic parties constituted the main barrier in the struggle of the workers to achieve power and build a socialist Europe. The majority of the workers followed the Social-Democratic parties. The young revolutionary parties did not succeed in winning the masses to their side.
In 1945 it is the Stalinists who control the decisive sections of the working masses. This has been proved in France during the municipal elections; this is probably true of Northern Italy and of Belgium. The conclusion is inescapable. To the extent that the Stalinist parties now have the support of decisive sections of the working class and could lead the workers to power, if they wanted to do so, to that extent they are playing the same counter-revolutionary role that the Social- Democrats played in 1918.
* * *
When one compares the present situation in Europe with the one that existed immediately following the First World War, one can note both advantages and disadvantages. The main factor that is unfavorable is that the Soviet Union is now under the control of Stalin who fears a successful revolution in western Europe because that would endanger the rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy Whereas in 1918 the workers could count with absolute assurance on help from the Soviet Union, at present the Soviet armies would help the imperialist armies crush the revolution.
Another unfavorable factor is the more aggressive, more powerful and more demagogic apparatus that the Stalinist parties possess in comparison with the Social-Democratic parties in 1918. The mere fact that the Stalinist parties have the support of the G.P.U. is a terrible danger to the militant workers.
One can say that the “Socialist” Government of Germany did not hesitate to use violence against the workers. Perfectly true. But it is also true that the Social-Democrats had to grant some democratic rights even to their revolutionary opponents. The Stalinists are more ruthless and will not hesitate to eliminate from the scene every militant worker opposed to their policies of betrayal. Right now in France the revolutionists of the Fourth International are hounded more by the Stalinists than by the official government.
 
French Workers
But the masses following the Stalinists are more militant and more conscious than the workers who followed the Social-Democrats in 1918. In general the workers who supported the Socialists subsequent to 1918 were not yet ready to take the path of Lenin and Trotsky. The workers who support the Stalinists do so in the main because they mistakenly believe that the Stalinists represent the traditions of the Communist International when it was led by Lenin and Trotsky.
On the basis of the fact that the masses are more revolutionary now than they were in 1918 we are justified in hoping that they will soon learn the real nature of the Stalinist parties. Aided by the propaganda of the French Fourth Internationalists the advanced workers in France should quickly learn that the path of power to the workers is in a direction directly opposite to that followed by the Stalinists.
 






The following is part of the speech delivered by Comrade Albert Goldman at the May Day Rally of the New York local of the Socialist Workers Party held at Webster Hall on Tuesday evening, May 1, 1945.



* * *
Not only are the German masses compelled to witness the almost complete destruction of the industries of their country; not only must they view the foreign conqueror take possession of what is left of their native land; not only must they think of the possibility of slavery to Stalin and the imperialists; they must also be compelled to listen to one of the greatest slanders of the modern age against a whole people. They are compelled to listen to the dastardly charge that the German masses are equally responsible with the Nazis for the terrible atrocities committed by the beasts who followed the orders of Hitler.
The workers of Germany who once voted solidly against Hitler, who were willing bo fight him to the death if only their parties had led them to the barricades, must gnash their teeth in silent rage when they are held responsible for the terrible Nazi cruelties.
Who is responsible for this dastardly accusation against the German people? Stalin and the leaders of American and British imperialism, who knew all about the atrocities committed in the concentration camps before the war but who remained silent “for reasons of state.” Before the war there were only Jews and political prisoners in the concentration camps and they thought Jews and political prisoners were not worth bothering about. So the rulers of these powerful countries kept silence and by their silence aided and abetted the crimes of the Nazis.
Stalin and the leaders of American and British imperialism refused to give asylum to the Jews and political prisoners subjected to inhuman torture. And now the hypocrites weep crocodile tears at the sight of human wrecks who could have been saved had there been a will to do so.
And why is the fact that a great number of the prisoners of Buchenwald, of Flossenburg, of Belsen and other concentration camps are GERMAN political prisoners practically concealed from the readers of the Press? The average reader gets the impression that only Allied war prisoners have been tortured and poisoned and burned by the Nazi beasts.
 
There Are Two Different Germanies
Before there were prisoners of war there were German political prisoners, tens of thousands of them. Stalin and the imperialists gloss over this fact. Why? Because they are not interested in showing that there are two Germanies – the Germany of the Nazis and their capitalist supporters and the Germany of those who fought against the Nazis, the men and women who suffered agonies in that fight.
Stalin and the imperialists are not interested in giving the truth because they want to win the support of the masses of their countries for their infamous schemes of enslaving the German masses and suppressing any possible workers’ revolution. That is why they spread the lie that the German masses are responsible for the atrocities committed by the Nazis.
* * *
Who is responsible for the crimes of the Nazis – the German workers who fought against them or the French and British and American capitalists who supported Hitler?
Can any one show where the German people were asked to vote whether the atrocities should be committed? Can any one show that the German people had an opportunity freely to decide that the Jews, German political prisoners, and prisoners of war should be tortured? Can any one show that the German workers had the right to organize protests against the atrocities and failed to do so?
In what way then are the German workers responsible? By their failure to revolt against Hitler? Will the slanderers of the German people show us how it is possible for workers whose parties betrayed them, whose leaders were executed or exiled, who were subjected to the inhuman terror of the Gestapo, – how it is possible for workers under such conditions to revolt?
* * *
Who Is Responsible for the Atrocities?
We Trotskyists hold responsible for the atrocities the Nazis who planned them and who trained human beings so that they would be transformed into beasts capable of perpetrating such crimes. We hold the capitalist rulers of Germany who placed the Nazis in power responsible for the atrocities. And above all we hold a decaying capitalist system that can bring only hatred and starvation and death to mankind responsible for the atrocities. The hatreds engendered in the fierce struggle to eke out a livelihood, in the terrible fight of each against all, assume inhuman proportions in this period of the death agony of the capitalist order. A maddened group of de-classed individuals is utilized by finance capitalism to retain power. A Hitler stands forth as the symbol of decay and hatred and death. Civilized man witnesses the beginning of the transformation of civilized society into totalitarian barbarism.
Let no one believe that only Nazified Germans are capable of fiendish cruelty. Right here in this country, even before the class struggle has reached a point where the big capitalists must have recourse to fascism, there have been a sufficient number of incidents that show that there are enough sadists and degenerates who can easily be trained to duplicate the deeds of the Nazis.
I have seen fifty and more militant workers placed in a cell built to hold five and kept there for more than seventy-two hours. I have seen workers who were beaten to a pulp while under arrest. If the masses permit fascism to conquer here it will find all the recruits it wants to cause excruciating suffering to men and women who struggle for a new world.
Can any one seriously believe that there will be difficulty in finding candidates to torture and kill from among those who take delight in lynching Negroes? Did Mussolini find it difficult to get men who were willing to hurl poison gas at peaceful Ethiopians? Did Franco find it difficult to get Spaniards to bury Spanish workers alive? Fiendish cruelty is no monopoly of any people or of any race. It has always been and will always be a characteristic of the human being so long as he lives in a class society and is raised amidst exploitation, hatred, cruelty and war.
* * *
The German Masses Will Uphold Internationalism
And who, pray, will be the ones who will suffer punishment under the doctrine of the responsibility of the German people for the crimes of the Nazis? Will the German capitalists who placed Hitler in power, will Thyssen and his ilk be compelled to slave under Stalin and the imperialists? No, the German workers who fought Hitler, will be dragged off to Siberia and compelled to work under the whip of the G.P.U. It will be the German workers who will be starved and humiliated in Germany.
For our part we shall never forget the atrocities of the Nazis, We shall point to them frequently and say to the American workers: look what can happen to you if you permit native fascism to conquer. We shall say to the Jews: look what will happen to you if you depend upon capitalist democracy in the United States as the German Jews placed their faith in the Weimar republic.
Remember that the German masses who once marched proudly on May Day did so under the banner of internationalism. They wanted freedom for themselves and for all mankind. We feel certain that soon they will once more march under the same banner. They will show the whole world that in the organized working class of Germany there is nothing of the feeling of racial superiority. They will show that they, together with all other workers, are struggling for a world free from capitalist brutality, for a world of socialist brotherhood and freedom for all peoples and all races.
 



Representatives from more than forty nations will begin the staging of a show on April 25 at San Francisco. Its purpose is to convince the masses throughout the world that an organization will be created for the purpose of settling future disputes between countries and thus avoiding armed conflicts. The “United Nations Security Conference” will commence its sessions and the game of assuring the gullible that peace on earth will be our lot forever after will begin.
In reality only three big powers will run the show and everything they agree upon will be accepted with a barely audible grumble here and there from some small nation. The most powerful nations call the tune and all the delegates fall in line. As a matter of fact everything important has already been decided. No small nation was in attendance at Dumbarton Oaks where the proposals for the coming conference were first formulated. At Teheran and at Yalta the nations that have the most powerful armies and navies parcelled out the world. At San Francisco the organization will be created to place the stamp of approval upon the decisions of Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin.
At the very time that “peace” is being organized the great powers are taking care to guard their own interests. They have no faith in peace machinery. They continue making separate agreements. Britain and France have each made their own alliances with Stalin; the United States has gathered around her the nations of the Western Hemisphere. New and more powerful armies and navies are contemplated. For the first time in the history of this country compulsory peacetime military training is seriously planned by all of the ruling groups. What is all this if not the recognition that the machinery which is supposed to keep peace is nothing but a sham?
 
Aim to Dupe Masses
It is mainly for the masses that the show is being staged. They have lost millions of dead; more millions remain to go through life, crippled, blind, disfigured. Victims of World War I are still alive to behold their ranks increased by the victims of World War II. The cynical rulers are holding out a hope that World War III will be prevented. For they fear that if the masses lose faith in the ability of the rulers to avoid another slaughter, they will not be able to keep the people in subjection. To fool the masses, to give them hope where there is no hope – that is the primary purpose of the grand hoax to be staged at San Francisco.
* * *
The failure of the first League of Nations must be explained. Intellectual servants of the ruling classes are trotted out to convince the masses that its failure was due to the refusal of the U.S. to participate and assume some of its burdens. It is true that only the most far-sighted representatives of American imperialism saw the necessity of playing a leading role in the old League of Nations. But no one can show that, had the United States been a member of the League, affairs would have taken a different turn. No one can show that the fundamental conflicts that led to World War II could possibly have been solved with any kind of a League of Nations.
Far more active participation in world affairs has now been decided upon by the decisive sections of American capitalism. The stake which American capitalists have in the world of today is far greater than they had in 1919. They see more clearly that their interference everywhere and at all times is essential in order to prevent their own power from crumbling. It is symbolic that the conference for the organization of the new League is taking place in the United States. But this only means that instead of acting behind the scenes, the United States will act openly. It only means that the United States will take the place of France and Great Britain in the leadership of the League of Nations. It does not mean that the fundamental conflicts which made the old League impotent will disappear.
 
Old League – and New
We are assured that serious mistakes were made in organizing the first League of Nations and that the avoidance of such mistakes will insure the success of the new League. The old League, we are told, was too intimately connected with the Versailles Peace Conference. The new League will have nothing to do with the problems of arranging the terms of peace after the war is ended. If that is so (and it is nothing but idiocy) then the conflicts which tortured the old League will simply be transferred to a different place.
* * *
Even before the League is organized conflicts have arisen which indicate the strains to which it will be subjected. The small and middle nations are dissatisfied. A grandiloquent statement about their sovereign rights may be adopted but they know that they are helpless. It is significant that Paul-Boncour, former Premier of France and a delegate to the conference, advises the small nations to be patient and hopeful.
Already the big powers have begun to jockey for position. Great Britain has six votes in the Assembly plus those of its satellites. The United States has the votes of all the American countries. The Soviet Union wants three votes instead of one and it, of course, will have the votes of its satellites. Each major power wants the greatest number of votes to support its side.
Not that these votes will settle anything. Everyone recognizes that, in case of any serious conflict between the big powers, the organization for peace would be completely helpless. The new League of Nations could no more prevent war than the old League could. The struggle for votes in the Assembly is simply a struggle for support of other powers in case of a serious controversy.
 
* * *
Cannot Stop New Wars
No matter what its form and no matter how the votes will be apportioned the new League can under no circumstances act on behalf of peace. Here and there a conflict between minor powers may be averted but only under circumstances where the major powers are not yet ready to go to war. Just as the old League was an organization of the victorious imperialist powers to keep the status quo arrived at after World War I, so the new League is an organization to maintain the conquests of the victorious powers of World War II. As the old League did not prevent World War II, so the new League will not prevent World War III.
The play is the same; only the actors have changed. Now the United States assumes the first role. Now there is no Lenin and Trotsky at the head of the Soviet Union to warn the masses against the wars that the League is powerless to prevent. There is instead a Stalin dominating the Soviet Union who helps the imperialists fool the masses and keep them under subjection in order to guarantee the power of the Stalinist bureaucracy.
The revolutionary section of the workers of the world will struggle against the aims of the new League just as they struggled against the aims of the old. They are in a better position than they were before to prove that not a League of imperialist states and their accomplices but only a World Union of Socialist Republics will guarantee the existence of peace.
 



In the New Leader of March 10, 1945, Liston M. Oak who left the Stalinist party after his experience in the Spanish civil war and is now a staunch Social-Democrat (a right-wing one, if such a thing is possible) attempts to show that the Trotskyists talk “gibberish” when they explain and justify their support of the EAM-ELAS in the recent civil war in Greece. My explanation for our material support of the EAM-ELAS, which appeared in my article in The Militant of February 24, is to him utter nonsense.
There is no doubt whatever that he is unable to understand it. That simply means that he does not understand the language of revolutionary Marxism. The fact that he left the Stalinist movement some time after it had ceased to be a revolutionary force and then joined the decayed social-democratic movement is conclusive evidence that he never understood the language of Marxism.
Oak characterizes the struggle between EAM and the Papandreou Government backed by British imperialism as a war between “Russian and British imperialism.” The victory of the former means totalitarianism; the victory of the latter means democracy. Hence we must support British imperialism.
For Marxists the term imperialism has a definite connotation. In general it means to us a stage of capitalist society where monopoly has displaced free competition, bringing with it the reactionary policies of finance capitalism. There is no law preventing one from using the term in any way he pleases; one can use it to designate the drive on the part of the Stalinist bureaucracy for prestige, power and wealth. But we insist on defining it in the Leninist manner. There is, however, no need to enter into a discussion on the nature of imperialism with Oak. It is really not relevant to the issue.
* * *
It is necessary in the first instance to examine what forces fought on each side of the Greek civil war, what were their aims and the probable consequences of their victory. On. the side of the EAM was the overwhelming majority of the workers and peasants. Were it otherwise the Greek Government would not have had to depend upon the British armed forces. What were the workers and peasants fighting for? They had no written program but it can be taken for granted that the masses fought for the right to determine their own fate, for the right to live without being exploited, for freedom, democracy and for their national liberation. Undoubtedly a large section of the working class hoped to establish a socialist regime in case of victory.
 
Stalinists and the Masses
In addition, to analyzing what the masses fought for it is incumbent upon us to state what the organization which led the masses was fighting for. What program did the leadership of the EAM have? It is clear that the EAM was not fighting for a socialist government. The leadership consisted of Stalinists, Social-Democrats (of the Greek and not of the New Leader variety) and liberals.
It is probably true that the Stalinists played the most important role in the leadership but that does not mean that they completely controlled the masses. All the information we have indicates that the Stalinist leadership did its utmost to avoid the struggle and to compromise it after the conflict began. Mainly responsible for the compromise which left the Greek masses without arms and therefore helpless against the tyranny of the reactionaries are the Stalinists.
What would have been the result of a victory for the EAM? In all probability the establishment of nothing more than a bourgeois republic. But it would have meant also an advance in the power of the masses who would have gained greater class-consciousness. and self-confidence by virtue of the victory. It would have meant a big stride forward in the establishment of a workers’ republic.
It is perfectly true that an EAM victory would have meant an increase in the power of the Stalinists and therefore an increase in the danger of totalitarianism. But the masses, with arms in their hands, with the confidence that victory would have given them, would not have easily succumbed to any dictatorship by the Stalinists. The probability is that the masses would have fought the Stalinists to the bitter end. There can be no guarantee of victory in any struggle. We are sure that had the EAM been victorious the masses would have had a greater opportunity to go forward.
The reactionary forces did not win a complete victory. Because of the resistance of the Greek masses and the British workers, Churchill had to retreat. The wonderful struggle put up by the masses gives them an opportunity to struggle in the future. Had no resistance been offered the workers would have been crushed completely.
Oak calls the Trotskyists the most deadly enemies of Stalinism. Correct. But we do not adopt tactics by virtue of hatred of Stalinists. Our support of a movement depends upon the direction in which a movement is travelling. Under Stalinist leadership a movement may be caught in the dreadful coils of Stalinist totalitarianism. But the workers, while in motion, can wrench themselves loose from these coils. A victory of British imperialism against masses of workers and peasants can never help the masses.
* * *
What Oak Fears
In reality what Oak is afraid of is not only Stalinist totalitarianism but the Bolshevik revolution. For he expressly states that we would be better off now had the British, French and American imperialists helped Kerensky and the Mensheviks defeat the Bolsheviks. Now we know exactly where we stand. Oak prefers British imperialism to a workers’ revolution. That is why he would have been shooting on the side of British imperialism, against the Greek masses had he had the chance, and we would have been in the forefront of the struggle urging the masses to defeat the British imperialists and then to settle scores with the Stalinists.
Oak blames the Bolshevik revolution for the existence of Stalinism. One might as well blame the mother who gave birth to the child for the disease that strikes the child. Stalinism came after the Bolshevik revolution but the basic cause of Stalinism lies in the betrayal of the German Social- Democrats. Had they not submitted to German and British capitalism the German workers would have taken power in 1918 and Stalinism would have never come into existence. The union of industrialized Germany with agricultural Russia would have assured the complete success of the Russian and German revolutions.
Living in a backward country and unaided by the workers of Western Europe, the Russian workers permitted Stalinism to gain control of their destinies. The main responsibility for the victory of the Stalinist bureaucracy lies upon the leadership of the German Social-Democrats, the spiritual predecessors of Liston Oak.
 



What is the explanation for the failure, up to the present, of the German workers to rise and overthrow the Nazi power? The demoralization of the Nazi army, as a result of the military defeats, has reached a point where one would expect the suffering masses to rise and destroy every vestige of Hitler’s power. When a dictatorship suffers such military reverses as the Nazis have suffered, when the masses have been subjected to such grueling punishment as has been the lot of the German people, a revolt and the wiping out of the slave drivers is to be expected.
There have undoubtedly been anti-government and pro-peace demonstrations in various parts of Germany. Even if we discount some of the reports about demonstrations that emanate from Moscow, Stockholm and Berne, it is highly improbable that all of the reports are baseless rumors. But whatever demonstrations have occurred have been suppressed and many participants executed. They have not been on a large enough scale to topple over the regime.
In 1918 the defeats suffered by the German army were not nearly so serious. German soil was not invaded. And yet the German masses rose and destroyed the power of the Kaiser. What prevents the masses from repeating the revolt of 1918?
* * *
Means of Repression
One of the factors explaining the failure of the German masses to overthrow the Nazi power up to now (April 6) is the very powerful repressive instruments which Hitler has at his disposal. The Kaiser had his police but he did not have a group of hundreds of thousands of young fanatics well organized, superbly armed and excellently trained. The S.S. corps of militant Nazis has been trained for the very purpose of quelling any revolt. It is a mobile unit ready to be thrown against any sector of the internal front. It is absolutely ruthless, and trained to perfection in the uses of barbaric violence. The very fact that the masses revolted in 1918 taught the Nazis a lesson in the necessity for preparing for such an eventuality.
But by itself the existence of a powerful instrument of repression would hardly suffice to explain the failure of the masses to revolt. A half-million armed thugs can not be ignored but they could not stand up against tens of millions of determined and militant workers, especially those workers who are in the armed forces.
German fascism has been in power for twelve years. During those years it has, by hounding, torture and murder eliminated the flower of the working-class militants. There are undoubtedly many revolutionary workers still left but so many have been killed, incapacitated and exiled that the German masses have been left leaderless to an extent where a successful uprising becomes extremely difficult if not impossible.
 
Situation in 1918
In the First World War many revolutionists were jailed but there was nothing remotely comparable to the suppression practised by Hitler. There were countless militants who kept silent during the war but lifted their heads as soon as the Kaiser’s war machine began to crack. Left-wing Socialists following the revolutionary Spartacus group and the centrist Independent Socialist Party were in the factories and in the army and were agitating the masses to come out on the streets. The leadership furnished these revolutionary workers was not conscious enough and strong enough to give the masses victory against the opposition of the Social-Democrats but it was strong enough to overthrow the Kaiser. Hitler’s terror has successfully eliminated from the scene a vast number of conscious militant workers and the masses, without leadership, are unable to act.
* * *
One must add to the above-mentioned factors the fear of the German workers that they will receive no help from the workers of England, France and the Soviet Union. When Hitler was victorious we did not expect a revolution because he had too much support from the middle class and sections of the working class. Now that the Allies arc dealing Hitler’s armies terrible blows, the German masses see before them the dark future of the military rule of Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt. There is no incentive for them to run the risk of slaughter at the hands of Hitler’s storm-troopers.
What a difference between the present and 1918! Then the German masses had the inspiring example of the Russian Revolution. They felt confident that the Soviets under Lenin and Trotsky would do all in their power to help them. Now they hear only words of hate and vengeance coming from the Stalinist bureaucrats. They hear threats of enslavement – millions of them are afraid of being dragged from their native soil, from their homes and families, to be compelled to work under the whip of Stalin’s G.P.U. They hear no voice coming from east or west to give them encouragement and assurance of help.
 
Key to German Revolution
But the German masses may yet make a desperate effort to overthrow the yoke of Hitler and prevent further slaughter. What then? Can they stop the imperialist forces and Stalin’s Red Army from occupying all of Germany? Not without the help of the English, French, American and Russian workers.
And what if the Allies seize all of Germany? History has shown how difficult it is for workers to take power when a foreign army whose soldiers have not been infected by the revolutionary virus is stationed in their country. The workers of Northern Italy have been compelled to bow beneath the yoke of the Nazi army. Unarmed or poorly armed masses do not have much of a chance against a disciplined modern army with all its deadly equipment.
The German Revolution will assure the success of the European Revolution but the key to the German Revolution is in the hands of the French, the English, the Russian and the American workers. One thing is certain. The problems of the German working masses can not be solved by the Allies just as they could not be and were not solved by Hitler. From this it follows that the workers of Germany are bound to attempt a revolutionary solution of their own, which means taking power into their own hands and calling upon the European masses to aid them in establishing a Socialist United States of Europe.
 



When, after the conference at Yalta, the announcement was made that a United Nations Security Conference would be held at San Francisco, beginning April 25, and when it became known that both the Soviet Union and China would be present at the conference, the correct deduction was made that Stalin had decided to denounce the neutrality pact which the Soviet Union signed with Japan on April 13, 1941. This pact was to be valid for five years and automatically renewed for another five years unless, a year before the expiration of the first five year period, either party announced its intention to end or modify it.
Up to now Stalin refused to enter into discussions with the Allies if China was present, lest the presence of that country should be interpreted by Japan as a violation of the pact of neutrality. The pact still has a year to run but Stalin now feels free to participate in a conference where Chinese spokesmen are present.
Does the denunciation of the treaty mean that Stalin has decided to declare war op Japan in the near future? Formally the treaty has another year of life but it would be foolish to base one’s judgment on the existence of a treaty. Molotov cited the attack of Hitler on the Soviet Union and the Alliance of Japan with Hitler as justification for the denunciation of the treaty but Japan’s help to Hitler could easily have been made a cause for the breaking of the treaty and a declaration of war at any time since Hitler’s attack. Only gullible people believe that treaties really determine the relations between nations.
 
Stalin’s Aims
What motivated Stalin in denouncing the treaty are the facts that the war in Europe is drawing to a close and that his aims in the Far East need to be asserted soon, because Japan is on her last legs. His attitude in the Far East has become a very active one and has displaced the passive attitude which he had to assume because he was so occupied with the war against Hitler. He does not intend to permit the United States alone to determine the fate of the Far East. He has certain aims which he wants to realize and the denunciation of the treaty constitutes notice to everybody that he intends to realize them.
* * *
It is assumed that what Stalin wants is all of Southern and Northern Manchuria plus Korea. As always he would prefer to achieve his aims without going to war. It is hardly likely that after almost four years of a devastating conflict the Soviet Union is in a condition to wage another war with the ease that most correspondents so glibly assert. The denunciation of the treaty affords him an opportunity to negotiate with Japan. What chance is there for a peaceful surrender of Manchuria and Korea by Japan to the Soviet Union? Hardly any. Stalin must therefore be prepared to enter the conflict whenever he thinks the situation demands it.
Entering the war would enable him to occupy Manchuria and Korea, place his own puppet governments in control, and exclude both Kuomintang China and American imperialism from any control of that important section of China.
Stalin’s ambitions in the Far East bring him into direct conflict with Kuomintang China and U.S. imperialism. That is why it is difficult to believe the assertions of some commentators that Roosevelt at Yalta agreed to give Manchuria to Stalin, if the Soviet Union declares war on Japan. When it is a question of Rumania or Poland, American imperialism will make a few half-hearted protests on behalf of the “principles of democracy.” But the interests of American imperialism are not greatly affected by Stalin’s seizure of the Balkan or Baltic countries.
 
Main Rivalries
American imperialist interests would be seriously affected by Stalin’s gaining control of Manchuria and Korea. It is not an accident that soon after Yalta an official announcement was made by American representatives that they can send no arms to the Chinese “Communists.” If Stalin declares war on Japan the Chinese Stalinists will play a very important role. It is they who will do a large share of the fighting and possibly constitute the puppet government in Manchuria. American imperialism can hardly look with favor upon such a development.
Undoubtedly Roosevelt yielded much to Stalin with reference to Poland, the Baltic and Balkan countries but it is exceedingly unlikely that he promised very much as far as Manchuria is concerned. The most acute rivalries between the Stalinist bureaucracy and American imperialism do not lie primarily in Eastern Europe but in the Far East.
* * *
When Hitler’s armies attacked the Soviet Union the Trotskyists unhesitatingly came out for the defense of the Soviet Union. That did not mean that we supported the Stalinist bureaucracy or any of its foreign or domestic policies. It meant only that we defended that nationalized property against destruction by German imperialism.
Now that the Soviet Union is safe as far as German imperialism is concerned and since the danger to Soviet nationalized property comes mainly from Stalin’s domestic policies and his suppression of the European Revolution, the military defense of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack is no longer the main task. The main task now is the defense of the European Revolution against Stalin and the struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy within the Soviet Union. As comrade Munis says in his article in the March issue of the Fourth International, the military defense against imperialism is now subordinated to the struggle against Stalinism on all fronts.
 
Another Crime
Will the situation change if Stalin attacks Japan? I can not of course speak for the party which will consider the problem if and when it arises. I can only say for myself that the Soviet Union is in no danger from Japanese imperialism. Stalin’s entry into the war against Japan can under no circumstances be justified on the basis of any danger to the Soviet Union coming from Japan.
Whatever our decision may then be with reference to the slogan of “Defense of the Soviet Union,” it is certain that Stalin will be committing another terrible crime against the Soviet masses, if he throws the Soviet masses, who have suffered so much in the last three years, into another war, when it is no longer a question of the necessity of defending the Soviet Union.
 



The Italian masses are certainly not shouting for joy at the concession granted to the Bonomi Government, by the British and American Governments, through the Allied Commission. From now on the Bonomi Government (not elected) will be able to pass its decrees and laws without first getting approval of the Allied Commission. It is also granted the right to appoint and receive Ambassadors to and from all Allied and neutral countries and deal directly with them without first asking permission of the AC. Control of the appointment of administrative officers, with the exception of those who have military importance, is relinquished by the Commission.
These concessions are of no real benefit to the Italian people and do not shift the actual power from the Allies to the Italian Government. They are indications, however, that the real masters of Italy, the American and British imperialists, must, up to a certain point, take into consideration the feelings both of the Italian people and the American and British masses.
As the primary reason for the concessions must be given the dissatisfaction and resentment of the Italian masses at the arbitrary rule of the foreign armies and the failure of the British and American Governments to alleviate their miserable lot. This resentment has reached a point where an effort must be made to prevent a serious clash between the Italians and the imperialist powers in control of Italy. It is this danger of a clash that explains Roosevelt’s recent decision to increase the food allotment to the starving people of Italy.
* * *
Roosevelt and Churchill are claiming to fight, under the banner of democracy and “freedom from want.” The millions of Italians living in that portion of Italy conquered by the Allies from Hitler’s army can testify before the whole world that they have experienced neither democracy nor freedom from want under the rule of Churchill and Roosevelt. To revive the faith which the Italian masses undoubtedly had in the imperialist democracies – a faith which they quickly lost – is now the aim of Roosevelt and Churchill.
 
Fear Workers in North
Another factor that explains the concession is the expectation of the retreat of the Nazi Army from the northern section of Italy where the large industrial centers, with their numerous working-class population, are located. The workers of Northern Italy are aware of the treatment their brothers received at the hands of the Allies and while this knowledge does not reconcile them to their terrible fate under the Nazi masters, it minimizes their zeal in fighting on behalf of the Allies. The concessions can be used as an argument by the agents of the Allies to assure the workers of Milan, Turin and other centers that the Allies really mean what they say about fighting for democracy and for “freedom from want.”
Then again, the move granting the Bonomi Government greater rights places more responsibility for keeping order on that Government, Roosevelt and Churchill fear a repetition of the events in Greece. Should it be necessary to keep the masses down by force, it will make a better appearance if the force is used by ap apparently independent Government.
* * *
Criticism of Churchill and Roosevelt in their own countries for their treatment of the Italian people is undoubtedly another factor in their decision to grant the Bonomi Government greater powers. To Roosevelt and Churchill the slogans of democracy and “freedom from want” are utilized to fool the masses. But the masses of people take these slogans seriously and want their realization.
The reaction of the British masses to the treacherous role played by British imperialism in Greece warned the rulers that the use of naked force involves danger to them. There has been a constant barrage of criticism levelled at the American and British Governments for their failure to root out the Italian fascists and to grant democratic rights to the Italian people. Roosevelt and Churchill hope to silence the critics by means of these minor concessions.
 
Bonomi Government
All the more are the representatives of American and British imperialism willing to make concessions because they know that the Bonomi Gov’t will be their willing tool. They can afford to give that government a great deal more power and still feel certain that they are controlling the power behind the scenes, What they fear is the action of the Italian masses who may take the reins of government in their own hands as soon as the industrial section is released from the grip of the Nazis. What they fear is that every concession they make will encourage the masses to go further.
In this lies their dilemma and it is not possible for the imperialists to extricate themselves. To rule solely with their armies creates tremendous dissatisfaction among the masses who are opposed to foreign masters more than to native ones. It also means to antagonize their own workers who believe in the legend that this war is being fought for democracy. On the other hand, to grant freedom and democracy to the masses in Europe means running the risk that they will take power into their own hands and freeze the imperialists out altogether.
That the American and British imperialists will yield to pressure both from the European masses and their own workers and grant more concessions than they have thus far given is very probable. But only up to the point where they see their interests immediately threatened by the danger of the workers’ taking power. When that point is reached all pretense of democracy will be thrown overboard and the imperialists will not hesitate to use all the force at their disposal – unless prevented by the decisive action of the American and English workers.
 



For the workers of Europe, including England and the Soviet Union,
the problem of reparations, discussed by Stalin, Roosevelt, and
Churchill at the Crimea conference becomes one of the most important
problems that Will confront them in the post-war period. Because that
problem is intimately connected with the all-important questions: how
should the working masses go about repairing the vast damage wrought
by the various armies; for whose benefit shall they repair it; how
should they guarantee that once repaired, another and more
destructive war will not once again bring ruin and chaos to Europe?
The representative of the Kremlin bureaucracy and the exponents of
British and American imperialism were exceedingly vague on this
question of reparations in their release issued after the conference
at Yalta. They “recognized it, as just that Germany be obliged
to make compensation for this damage in kind to the greatest extent
possible” and provided for a commission “to consider the
question of the extent and methods for compensating damage caused by
Germany to the Allied countries.”
There were undoubtedly differences of opinion between Stalin on
the one hand and Churchill and Roosevelt on the other, on the
question of compelling German workers to work under the whip of
Stalin and the Allied imperialists for the restoration of the
devastated areas. The capitalist countries are faced with the problem
of what to do with their own workers and also with serious opposition
on the part of the organized workers to the use of slave labor, a
system which would inevitably reduce the standard of living of the
native workers. Stalin is not confronted with these difficulties and
is anxious to enslave the skilled German workers for the purpose of
restoring the devastated areas of the Soviet Union.
 
How to Rebuild
Leaving aside the differences with reference to the method of
reparations, it is clear that Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt agreed
on the principle of reparations. Here a warning to some advanced
workers is necessary. So terrible is the ruin caused by Hitler’s
armies that it is fairly easy for Stalin and the imperialist
representatives to convince the millions of people who suffered at
the hands of Hitler that justice demands reparations by the Germans.
Some radical workers, understanding correctly that the Soviet
bureaucrats and the imperialists will utilize the apparent justice of
the claim to reparations in order to fool the masses, may insist on
presenting the obvious argument that the armies of Stalin, Churchill
and Roosevelt caused as much, if not more damage, at least in Western
Europe, as Hitler’s armies.
The question must not be argued on that plane. Not only is it
impossible to say which army did the most damage but an argument of
that type indirectly involves us in the futile argument as to which
side was responsible for the war. Taking the fundamental position
that the imperialist rivalries are responsible, we can and must shift
the argument to the question as to what is the best method for the
workers to use to rebuild the devastated areas and how to prevent
their destruction by another war.
* * *
On the theory that Germany alone is responsible for the war,
Stalin, the imperialists and their representatives and followers
argue: make Germany pay for the damage in services, in goods and in
money; take control over the entire German economy for many years and
generations if necessary; close down and destroy all her war
industries (which means in practice her basic industries). These in
essence are the proposals made by Sir Walter Citrine, general
secretary of the British Trades Union Congress, at the World Trade
Union Conference recently held in London. His views are of course the
views of the British Government, and in general they represent the
views of all the governments on the side of the Allies.
Against these views the advanced workers of Europe, especially
those of England and France, must conduct the most bitter and
incessant struggle. They must stress that for the welfare of all the
workers of Europe German economy must not be weakened; on the
contrary it must be strengthened if that is possible. The fate of
civilized Europe depends largely on German productive forces. Any
plan which starts from the proposition that German economy must be
weakened is, in reality, directed against the welfare of the European
masses.
 
Socialist Germany
It is obvious however that to leave the German productive machine
in the hands of the German capitalists is to lay the basis for a war
twenty or so years from now. The conclusion is inescapable. To permit
German productive capacity to remain at its high level and even to
increase it so that the masses of all of Europe can benefit, and at
the same time avoid another war, it is necessary to establish a
Socialist Germany. It is necessary for the German workers to take
power and nationalize German industry.
* * *
The German workers can and must utilize the enormous power of
German industry to rebuild the factories that have been destroyed,
the homes that have been bombed out of existence—not only in
Germany but in all of Europe. The German workers will be more than
glad to help in the rebuilding of Europe provided they know that they
are doing so not for foreign or native exploiters but for themselves
and their fellow-workers of Europe.
Once the European workers realize that the problem of rebuilding
devastated Europe and guaranteeing it against further devastation can
be solved only with the help of a Socialist Germany, their task
becomes dear. No one in his right senses will contend that the Soviet
bureaucracy and the imperialists of Great Britain and the United
States will put the German workers in power for the purpose of
building socialism. The German workers are certain to take power if
the workers of Europe will give them the lead and assure them of
their support.
 
Aid German Workers
Under the condition of complete occupation of Germany by the
Allied armies the burden of removing those armies from Germany and
permitting the German workers to take power will rest upon the
European masses outside of Germany and also upon the American masses.
Essentially the problem of enlisting the aid of German industry in
the rebuilding of devastated Europe can be solved only if the workers
of Europe, especially France and England, take power into their own
hands and call upon the German workers to do the same thing.
To leave Europe in the hands of the capitalists and of Stalin
means destroying German industrial power and with that the
possibility of reconstructing Europe for the benefit of the European
masses. Europe can be rebuilt with the help of German industry but
that industry must be in the hands of the German workers. To enable
the German workers to take and hold that industry it is necessary for
the European masses to take power into their own hands. The question
of reparations, when properly analyzed, means that its solution lies
in a Socialist United States of Europe.
 



What has become known as the “Act of Chapultepec” is
considered the major achievement of the Inter-American Conference
held recently in Mexico City. The masses of the Latin American
countries can with justification feel disquieted about this
achievement. Through it the door has been opened for the apparently
“legal” intervention by American imperialism in the
affairs of Latin American countries.
For the representatives of twenty American republics meeting in
Mexico City to deal “with problems of war and peace”
accepted a proposition which obligates these governments to guarantee
the territorial integrity and the political independence of every
country signing the Act of Chapultepec. In case of a threat to any of
the nations that sent representatives to the conference, either by an
American or non-American aggressor, all the others promise to
consult, to agree on measures to be taken against the aggressor, and
to use force if necessary to prevent or repel aggression.
For the duration of the war any intervention under the Act of
Chapultepec is to take place only if the aggression interferes with
the “war effort.” After the war a treaty is to be drafted
to be presented to the United States Senate for ratification
providing for the same guarantees but without the necessity of
justifying any intervention because of interference with the war
effort. This distinction was made to avoid any conflict between the
Roosevelt administration and the Senate.
* * *
By signing the declaration the Latin American republics have
given up a tradition in existence for many decades – the
tradition of opposition to any interference by the United States in
their internal or external affairs. In 1933 at the conference held in
Lima these republics insisted on a statement that “the
intervention of any state in the internal or external affairs of
another is inadmissible.” This statement was aimed at American
imperialism. Roosevelt agreed to it because he had decided to
introduce the “good neighbor policy” and to use the silk
glove instead of the mailed fist in order to guard the supremacy of
American imperialism in the Western Hemisphere.
When one takes into consideration the fact that the only power
that is really capable of using force to prevent “aggression”
against any Latin American republic is the United States, it becomes
clear that the representatives of the Latin American republics have
permitted a loophole which the imperialists of this country may
utilize as a legal cover for any future intervention.
It may be true, as is claimed, that fear of a possible attack by
Argentina against its weak neighbors is the factor that led some of
the Latin American representatives to introduce the proposal embodied
in the Act of Chapultepec. But to depend upon U.S. imperialism to
defend the territorial integrity and political independence of any
Latin American country is a sign of imbecility or a conscious
betrayal of the masses of the Latin American countries. One might as
well depend upon the tiger for defense against the wolf.
At present it is the military-police dictatorship of Argentina
that has aroused the displeasure of the United States Government. All
other Latin American republics have willingly exchanged their
independence of action for economic help from the rich uncle. It
happens that Argentina is not so dependent upon help from this
country. It is in fact a competitor of the United States on the world
market for meat and grain products. Behind Argentina are the British
imperialists who are deriving great satisfaction from the
Argentina-United States controversy.
 
Will Scrap Treaties
But it will not always be a reactionary government that will
oppose the dictates of the American imperialists. On the contrary,
the more democratic and progressive a government of any Latin
American country is, the more likely is it to come in conflict with
the colossus of the north.
It must be recognized of course that the imperialists of this
country will not, in the last analysis, be guided by provisions in
any agreement or treaty. If and when they think that intervention on
their part is necessary to protect their interests, they will do so
with or without any provisions in any treaty. But under no
circumstances should U.S. imperialism be furnished with a “legal”
pretext by the very countries who ought to oppose intervention under
any circumstances. The masses of Latin America must defend themselves
against the dictatorships of Argentina and other South American
countries but they must never rely on the American imperialists.
* * *
If the Act of Chapultepec received the lion’s share of
attention at the conference, the economic problems facing the Latin
American countries gave the representatives of those countries the
greatest worry. What will the capitalists of the United States and
their government do to help the Latin American countries economically
after the war? For the present the Latin American governments depend
for their economic stability upon the contracts for the sale of raw
material to the United States. Should the United States cease its
purchases it would result in economic breakdown and possible
revolutionary upheavals.
 
Socialist Latin America
What the Latin American representatives received from the
representatives of the United States were some declarations on the
necessity of a higher standard of living and of encouragement for
private investments. The Latin American politicians were not greatly
interested in empty declarations. The best they could get, however,
was a promise that the contracts for the purchase of raw material
would be canceled only after due notice.
Undoubtedly United States imperialism will try to keep the
Latin American governments satisfied. But the fundamental
contradiction between American imperialism anxious to make profits
out of its investments in Latin America and the welfare of the Latin
American masses cannot possibly be solved. The industrialization of
Latin America, the raising of the standard of living for the masses,
the complete independence of the Latin American republics are
problems that cannot be solved with the aid of American imperialism.
They can be solved only by a Socialist Latin America with the aid of
a Socialist United States.
 



Many people write and speak as if they were taken by surprise by
the decision of the Big Three, at the Yalta conference, with
reference to Poland. For many months previous to the Yalta verdict
all indications were that Churchill and Roosevelt had decided to
yield to Stalin. The three lords sitting in state at the seaside
resort situated on the shores of the Black Sea found no difficulty in
granting that part of the earth known as Poland to one of them. The
people of Poland were transferred to a new master.
Nominally Stalin was made a gift only of that part of Poland east
of the Curzon line. In reality, however, he also gets all of Poland
west of that line plus whatever German territory the three rulers
will decide later to attach to Poland. Only naive people or those who
have an axe to grind will accept as good coin the promise that “free
and unfettered elections” will be held in that part of Poland
which, according to Stalin’s assurance, will be permitted to
exist in freedom and independence.
The Provisional Government created by Stalin will be enlarged
to include “democratic leaders” from within Poland and
from abroad but it can be taken for granted that only leaders willing
to play ball with Stalin will be acceptable to him. At any rate a
majority of the contemplated Provisional Government of National Unity
will be under Kremlin control and with such a government in power
only the fatuous will expect a free election.
 
“The Great Liquidator”
Charges have been made by the Polish Government-in-Exile that
Stalin’s GPU with the help of his Polish puppets are
liquidating all political opponents of the Stalinist regime, Through
deportations, transfer of populations, and confinement in
concentration camps, Stalin is making certain that any elections held
will give his puppets a safe majority. We need not have too much
confidence in the veracity of the Polish Government-in-Exile to
believe that Stalin will not hesitate to use all measures of
chicanery and violence to rid himself of political opponents,
especially of revolutionary Marxists. His activities in the last
twenty years testify to the truth of such a charge.
* * *
Several factors explain the important concessions made to Stalin
by the representatives of the imperialist democracies. It may be
argued that there was nothing else that they could do. They surely
would not go to war against the Soviet Union for the purpose of
retaining the prewar Polish frontiers. The English and American
masses could not easily be cajoled into supporting such a war. The
issue is too remote; they have already suffered too much. Stalin’s
prestige as a result of the victories of the Red Army is too great.
And it is difficult to sell the masses the idea that the Polish
Government-in-Exile represents justice, truth, freedom and democracy.
All this is true but it does not explain why Churchill and
Roosevelt have given in so easily and in addition g0 out of their way
to defend their action as just. The important factor is the
conviction on the part of the representatives of imperialism that
Stalin’s help is essential to suppress any revolutionary
outbreaks on the part of the masses in the different countries of
Europe. The Stalinist parties constitute a very important part of the
working- class movement all over Europe. Their role as a brake upon
the revolutionary activity of the masses is clearly understood by the
imperialists.
One can say that in Greece the Stalinists led the EAM in its
struggle against Papandreou and the British masters. Rut just because
of that fact and just because the Stalinists betrayed that struggle,
Churchill and Roosevelt know what a valuable support they can be for
keeping the rule of the imperialists in Europe safe from the masses.
And not only do the imperialists depend upon Stalin’s
control of the Communist parties but upon Stalin’s Red Army
which in case of necessity can be used to crush any revolutionary
uprising by force. Rumor has it that Stalin has made some secret
promises to Churchill and Roosevelt. One of those promises is
undoubtedly to help keep the European masses chained to capitalism.
 
Capitalist Restoration
Another exceedingly important factor explaining Roosevelt’s
and Churchill’s decision to appease Stalin is their conviction
that capitalism stands a very good chance of being restored in the
Soviet Union. They know better than we do the extent of the
devastation brought to the Soviet Union by Hitler’s armies. Has
Stalin indicated to them that he needs their economic aid and that he
does not look with hostility to a strengthening of the capitalist
forces within the Soviet Union?
No one can tell whether Stalin discussed this question with the
other two participants in the Yalta Conference. But we can safely
assume that Churchill and Roosevelt realize that conditions exert a
tremendous pressure upon the Stalinist bureaucracy in favor of the
restoration of the capitalist market. In the light of the tendencies
of capitalist restoration in the Soviet Union, the representatives of
imperialism are more than willing to take a chance on yielding to
Stalin on the Polish question.
* * *
For a Soviet Poland
The advanced workers of Poland will certainly not determine
their policy upon the choice between Stalin and the Polish Government
in Exile. They understand that neither the one nor the other can
solve the problems of the Polish masses – problems of national
liberation, of economic security and freedom. They will steer their
course on the basis of the fundamental line of a Socialist United
States of Europe. This means raising the demand for the right of
national self-determination for all peoples living in prewar Poland.
This means raising the slogan of an independent Soviet Poland.
No one will underestimate the difficulties confronting the
advanced Polish workers in spreading their ideas. The GPU is a force
to be reckoned with. Nevertheless there will, in all probability, be
“democratic cracks” through which, in the first period,
the revolutionary Polish Marxists will be able to spread their
propaganda. To fool the gullible and to give Churchill and Roosevelt
a chance to say that Stalin has kept his promises, the Kremlin ruler
may permit some degree of democracy. If he does, the revolutionary
workers of Poland will utilize the opportunity to put forth their own
program against Stalin and against the Polish Government-in-Exile.
 






The following discussion on the proposed unity of the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party took place at the October, 1945, Plenum of the National Committee of the SWP. It is reprinted from the Internal Bulletin of the latter party. – Editors.
 



Note: After the opening report on behalf of the majority, made by Comrade M. Stein, some comrades asked questions of the minority representatives. I did not answer all of the questions then and am not doing go now. I am replying to the serious ones and consider all others either answered or not deserving a reply. I am also answering some arguments I had no chance to answer at the Plenum.
 
Right of Tendency to a Bulletin
Question by Comrade Cannon: In point six of the resolution submitted by the minority, here is a statement that the right of any tendency in the Trotskyist party to have a bulletin of its own is taken for granted. In the PC meeting, two weeks ago, Comrade Goldman expressed himself as opposed to the whole idea of internal bulletins. I would like to ask if, by the right of a tendency to have a bulletin of its own, is meant a bulletin that can be distributed on the outside as well as inside of the party, if the tendency so desires.
Answer: It is not correct to say that I am opposed to the whole idea of internal bulletins. It is correct to say that I consider it wrong to look upon the party as a sort of Masonic Lodge with rituals, rules and secrets.
The party is a party of the working class and its internal life – its discussions and methods of arriving at decisions – should lie open to all advanced workers who are interested. Every political discussion, and this includes discussion on important organizational questions, should be made available to all who are sufficiently interested in the party to desire knowledge about them.
It is significant that Lenin, writing some years before World War I, gave as his criterion for the democratic nature of the Social Democratic Party of Germany the fact that the party had no secrets and that its conventions were open to the public.
Every experienced political person understands that it is impossible to keep important discussions in a large party a secret. Why did the Stalinists recently have a bitter public discussion on the differences between Browder and Foster. They certainly do not believe in public discussion as a matter of principle. They simply took it for granted that they could not keep a discussion involving the ranks of the party a secret. I do not claim that this is the only reason for their public discussion but by itself it would have been a sufficient reason.
It must be taken for granted that in a large party everything that is known to the members is also known to the people who are interested in the life of the party. It follows therefore that practically it is useless to try and keep any discussion a secret by means of an internal bulletin. I insist, however, that our policy with reference to keeping discussions secret must not be based merely on the practical ground that in a large party it is impossible to keep secrets. It must be based rather on the idea that our party life should be an open book to all advanced workers and others who are not members of the party but close sympathizers and are interested in its life. I repeat: the party is a party of the working masses and not a secret society.
Some of you remember that in the factional struggle of 1939-40 the question came up of permitting the minority to publish articles expressing their viewpoint in the New International, at that time our theoretical organ. Comrade Morrow and I voted to have the discussion articles printed in the magazine.
At first Trotsky agreed with us but later changed his mind. It is important to understand however that he considered the question as purely a practical one. If I am not mistaken he expressed the idea, in one of his letters, that publication of minority articles in the New International would make it more difficult for the minority to retreat because they would then have committed themselves before the public. I considered that reason totally inadequate. I argued that to refuse publication would furnish the minority with a new issue, intensify the struggle and, in spite of Trotsky, set a precedent. And so it turned out to be. Later on Trotsky also gave as a reason that the minority should not be permitted to appeal to the petty-bourgeois intellectuals outside of the party.
Whatever one may think about these reasons, it is clear that Trotsky did not decide the question as one of principle. From the remarks of Comrades Stein and Cannon one could conclude that it has become a principle to allow minority articles in the theoretical organ only after the discussion is over. We must then notify the world that a discussion has taken place and the result of that discussion.
It should be carefully noted that in 1939 I limited my motion, to permit the minority space for discussion, to the theoretical organ. I was then opposed and am now opposed to carrying on a discussion in the agitational organ. Some discussion is of course permissible and necessary even in the agitational press but it should be confined to a point made by some writer with which some reader may disagree.
Am I in favor of publishing all discussion articles in the theoretical organ? By no means. I am in favor of publishing only the best on either side of the controversy. Articles published in our theoretical organ should have a certain tone and, at all times, a high standard of quality. What tone and what quality must necessarily be left to the editorial board.
A discussion in the theoretical organ would itself tend to modify the tone of factional articles. One conscious that he is writing for a magazine read by the wide public, would be careful to avoid all factional dirt.
There should of course be a party discussion bulletin where articles not good enough to be published in our theoretical organ should find a place. But even this discussion bulletin should not be kept a secret from the outside world. There is a difference between an internal party bulletin the giving of which to one outside of the party is considered a crime against the party and a discussion bulletin for the purpose of giving all party members a chance to write and for articles of inferior tone and quality.
Who will decide which articles should go into the theoretical organ and which into the discussion bulletin? I am perfectly willing to submit the matter to an editorial board – competent or incompetent – provided at least the principle is recognized that it is the quality and tone which should determine whether an article should be published in the theoretical organ or in the discussion bulletin.
* * *
I have stated that every tendency in a Bolshevik party has the right to its own bulletin if it desires to have one. I do not propose that as an immutable principle but I would insist that it be stated as a general rule, recognizing that the rule could be violated only under the most exceptional circumstances. Under Lenin and Trotsky the Bolshevik party, at its Tenth Congress, prohibited factions and factional organs. Whether this was correct or not need not be discussed. It was necessary only to remember that Trotsky has always insisted that this was done under the most exceptional circumstances and that the general rule is that in a Bolshevik party the right to organize factions, groups and tendencies must be taken for granted.
In my article in the last issue of the Internal Bulletin I quoted from an article of Trotsky, published in the October 1939 issue of the New International. In it Trotsky speaks only of factions and groups but it would indeed be a piece of scholasticism to make a distinction between factions and factional organs.
This does not mean that it is correct for comrades to publish their own organ whenever they feel like it. It is to be accepted as a principle that publication of a tendency organ is to be resorted to only under exceptional circumstances. A party discussion bulletin and the theoretical organ of the party should suffice and satisfy all comrades, under normal circumstances.
But if a group of comrades wrongly and foolishly decide to issue their own bulletin there should be no prohibition against it. It is up to the leadership of the party to discredit them for taking a wrong step.
The general rule stated above is also applicable to the comrades of the WP who have indicated their intention to publish a bulletin for their tendency if and when there should be fusion. We must recognize their unconditional right to do so. Should we refuse, then, to be logical, we must also prohibit those now in the party from publishing their own bulletin if they see fit to do so. It would mean in fact the prohibition to publish factional organs, a serious step in the direction of monolithism.
If the present minority should not be prohibited from publishing its own organ and only the comrades of the WP should be forbidden to do so, then two classes of membership are created – one class prohibited from doing what another class is permitted.
In recognizing the right of the WP comrades to publish their own organ when and if unity is achieved the minority does not intend to say that the WP comrades should do that. It is obvious that unity will be aided if the WP comrades refrain from exercising the right to publish their own organ. Hence we shall strongly urge them to be satisfied with a discussion bulletin. But we shall insist that they have a right to publish a tendency organ and shall oppose any attempt to make the giving up of that right a precondition for unity.
 
Distribution of Discussion Bulletin
Question by Cannon: If you give them the right to have their own discussion bulletin and, if you were in the majority, would it include the right to distribute it outside the party and a right to have their own editorial board? What possibility and right would the party have to censure or regulate the distribution of the paper?
Answer: The party has a right and a duty to control the bulletin of a tendency, if that bulletin goes beyond the legitimate purpose of convincing the membership of I the party to its point of view and begins a campaign to get the workers to act contrary to party policy.
In every instance the action of the party would have to be determined by the question: Is it n tendency bulletin with the legitimate purpose of convincing party members or is it in reality a public organ agitating against party policy?
If it is a tendency organ then the fact that some copies reach non-members who are interested in the questions treated by the bulletin, is immaterial. It may well be that a tendency bulletin has a large circulation outside the party. That would simply mean that a large party has many sympathizers interested in the discussions of the party.
Naturally every group in the party must abide by the decision of the party with reference to the distribution of discussion bulletins to non-members. If the majority insists that party discussion bulletins should not be made available to non-party members or if the majority insists that there be no discussion in the theoretical organ then the minority must abide by that decision no matter how foolish it may be. So long as the minority is granted the right to publish its own bulletin then the minor question of distribution is one which the minority can afford to submit.
It is possible, of course, to reduce the concept of the right of a tendency to publish its own organ to an absurdity. With the growth in the size of the party we may have a tendency organ for every thousand members, some wiseacre will argue. But let me point out that under Lenin and Trotsky the right was not questioned and before and after the October Revolution there was no split because the right was recognized.
A correct policy of the leadership is the main factor in preventing a situation where the party is nothing but a group of factions. In a healthy party, factions will exist temporarily and will disappear with the disappearance of the issue that brought them into being. A tendency may exist for a long time but only in exceptional cases. I can readily see where a tendency, such as the present minority represents, basing itself on the concept of a Bolshevik party, can last for a long period but even in such a case ultimately the differences will disappear or become so sharp as to make it impossible for the different tendencies to live in the game party.
The ideal is not to have factions and factional organs. By this I do not mean that the ideal is to have no differences of opinion but to have such a healthy party that differences are discussed and settled without factions and factional organs. But the point we are discussing is not some abstract ideal but the attitude of the leadership of a party to the formation of factions and the publication of factional organs. The general rule should be recognized: no prohibition of factions or factional organs.
Cannon gave us a dissertation on the looseness of the Socialist Party in this country prior to the First World War and to the organization of the communist movement. He told us that whoever wanted to and had the resources could and did publish a paper. He did not expressly say so but the conclusion is that we must now not permit the existence of tendencies and tendency organs in the party. For what is the purpose of Cannon’s dissertation? Is there anyone proposing that an individual or a group in the party should be given the right to issue public organs? Cannon has that habit of creating a straw man and then valiantly knocking him down.
The problem for us is to avoid the looseness of the socialists and the monolithism of the Stalinists. It is not difficult to get an admission from us that there are dangers inherent in freely permitting the existence of tendencies and tendency bulletins. But these dangers are far outweighed by the dangers of prohibiting factions and factional organs, that is, by the dangers of monolithism.
When we come to the question of unity and the demand of the WP comrades to have a tendency bulletin, it is first of all necessary to realize that thus question cannot be settled at present when neither the majority of our party nor the WP is enthusiastic for unity – to put it very mildly. Both sides fear unity because they fear a bitter factional struggle following union. In such an atmosphere of lack of confidence it is impossible to solve the problem of a tendency bulletin.
It is first of all necessary to create the proper sentiment for unity before a calm and objective discussion can be carried on, on the question of a tendency organ. It is first of all necessary to cooperate and prepare the membership of both parties for unity before taking up the question of a tendency organ. At this time it is only necessary to recognize the right of any group to have its own organ if it so desires. After a period of sincere cooperation there will either be a real desire for unity, in which case the question of a tendency organ can be solved either way without difficulty, or the suspicions and fears will still prevail and there will be no unity.
We of the minority would vote against immediate unity if such a proposal were made. For we know that the members of our party have been terribly miseducated on this question. In the history of our movement there has never been such a case of miseducation as has occurred in the discussion on unity. Our members were taught that the political differences between us and the WP are irreconcilable and unity impossible because of them. Not so long ago Cannon sneeringly asked me what there is to discuss with the WP. Now he wants only discussion.
There are members in the majority faction who want unity; others are opposed to unity; still others do not know and are waiting to follow the leadership. Most of the majorityites think that unless the WP gives up its ideas with reference to the Soviet Union we cannot have unity. They are in a condition of confusion worse confounded. And that is only natural because the leaders whom they follow have succeeded in confusing them.
The ranks of the majority are bitterly hostile to the demand of the WP for a tendency organ. Cannon himself is unwilling to state definitely that unity is impossible because of the demand of the WP for a tendency organ. Because he would find himself in an embarrassing position were the WP suddenly to decide to give up the demand and be satisfied with an internal bulletin.
The resolution of the majority says nothing about the question of the tendency organ. It thus permits the secondary leaders of the majority to go around and agitate the ranks against unity became of the demand for a tendency bulletin, while Cannon does not commit himself on the question.
Does a tendency organ mean a bitter factional fight? Not necessarily. The desire to have a tendency organ is not the sole indication of the degree of factionalism. The minority tendency at present has no organ of its own and yet the factional bitterness in the party can hardly be greater. An educational tendency organ is just as possible as a bitter factional fight without a tendency organ.
At this time the only solution for a cessation of the factional atmosphere is unity. The only unity that is worth while is unity without a factional struggle. To achieve that unity it is necessary to reeducate the membership to prepare them to see in unity a strengthening of the party and to realize that the political differences are compatible with membership in a united party.
 
Loyalty
Question by Andrews: Did you, Comrade Morrow and Comrade Goldman, turn over to the Shachtmanites your resolutions for fusion which they printed even before we had it in our Internal Bulletin? Have you had meetings or discussions with them since the occasions mentioned in the minutes that all the comrades received? If so, what was the attitude of the WP leaders? What did they have to say and what did you have to “ay in those meetings? Have you made reports on these meetings to the Political Committee and if you didn’t, why didn’t you? Have you discussed with them just prior to this Plenum or during this Plenum? Tell us all about it.
Question by Wood: Comrade Goldman dismissed the questions that Andrews asked him. He says they are not serious. I want to ask the very same questions. You will admit that the circumstantial evidence is against you. You are going behind the back of the party. Why then do you stand on your dignity and refuse to answer? We want to know. The membership in the field wants to know. Are you loyal to our organization?
Answer: Yes, I said the questions were not serious and I would not take the time of a Plenum ostensibly called to discuss unity with the WP to answer them. But I tee that if the questions are not serious to me they are serious to you and I shall therefore answer them. I shall answer you only, however, on the general proposition of loyalty. It is too difficult for me to answer some of the questions put to me by Comrade Andrews. They are on the lowest possible intellectual level. It is sad and extremely discouraging that all of our controversies hare revolved around such questions as the propriety of talking with opponents and whether a letter written by a friendly critic should be published in the Fourth International. Since the death of Trotsky the intellectual level of our discussions has fallen close to zero. Even such an important discussion as the one on the problems of the European Revolution has been dragged down by the majority to an inconceivably low level.
What does loyalty to an organization me in? In the last analysis, for a revolutionary Marxist, it means loyalty to ideas which the organization has been created to struggle for.
When one considers the history of the socialist movement in the last thirty years it is clear that simple loyalty to an organization can result in the victory of the counterrevolution. The hundreds of thousands of sincere workers who were loyal to the socialist and Stalinist parties had the same idea of blind loyalty to an organization that is suggested by the questions put to me. It is the conservative but natural loyalty to an organization on the part of sincere workers that makes it so difficult now for our parties in Europe to grow. Did we not expect that the European workers after all the betrayals would rally to a revolutionary party? But they did not. They cling to the parties they created and are loyal to. The revolutionary vanguard needs n different type of loyalty, a loyalty to ideas and not to an organization, which, in the last analysis, means the leadership of an organization.
A comrade old in the movement, in a conversation with Comrade Morrow, told him that it was useless for the minority to fight. He said that the workers like to be told what to think and what to do. This comrade did not understand that he was giving up the very basis of our struggle for socialism, the creation of a critical and independent group of workers who cannot be told what to do and how to think.
Some of you have interpreted my remarks to mean that I blame the failure of the revolution on the workers. What shallowness! When I say that the worker a arc naturally conservative and follow the leadership of an organization they built, that immediately shows that I consider the problem of leadership the all-important problem of our generation. And the highest duty of a revolutionary leadership is to create a critical and independent spirit, a phrase which always gives a laugh to the Philistines.
In this controversy about unity the question of loyalty has been raised in a manner which completely miseducated the membership. Form has been raised above substance. What has been emphasized are mere insignificant formalities as against the real substance of loyalty, the loyalty to the idea of building a revolutionary organization where legitimate differences are expected and discussed on their merits.
The minority starts from the fundamental proposition that the comrades of the WP are devoted revolutionists, that they have proved themselves to be such in the period of the imperialist conflict. We start from the proposition that they belong to the Fourth International.
It is inevitable that we should have very friendly relations with the comrades of the WP and that we should discuss the question of unity and urge them to favor unity. Were we to do otherwise we would have been disloyal to the party that we want to build.
At present the minority goes further. When the WP indicated its willingness to unite with our party and to submit to discipline in action whenever they found themselves in a minority, we had to consider them not only as devoted revolutionists who made a mistake by splitting but as a tendency in the Fourth International. We now recognize three tendencies in this country – the Cannonite tendency, the WP tendency and ours. I shall not now go into the differences between the tendencies. It is sufficient when I state that they exist as far as we are concerned.
Truth compels me to state that right now the bond that ties us with the WP tendency is stronger than that which binds us to the Cannonite tendency. The questions of the nature and the defense of the Soviet Union are now remote and the questions of unity and the struggle against the creation of a monolithic party are the important issues. On those issues we see eye to eye with the WP comrades. Another important question is the utilization of democratic demands to mobilize the masses of Europe for the socialist revolution and on that issue the WP is closer to the minority.
It is only because there are formally two parties that the bloc of the minority with the Cannonites exists. It is only because we are so interested in achieving unity of all three tendencies in the Fourth International that we adhere to the formal rules which bind us, by virtue of the fact that there are two parties.
What some of the majorityites consider disloyal, we of the minority consider loyal. We consider it our duty to talk to and convince the WP comrades that they should be for unity, without any strings attached and without making any maneuvers. We are certain that we have succeeded and that the WP comrades are sincerely for unity, although they fear it because they know the attitude of the Cannonites.
Since our concepts of loyalty clash it is incumbent upon the majority to lay down specific rules of conduct. If the majority thinks that to discuss the question of unity and all its ramifications with the WP comrades is disloyal let them say so specifically and forbid such discussion. The minority will then decide whether to abide by the rule or leave the party. Leaving the party is an alternative because we would consider such a rule as an indication of the party’s degeneration.
Comrade Frank contends that no such rule is necessary. Just as we do not pass a rule against crossing a picket line so do we not pass a rule against talking or discussing with the WP. And we expect that no comrade will cross a picket line. As usual, Frank’s analogies limp. If some comrade contended that to cross a picket line is perfectly justifiable and would demand a rule against it before he would submit, then i for one, bating formal rules as I do, would not hesitate to pass such a rule. The very hesitation of the majority to pass a specific rule prohibiting the minority members from discussing unity with the members of the WP shows on what weak ground the majority stands.
The members of the minority will continue to regard and treat the members of the WP as devoted revolutionists and will discuss with them all aspects of unity. Let the majority take such action as it deems right to prevent it. But it is downright dishonesty to call the minority “disloyal” without taking some action against its “disloyalty.” To hide behind the proposition that during a discussion on a political question it is not correct to take action against disloyal people is another dishonest statement.
This is not a question of breaking discipline. It is a question, according to the majority, of disloyalty. Disloyalty should be dealt with under all conditions.
Here I want to repeat the charge I made before, that during the period just prior to the entry at Trotskyists into the Socialist Party, Cannon, Shachtman and Burnham secretly held conversations with leaders of the SP, at a time when the majority of the Political Committee was against entry. Cannon denies that. I have the statements of three people who were in a position to know from personal knowledge that such is the case. One of the Oehlerites actually accused Cannon of doing that very thing. I raise this point simply to show that Cannon is sometimes capable of subordinating form to substance.
 
Los Angeles
A question that has nothing to do with unity but which I answer because so much confusion has bean created around it, is the one asked by Comrade Adler with reference to my article on the refusal of the Los Angeles leadership of our party to organize a united picket lines with the WP at the time of the meeting of the fascists.
What was the main burden of my criticism of the Los Angeles leadership? That it refused to picket the fascist meeting jointly with, the Workers Party. That the decision was not to picket “unless the labor movement or the CP should do so.” Since it could have been foretold with certainty that the labor movement and the CP would not picket then it was the duty of our party to join the WP on the picket line.
The leadership further stated: “The main line of our campaign should be to get the labor movement to act.” This is all to the good but in its context it could mean only that until the “labor movement” acted our party would not act. (See Internal Bulletin No.6, July 1945).
The article of Murry Weiss as an answer to my criticism should confuse politically immature people but not those with any experience and intelligence. He told us all about the efforts of the Los Angeles leadership to arouse the labor movement after the WP comrades aroused him from his slumbers. Who has any criticism to make of those efforts. No one. Who says that we should not mobilize the masses? No one.
We shall even ignore the trickery which Weiss uses to give inexperienced comrades the impression that our efforts were solely responsible for the calling of the subsequent united front meeting against the fascists. We shall assume that we were responsible. It is clear that it was a meeting which was completely in the tradition of the Stalinist Peoples’ Front meetings.
But, does that meeting exclude picketing?
Even if we believe that the WP comrades were insane and said that they are not interested in mobilizing the labor movement, does that mean that we should not join in picketing a fascist meeting with them?
All of the innumerable pages written by Weiss cannot and do not answer these simple questions.
I said in my criticism that we would correct the line of Los Angeles. And we did. And Detroit proves that we did. Did we wait for the labor movement to mobilize the masses in Detroit before we took the initiative to picket the fascist meeting? Unless one is a thorough-going formalist and considers the motion of the Wayne County Council as a mobilization of the labor movement. We correctly took advantage of that motion to try to get more workers on the picket line. We correctly got the executive board of some unions to favor a picket line. But the party would have and should have gone out on the picket line even if those motions had not passed. And in reality that is what happened.
We did not follow Weiss’s original prescription – to wait for the labor movement or the CP to take the initiative. And this is correcting his line.
 
Unprecedented Nonsense
Cannon has been repeating with an air of great profundity that the situation is unprecedented – the situation of unity between two parties that are in disagreement on some important political and theoretical questions. We shall grant for the sake of argument that the equation is unprecedented. Surely this is no obstacle to Bolsheviks.
We speak a great deal about Bolshevik tradition but we forget that the most important tradition of Bolshevism on organizational and tactical questions is that we do not feel ourselves bound by tradition. (Comrades who were present at the Plenum say that I actually said that we have no traditions. I of course spoke nonsense. We have traditions but we are not bound by them.)
If the situation is unprecedented then it is up to us to set a precedent. If the situation is unprecedented it not at all complex.
The members of the WP split from us in 1940. They were wrong. We said then that the differences were compatible with membership in one party. The split was based on the question of the defense of the Soviet Union and the question of the regime. More than five years have passed and those who are now in the WP showed that they have been loyal to the fundamental principles of the proletarian revolution. For political people who are not motivated by fear of differences the question of reuniting the forces that were once together presents itself immediately. Especially since the question of the defense of the Soviet Union no longer the burning issue that it was.
Two separate questions present themselves. One is whether the political premises for unity exist. That simply means whether we have the same fundamental program and the same program of immediate action and whether the differences that still exist are compatible with membership in one party. The second question is whether the two groups can work harmoniously in one party in spite of the political differences. The first question can be answered by an analysis of the program and activities of the Workers Party plus the differences that divide us. The second question can be answered only by a preliminary period of close cooperation.
As a matter of fact the minority is certain that it can live harmoniously with the WP comrades because it has made an estimate of them as devoted revolutionists and thus has indicated confidence in them and acquired their confidence in us.
With the majority it is an altogether different question. The majority has designates the WP as renegades, betrayers of Marxism, petty-bourgeois adventurers and by other choice names. Naturally this does not result in an atmosphere conducive to unity. We therefore say that a period of cooperation to prepare the membership of both parties for unity is essential.
The majority answers: The question whether or not the political premises for unity exist is an abstract question. We cannot answer it by yes or no. We must probe the differences and see the attitude.
But what will the majority answer after they know that the differences are what they are claimed to be by Cannon and others? They have already listed the differences. No answer is given to that question except the formula: it is an abstract question.
A picture of real political bankruptcy was furnished by Comrade Graham who spoke at the Plenum on behalf of the majority. Since he is the most serious and honest of the majority he presented the picture in all its nakedness. He said that the discussion which the majority resolution provides for is for the purpose of educating the rank and file. The leadership knows the differences but we must educate our membership.
Thereupon I interrupted and was permitted to ask the following questions:
“As a leader do you know the differences between us and the WP?”
“Yes.”
“In your opinion are they compatible or not compatible with membership in one party?”
“I cannot answer that question. I stand by the resolution ... blah ... blah ... blah.”
When the leaders of the party say that the purpose of the discussion is to acquaint the rank and file with the differences and, at the same time, claim that they know the differences and do not want to say whether those differences are compatible with membership in one party, then it constitutes an abdication of leadership.
A leader of a revolutionary party is in duty bound to give his opinion on any important political question before attempting to “educate” the rank and file.
Not so long ago Cannon and his leading followers not only claimed that they knew all about the differences and did not want to discuss them but were ready to tell the rank and file that unity was out of the question.
They did not wait to discuss the differences and educate the rank and file before they made up their mind that unity was undesirable. Why is it that now it is all-important to educate the rank and file without telling them whether they should be for or against unity?
The reason is simple. They did not want unity before and were not afraid to say so before any discussion. They do not want unity now but do not want to say so in so many words after discovering that leading comrades of some sections of the International are definitely for unity.
It is perfectly true that the great majority of the members of our party do not know the nature of the differences between us and the WP and it would be very good to discuss those differences with the WP in order to clarify the minds of the members.
But in the first place it is the duty of the leadership to take a position on the question whether those differences are compatible with membership in one party. And in the second place it is necessary to discuss them with the WP after taking a position in favor of unity.
A discussion is in order but it should be one that is carried on through joint discussion bulletins and joint membership meetings. What the WP stands for can be found out much better from the WP members themselves in joint discussions. Such discussions will serve not only to educate our members but also to eliminate misunderstandings.
After the Plenum we found out that Cannon contemplates a “discussion” where we write articles for our press and the WP answers in their press. This is in reality not a discussion but one of the old-time “enlightenment campaigns” carried on by the Stalinist leadership to “educate” their followers.
The leadership of the majority claims that the question whether the differences between us and the WP are compatible with membership in one party is an abstract one. Will it become less abstract after we hold the discussion? The majority of the members were taught up to a few weeks ago that our differences on the Soviet Union, on the national question and other questions made unity impossible. The discussion will not abolish the differences; will unity be possible or impossible when we discover that the discussion does not eliminate the differences?
It is a question, say some of the majority leaders, of the attitude of the WP to our party. But how will the discussion on the theoretical and political differences reveal the attitude of the WP? It will simply reveal what every leader already knows: that there are differences and that they cannot be eliminated by the “discussion” contemplated by Cannon.
The attitude of the WP to unity is a very important question. But the WP has already come out in favor of unity on the basis of recognizing the political differences and agreeing to abide by discipline in action. Shall we say that the WP is dishonest? But the very fact that it is willing to give up its own party, its own leadership and its own public press is or should be conclusive proof that they are sincere.
Some comrades naively (and some not so naively) claim that the WP wants to enter our party for a raiding expedition. What foolish people they would be to do that under the present circumstances. And besides, they are demanding the right to publish a tendency organ. And that of course is an almost insuperable obstacle. The WP comrades know that. If they are dishonest would they not agree to anything we want in order to “enter” our party for raiding purposes? The majorityites jump from one argument to another – all equally bad – in order to avoid unity.
By raising the question of attitude Cannon furnishes himself with a pretext to come out openly against unity at any time he sees fit. What will follow is not so difficult to foresee. When the comrades of the WP find out the nature of the “discussion” they will be asked to conduct, they will undoubtedly characterize it as we do: a piece of fakery. This will of course show a hostile attitude. When the comrades of the WP publish an unflattering review of Cannon’s History this will also show a hostile attitude. Cannon and his followers will then say: see, we told you. The attitude of the WP makes unity impossible.
The truth is and it must be said over and over again: the attitude of the majority leadership makes unity impossible.
 
Cannon, Unity and Arithmetic
The picture has become clear after the Plenum. Cannon intends to prevent unity by aimless discussions on questions that have almost been relegated to history. The reason for his fear of unity is also clear. It is a question of arithmetic.
We were told by Cannon that if our party had five thousand members and the WP three hundred, unity would be a good risk. We could then take care of an obstreperous minority. But Cannon knows now that the WP has close to five hundred and our party has about twelve hundred. That is not a big enough majority for Cannon. Arithmetic tells Cannon that the WP comrades together with the present minority would be too large for him to handle easily.
In reality Cannon’s attitude means: I cannot meet ideas with ideas; I must depend upon a certain majority. I must get a few thousand more raw workers and train them to follow me and then I can afford to have a minority of four to five hundred, if I have to make unity.
In the resolution which the minority first introduced on behalf of unity it is stated:
“The question of unification with the comrades of the WP is thus of enormous symptomatic importance in determining the kind of party we want to build. The party’s decision will be a touchstone indicating the direction in which we shall henceforth move.”
The Plenum has answered: in the direction of monolithism.
Albert Goldman
 



Bigger and Better “Confessions”
AMIDST the jeering laughter of the reactionaries who with great satisfaction point to the “trial” in Moscow as conclusive evidence that Russia is a mad house; amidst the shrieks of the Stalinist bureaucrats wallowing in a filthy ocean of lies; amidst the shocked bewilderment of millions of workers and thousands of liberals; amidst the valiant struggle of the revolutionary workers and independent intellectuals to bring out the true character of the greatest frame-up in history, the frightful and sickening spectacle staged by Stalin is about to conclude its second cycle, as this is written. The second batch of miserable human beings who once were Bolsheviks, leaders in the greatest uprising of history, will slink off the stage, beaten and transformed into degraded wretches by a monstrous usurper who designates himself as a “disciple of Lenin.”
There will in all probability be an article on the “trial” of Radek and the others in the next issue of the Appeal, analyzing the evidence and “confessions.” In the meantime it is necessary to point out:

The “trials” are serious blows to the revolutionary movement. How many thousands of sympathizers of the revolutionary movement, if not participants in it, have been estranged from it because of these trials, is impossible to estimate. What kind of a movement is it that has brought into being men so unscrupulous as to plot with the Gestapo for the overthrow of the Soviet government, the government which they themselves did so much to create? Or, if the charges are not true, what kind of a movement is it that places at the head of the first working-class state a tyrant who stops at nothing to get rid of opposition?  It would be folly for us to expect that the sympathizers of the Marxist movement are all Marxists. Our own small revolutionary movement has no doubt gained converts as a result of the frame-up. But Stalin’s attack on us is an attack on the revolutionary movement and it will take some time for the revolutionary socialist movement to recover from the blow.
 
Stalin is achieving one of his objectives. His aim to discredit revolutionary Marxism by discrediting the greatest living exponent of Marxist ideas could not possibly succeed. In that he has failed and of course with the passing of time it will become clear even to some of Stalin’s followers that the charges against Trotsky were meant only to confuse and betray the working class. One of Stalin’s objectives however, is to assure the leaders of the capitalist states, with whom he wants a military alliance, that there is no danger that the “Old Bolsheviks” with their ideas of world revolution have the slightest chance to get back to power and upset the apple cart. In that he has certainly succeeded. If the capitalist politicians had any doubts about Stalin’s sincerity and determination to defend the status quo, those doubts have disappeared.
 
The necessity for an international commission of inquiry to take the testimony of Trotsky and his son and to demand that Stalin produce his evidence before an impartial tribunal is a political question of the greatest importance. It is a means to defend the integrity of the revolutionary idea and not simply to defend a great personality. The revolutionary movement must be guarded against usurpers and hypocrites who are undermining the morale of the whole movement.
 

Two Resolutions on People’s Front
TWO purposes must be kept in mind in formulating a resolution on an important theoretical or tactical problem. In the first place it must serve as a guide for the party in its important activities; it must orient the party in a certain direction.  In the second place it should educate the membership of the party and the advanced workers to see clearly the problem tackled by the resolution and the solution that it proposes.
Frequently one hears the complaint that a resolution is too long or written in Marxian language; the workers will not read or if they do will not understand it. That shows a complete misconception of the nature and purpose of a resolution. It is not a document which is to be spread widely amongst the masses. It is not a propaganda document but it is material for correct propaganda. It is to serve as a key for the members of the party in the sense that it should furnish them with the basic ideas for correct revolutionary agitation. It must include everything of importance with reference to the subject it deals with and while brevity is to be preferred it should not be achieved at the expense of clarity. Wonderful indeed would it be if our theoreticians were literary masters. It would increase its effectiveness a thousand times if a correct theoretical resolution were brilliantly written. But first of all we must aspire for correctness.
When a resolution deals with a current problem it invariably arises out of a previous controversy with reference to some tactic followed by some political or economic group in the working class. In such a case, to be effective both from the point of view of its serving as a guide for the party and of its educational value for the membership it is essential that it mention names and deal with specific instances where the theory of the resolution has been violated. Stated merely in an abstract form, even though correctly, it loses most of its value.
The difference between a resolution that is formally correct and a resolution that, aside from stating a correct theoretical position, also points out how that position was violated in specific instances and the effects of that violation is well illustrated by a comparison of the resolution on the People’s Front published in the Jan. 2nd edition of the SOCIALIST CALL and the one published in this issue of the Appeal.
For our party as well as for every working-class party throughout the world the question of the people’s front surpasses in importance all other questions. It is actually the main problem confronting the revolutionary movement because every other problem is solved in the light of the position taken on this key question. Whether it be the struggle against war and fascism or the question of a Farmer-Labor party our attitude will depend on what position we take on the people’s front; If for no other reason than the fact that the Communist and Socialist parties of France and Spain have become champions of the people’s front idea, is it necessary that every grouping in the party be compelled to take a position on that question.
The resolution in the Call correctly opposes the class struggle against the People’s Front. By its insistence on the class struggle it places itself in the category of a left wing resolution. But it is not enough simply to state that we stand for the class struggle. At a time when the Communists are all howling for the People’s Front; at a time when Socialists, so-called, are heading Popular Front Governments, it is impermissible simply to state a correct general proposition. Not a word in the Call resolution on Blum, on Caballero. on the effects of actual People’s Fronts in practice. Point fingers, name names, comrades. How else can you make sure that our members will understand exactly what you mean; how else assure that not mere lip service be given to a vague idea? Every main idea of the resolution is correct but taken altogether the resolution is not correct for the simple reason that our theories must be dragged down to earth so to speak.
No one reading the Appeal resolution on the People’s Front, published in this issue, can fail to understand what is meant by the People’s Front. It is only a draft of course and I do not think that it is perfect. In my opinion it should contain a paragraph making clear that we are in favor of a struggle for the democratic rights of the workers under capitalism; and what is more important, based on the proposition I stated above, it should contain an analysis of the situation in the Wisconsin section of our party. If Wisconsin is following the tactic of the People’s Front we must say so in our resolution.
It would appear to me that no difficulty at all should be encountered in the attempt to formulate a common resolution on the People’s Front. That should be the central resolution of the convention; at least the left wingers should attempt to make it so. The left wing must smoke out the People’s Fronters and a serious ideological struggle must be initiated against them.
In my judgment whatever ideas are found in the Call resolution which the Appeal resolution does not contain should be embodied in the latter and the left wing unite on one resolution.
 



Hail the Debs Column
LOCAL New York of the Socialist party deserves the highest praise for starting a movement which should have been set into motion by our party many months ago. The announcement that a Debs Column of five hundred volunteers was being organized to be sent to Spain to participate in the struggle against the Spanish, German and Italian fascists created an enthusiasm amongst class conscious workers which it would be criminal to permit to be extinguished by inactivity. A campaign is now in order to collect money to send the volunteers over to Spain and to ship arms and ammunition to aid our Spanish brothers.
He is a philistine who sneers at the idea of sending men and ammunition from this country to help in the struggle in Spain. It is so easy to show that the help that We can possibly raise for the Spanish workers is insignificant in comparison with the actual requirements. For a revolutionary Socialist the amount of money that we can raise for arms and the number of men we can send, although very important, are not the only significant factors. What is just as important is the beginning of a campaign to show our solidarity with the Spanish workers and on the basis of that campaign to teach the American workers some elementary lessons in the class struggle.
I do not claim that only revolutionary Socialists would contribute money to send arms and men to Spain. Even liberal democrats will donate for such a purpose. But only revolutionary Socialists will emphasize the need for such a campaign and will conduct it with the greatest zeal and enthusiasm. And it is as certain as anything can be that in connection with such a campaign only revolutionary Socialists will point out that we are sending men and money over to defeat the fascists not simply for the purpose of retaining a decaying capitalist democracy but in order to defeat capitalist democracy as well as fascism through the instrumentality of a workers’ government fishing for socialism. And only revolutionary Socialists will point out the lessons of the Spanish civil war to the American workers.
*  *  *  *
If the campaign initiated in New York has no other value it certainly will be justified by the fact that it will begin the process of rooting out all remnants of pacifism in the ranks of our party. The consistent pacifists, those who will not permit such a trifle as a civil war against the fascists to move them a hair’s breadth from their Tolstoyanism, cannot find a place in such a campaign and what is more they will undoubtedly leave the party. A consummation devoutly to be wished for.
In a letter to Norman Thomas, published in the New Leader, John Haynes Holmes expresses his “amazement and outrage” at the idea of sending men to fight the fascists. “I am shocked beyond words,” writes the reverend pacifist, “to discover that officers, or representatives of the party have in true fascist fashion arrogated to themselves this awful privilege of war and peace ...” He writes as if he were a member of the party and if he is I wonder why he raised no squawk at the war resolution passed at the Cleveland convention. Perhaps he is one of those members who doesn’t bother reading resolutions until they are called to their attention by some unexpected event. Or perhaps Holmes did read the resolution and saw nothing to kick about. Which does not speak so much for the resolution. The poor reverend will have his eyes opened to the fact that the Socialist party is becoming Something altogether different from the pacifist organization he would like it to be.
*  *  *  *
The New Leader, on the other hand, attacks the campaign from a different viewpoint. It does not agree with the pacifism of Holmes but contends that the “scheme” is bad because the Roosevelt Government will be compelled to react against it and thus prevent any kind of help being sent to the Spanish people. The idea seems to be that if men and arms should be sent to Spain it should be done without any public campaign so that no one will know about it and thus not give the reactionaries a chance to organize a counter campaign.
We are not at all surprised at the attitude of the New Leader.  It is in consonance with the whole social democratic conception of avoiding any kind of a mass movement and attempting to accomplish things through peaceful maneuvering. Leaving aside the question whether or not it is possible to gather aid on a large scale by means of a secret campaign, the problem still remains for revolutionary Socialists of arousing the American workers to a sense of solidarity with the Spanish workers and to prepare for the struggle against the American capitalists and fascists. And for this purpose an open, vigorous campaign is essential.
Socialists do not see how the possible adverse action of Roosevelt should deter them from carrying on such a vital campaign for the help of the Spanish workers. On the contrary, the opposition of Roosevelt will show how hollow his defence of democracy really is and it will then become necessary, as part of the campaign to enlist men and collect money, to broaden out the campaign to include a movement against Roosevelt and his supporters.
*  *  *  *
An argument that has been advanced by some timid members of the party against the kind of campaign initiated by the New York local is that it will alienate liberals and will not get a favorable response from the workers who would give clothing and medicine but not arms. They will undoubtedly point to the attitude of Holmes as confirmation of their contention. To that revolutionary Socialists will answer that alienating such liberals is quite a gain for the party. And as far as the workers are concerned no one who has the least experience with their readiness to struggle with all weapons in their hands in strikes will fail to understand that the American workers if they react at all to the struggle in Spain, will adopt the idea of sending arms to the Spanish workers with the greatest enthusiasm.  It is a language that they understand.
Revolutionary Socialists will push the campaign for arms and volunteers to help the Spanish workers to the limit. Let the Communists and Social Democrats worry about the liberals and pacifists; we must worry about the Spanish workers.

Anarchist Confusion Leads to Opportunism
REVOLUTIONARY Marxists have always recognized that the confusion which is part of anarchism would in a critical moment be dangerous to the working class.
Anarchism with its flamboyant revolutionary phraseology, its attitude of hostility to all authority, its apparent intransigence in the struggle against the capitalist masters, its open hatred of all reformism, gave the impression to the uninitiated that of all working class currents it alone would never compromise. But critical Marxists understand that a working-class movement requires something more than revolutionary phraseology and good intentions; it demands a correct revolutionary theory and without such a theory the workers will be led into a blind alley whether by anarchism or opportunist socialism.
No one denies the revolutionary qualities of the anarchist workers, their heroism and devotion to the cause of their class. They have been in the forefront of all revolutionary struggles and at the present moment in Spain the courage of the anarchist proletarians is unexcelled. All the more tragic is it that such courage should fail of its goal because of the confusion of anarchist thought. In critical moments anarchist confusion is unable to solve the problem confronting the working class in a revolutionary manner and consequently, wherever it must assume a responsible attitude because it controls working class organizations, its policies coincide with the policies of opportunist socialists.
*  *  *  *
If the anarchist movement had any possibilities of leading the workers to victory the situation in Spain afforded it the grandest opportunity. It controlled the majority of the organized workers in the revolutionary center of Spain (Barcelona); it had great influence in all other centers (Madrid, Valencia); it had no recognized reformist group to hold it back such as the Prieto group in the Socialist party; it is not bound to the Soviet bureaucracy as is the Communist party; its prestige amongst the workers is exceedingly great. What else does a movement need, what else can it expect to be able to lead the workers to victory?
And at the beginning of the fascist revolt the anarchist leaders gave the appearance of knowing what they wanted and of acting decisively to get it; they gave the appearance of understanding that it was necessary for the workers to take over complete power and conduct the struggle against the fascists on the basis of that power and not on the basis of the democratic bourgeois regime. The anarchist leaders went along with and aided the masses when they seized the factories; they participated in a united front with other working class organizations; they organized workers committees everywhere; they refused to have anything to do with the bourgeois government which was nothing but an empty shell.
But their confusion in theory brought them into an impossible situation and they extricated themselves by surrendering their cherished dogmas and accepting the ideas not of revolutionary Marxism but of plain and simple opportunism. Opportunism is the certain consequence of confusion of all kinds.
The workers under the leadership of the anarchists seized the factories. That was as it should have been. But then the anarcho-syndicalist idea about the workers operating their own factories, meaning thereby that the workers of a particular shop should control all the operations of that shop, created tremendous confusion. A revolutionary Marxist party would have immediately proceeded to centralize all operations with the workers of every factory participating in the control through their representatives or delegates. It was not long before the need of such centralization became apparent.
At the very beginning of the fascist revolt every political grouping, including the anarchists, had its own militia. Obviously a civil war, or any other kind of war, can not be won without centralized control. The trade unions created their own militia to keep order and fight the counter revolution.
Centralization was absolutely essential. Confronted by a situation which made impossible the functioning of their theories of decentralization, the anarchist leaders readily consented to the need of centralization. But, alas, centralization to them meant a return to the bourgeois democratic state. Instead of accepting the ideas of revolutionary Marxism, which would, have meant the creation of centralized and democratic organs of control of the army, for industry and for the police, through the creation of a workers’ government, the anarchists accepted centralization through the instrumentality of a democratic bourgeois government.
And by the action of the anarchist leaders as well as of the leaders of the other working class groups life was breathed into the hollow form of the Company’s Government and the task of placing the workers in their “proper” position as a class to be governed but not to govern has been well accomplished by the working class “leaders.”
*  *  *  *
What is the theoretical and practical justification offered by the anarchist leaders for their actions in Catalonia? One can hardly expect a thorough theoretical justification from the anarchists but we find an attempt made in the International Review of December 1936. Read that attempted apology and you will not have to read the pages of the reformist socialists for their justification. The arguments are cut out of one cloth.
According to the article of Roberto, the anarchists in Barcelona had to enter the Companys government because otherwise the Madrid government would not have given any money and no arms could be obtained. And in addition to that Mussolini would not tolerate a Catalonian commune and the democratic governments of France and England would not come to the aid of a workers’ Catalonia in case of an attack by Mussolini. Under these conditions is it not better for the anarchists to enter the bourgeois government so that the workers can “ride and manipulate the engines that some good people might want to use against them after the job of defeating the rebels is done”? Where have we heard such arguments before if not in the press of the pitiful and hesitating social democrats?
The logic of the whole argument is as follows. If the workers of one country or of one section of a particular country dare take power into their own hands the foreign capitalist governments will attack them and alone they are too weak to withstand such an attack. Therefore the advanced workers of any one country must wait until the workers of all other countries are ready to make the revolution. We the workers of any particular country must not begin until our brothers of the other countries are ready to do the same thing. And in practice that “theory” works out so that the working class is defeated in each country separately.
A revolutionary Marxist does not say that the Catalonian workers can defy the whole capitalist world. He contends merely that when the Catalonian workers are able to take power they must do so confident that their seizure of power will have inevitable repercussions on the workers of the rest of the world. The workers of one country must begin the revolution and struggle to extend it to all other countries.
Only they who have no faith at all in the revolutionary spirit of the workers can imagine for one moment that the Madrid proletarians would tolerate a government that would sabotage the revolution in Barcelona. Far more likely is it that a single appeal from the Barcelona workers would cause the Madrid Government to change its mind or suffer annihilation at the hands of the workers.
And would the French proletariat remain quiet if the Catalonian workers would appeal for help directly to them and urge them to overthrow the Blum Government if such help were prevented? A bold revolutionary policy on the part of the Catalonian proletarian organizations would mean that Blum and Stalin would be compelled to act or suffer the consequences. And would Mussolini and Hitler attack a Catalonian Workers’ Republic? Undoubtedly! But then the only way, following the logic of the reformists, to prevent such an attack, is to consent to remain under capitalist slavery.
Revolutionary Marxists readily grant all the difficulties in the way: the readiness of both the fascist and “democratic” capitalist powers to pounce upon a workers’ government; the hesitation and treachery of many a working-class leader. But is there any way out other than by a reliance upon the class war on an international scale? Any other path means remaining under capitalism with its inevitable danger of fascism. There are no guarantees of victory but they who are opposed to a bold revolutionary policy guarantee defeat.
 



JUDGED by every standard, the Institute which met at Chicago for three days (Feb. 20–22) under the auspices of the Socialist Appeal has a significance which no revolutionary Socialist can fail to recognize, The number present, the social composition of the delegates, the important role which many of them play in class struggles throughout the country, the spirit of those attending the Institute – both as delegates and visitors –, the high level of the discussion, the character of the resolutions adopted, all just tied the feeling of everyone present that a remarkably effective and successful gathering of left wing Socialist had taken place.
And all this in Spite of the fact that less than twenty days elapsed between the publication of the call for and the holding of the Institute. It must be remembered that only after all efforts to hold a united left wing conference had been exhausted was it decided by the Appeal Association of Chicago to conduct an institute. No one had in mind the calling of an Appeal Institute; it was taken for granted by practically everyone interested in the organization of the left wing forces prior to the party national convention that a united left wing conference of some kind would be held. Irreconcilable differences on the method of calling such a conference made it essential for some group to take the initiative in preventing complete disorganization of the left wing prior to and at the convention. The Chicago Appeal Association took the initiative and it must be admitted that few, if any comrades, had great hopes for a fair attendance. The time was too short for adequate preparation; the season of the year made attendance more difficult; there were no organized groups outside of Chicago; it was too close to the national convention. Under the circumstances the presence of thirty-five delegates would have been considered a good attendance.
A few days before the Institute it was estimated by the optimists that close to seventy five delegates would attend. No one dreamed that one hundred and eight delegates would register and had it not been for comrade Abern’s abilities in handling the technical side of the Institute there would have been considerable confusion. As it was the feeding and housing of the delegates reached a high degree of efficiency and set a standard for all conferences to emulate.
Twelve states were represented at the Institute. California comrades were unable to attend but sent greetings and financial support. About seventy five of the delegates were participants in some form of mass work. The steel, automobile, railroad, electrical, trucking and rubber industries were represented; many were active in the unemployed movement. That the most revolutionary section of the Socialist party could bring together under such adverse circumstances a group of comrades of the type represented at the Institute is of great significance and certainly furnishes encouragement to those comrades who see in the left wing of the Socialist party the hope of the revolutionary movement. And most encouraging of all was the fact that the so-called “natives” as contrasted with the members of the former Workers’ party, were present in substantial numbers.
As is most proper in any gathering of revolutionary Socialists the Institute was opened by an address on the international situation, by Max Shachtman. That gave the tone to all of the sessions of the Institute in the sense that all of the problems discussed and analyzed were done so with the understanding that we are part of an international movement and that we must help build an international revolutionary force. After Shachtman’s analysis of the forces at work on the international scene the writer reported on The Road Ahead, the platform, published in the December 15 issue of the Appeal. An exceedingly heated and interesting discussion followed the report.
 
Clarity Group Represented
To the Institute, as observers, came comrades Herbert Zam and Frank Trager, representing the Socialist Clarity group. Since Zam and Trager furnished the elements of controversy in the Institute a vote of thanks is due them for making the Institute more interesting than it would otherwise have been. As much time was given to Zam to speak against the platform as was given the writer to report in its favor. Comrade Zam took up most of his time in his first speech with the internal situation and only after that fact was pointed out by subsequent speakers did Zam in rebuttal launch into a criticism of the Appeal platform.
Zam’s criticism of the platform revolved around two alleged defects. One, that it was not sufficiently complete in that it failed to treat such fundamental questions as the dictatorship of the proletariat, the road to power; it did not give a full position on the Labor party question or on the International question. The other defect dealt with the attitude of the platform to opposing working class parties. This attitude was labelled as coming close to the theory of social-fascism. Zam did his best but he had such a difficult position to defend that his best was hardly effective. No wonder he spent most of his time on the question of the attitude of the comrades responsible for the platform and not on the platform itself.
Is the platform incomplete? If it be considered as a programmatic document formulating answers to all the theoretical problems confronting the revolutionary movement it is of course incomplete. But it was not intended to be such a document. The platform itself speaks of the adoption, in the future, of such a fundamental program which will “proclaim the historical necessity of the workers’ dictatorship as the only means for the conquest of power, as the only guarantor for genuine workers’ democracy and the only weapon for the attainment of socialism.” But this is not the purpose of the platform nor is the party or the left wing prepared to adopt a correct program on all fundamental questions. The purpose of the platform was a much more modest one: to point out the general direction in which the party should travel, to indicate the immediate problems confronting the party and the left wing and in a general way to point to the proper solutions of these problems. The platform is a document of minimum demands, so to speak, for the purpose of rallying all of the genuine left wingers around it. As such a document it is complete in every sense of the word.
Necessarily not all questions of immediate importance were treated in the platform with the necessary detail. The problem of the People’s Front, the question of Spain were left for further analysis in the spirit of the platform. And in so far as these two problems were given separate treatment they make the platform more complete and more correct. No one claimed that the platform said the last word on all the questions that it mentioned. But it did indicate an attitude to those questions and that was its purpose and no more.
 
Appeal Platform “Incomplete”
A great point was made by Zam and Trager about the fact that the supporters of the platform at the Cleveland convention insisted that the question of the road to power be included in the election platform whereas they did not treat that question in the Appeal platform. Such an argument is inexcusable. The election platform of the party had an altogether different purpose. In addition to pointing out to the working class the immediate problems confronting it and their solution it should have educated the workers in the most fundamental of all problems – that of the gaining of power by the workers. The Appeal platform is a document intended for the party members and especially for the left wingers, indicating the immediate problems confronting the party. In such a document it would have been the height of scholasticism to include a dissertation on the road to power.
It is not denied that the platform does not deal with the questions of the Labor party and of the international relations of our party in an exhaustive manner. These problems were treated so sketchily with a definite purpose in mind. The framers of the platform wanted to formulate a document acceptable to all left wingers and since there are vital differences of opinion on the Labor party question and on the International question it was felt that these questions should be formulated in a way as not to exclude any left winger.
At the Institute it was clear that the majority of delegates favored a resolution on the Labor party which would oppose categorically the idea that it is the duty of Socialists to help create a reformist Labor party. But it was made clear that the resolution on the Labor party was not “mandatory,” that is, that the delegates did not make the acceptance of such a resolution a condition precedent to joining the Appeal Association. A party member can join the Appeal Association and feel absolutely free to propagate ideas with reference to a Labor party which are contrary to the ideas formulated in the resolution so long as they are in agreement with the formulation of the Labor party question found in the Appeal platform.
The same is true of the international question. No resolution on that question was adopted but comrade Burnham in his report stated the views of the majority when he favored the idea of a complete break with the Labor and Socialist International. In this case also the question was not treated as a mandatory proposition. So long as any comrade is willing to accept the general formulation on the International question contained in the platform it is sufficient and he is not bound by the views of the majority.
To contend that the platform is incomplete is to assert that at this particular juncture of the development of our party it is necessary to say everything on every conceivable question in a platform intended to mobilize all the left wing forces. A proposition which no Marxist interested in the development of the left wing and of the party would be guilty of. No one who knows anything about the character of the APPEAL and the comrades supporting it will make the charge that we believe in concealing any of our ideas. We shall always state them openly but that is a different thing from making the acceptance of those ideas a sine qua non for the joining of a left wing group.
Nor did the charge that the platform tended towards the idea of social-fascism because of its attitude to opposing working class parties have any greater merit than the accusation that it failed to say everything on all questions. Do we and should we consider the Stalinist party as an enemy? Of course. But we must also consider it as a party of the working class, a party to which we must constantly appeal for united fronts on specific issues. This has nothing in common with the theory of social fascism. Nor would it be correct in the slightest to consider the rank and file members of the Stalinist party as enemies. But the Stalinist party as such, representing all that is poisonous in the revolutionary movement, is an enemy of any party that will attempt to play a revolutionary role. Some may be squeamish about the use of the word ‘enemy.’ We shall not quarrel with them so long as they agree that a revolutionary party must have an attitude of implacable hostility to the party representing the ideas of Stalinism and that if is necessary to say so in so many words.
 
“Right and Left Danger”
It was during the discussion on the Appeal platform that Zam and Trager attempted to justify the existence of the Clarity group with the contention that what the party required was a group of left wing Socialists to struggle both against the right and ultra left sectarian tendencies. Zam denied that he meant to indicate that the Appeal group is the sectarian ultra leftist group in the party. Why then should any group be organized with the purpose of fighting against sectarian tendencies? And why should the Appeal Institute be asked to come out with such a slogan? Because, according to Zam, there are indications of sectarianism in different parts of the country. Necessarily Zam had a hard time to point out any organized group with a sectarian policy and that is why it appeared absurd for him to raise the question. That there are sectarian tendencies on the part of individual comrades in the party no one cared to deny. But that these tendencies represented a danger to the party was a proposition so preposterous that no one could take it seriously. When Jack Altman and Paul Porter talk of sectarianism it is understood that they mean the revolutionary left wing but why should the Clarity group raise such a fictitious issue?
It was not difficult for the speakers on behalf of the Appeal platform to demonstrate that the only danger in the party is a danger from the right and that to fight that danger it is necessary for the revolutionary left to unite on a minimum basis. That the delegates to the Institute, at least, accepted the right danger as the only danger was made clear by the vote on the adoption of the Appeal platform. Seventy six voted for adoption and two abstained.
The resolutions on the People’s Front, on the Spanish Situation and on the Trade Union question were adopted without any differences appearing except on questions of formulation or on matters of secondary importance (the resolutions on the first two subjects were printed in the last issue of the Appeal. The amendments to these resolutions appear in this issue, as well as the resolution on the Trade Unions.) These three resolutions were the basic documents, together with the platform, adopted by the Institute. Basic in the sense that they were considered to be the resolutions which determined the political character of the Appeal group at the present stage of the development of the left wing of the party. It was not expressly formulated but it was clearly understood that the Appeal group would insist upon the acceptance of the basic principles contained in those resolutions for the entry of comrades into the grouper for the uniting of different groups into one left wing group. This does not mean that every formulation of the resolutions must be accepted but it does mean that every basic principle enunciated in the resolutions is considered essential by the Appeal group as a basis for any left wing. Nor does it mean that membership in the Appeal Association is confined to those who think that the resolutions are correct; a party member can join the Association with the idea of changing the resolutions but he must agree to be bound by them.
 
Resolutions Distinguished
As was indicated above, the attitude of the Institute on the Labor party and on the International question differed from its attitude on the People’s Front, the Spanish and Trade Union questions. On the Labor party a resolution was introduced (published in this issue of the Appeal) which gave the opinion of the majority of the delegates on that question but which is not binding on any one who is or wants to become a member of the Appeal Association. No resolution was introduced on the International question but comrade Burnham’s report was adopted as the basis for the formulation of a resolution by the incoming Action Committee and neither will that resolution be binding upon any member or would-be member of the Association.
Why should such a distinction be made? For the simple reason that a left wing should be built not on problems that appear to have no immediate relevancy to the issues confronting the party but on such problems upon which the party is called upon to take a definite stand at the next convention. Those of us who believe that it is not the function of Socialists to build a Labor party will continue to say so and say so in a manner which will not be misunderstood; at the same time we shall give our opponents the right to convince us that we are wrong and our opponents can be members of the group that we belong to. Everyone must however agree that it is the primary function of revolutionary Socialists to build a revolutionary party. Those of us who believe that the Socialist party should break with the Second International and proceed to take the initiative in forming a new revolutionary international will say so openly but we do not think that at the present moment it is an issue of such a character, although tremendously important, as to justify us in building a left wing group on the basis of that issue.
Next to the discussion on the Appeal platform the most interesting feature of the Institute was the report and discussion on the internal situation. Comrade Shachtman gave the report and if there was any doubt in the mind of any one as to the sincerity of the efforts on the part of the Appeal sympathizers of New York to create a united left wing group, it was dispelled after Shachtman finished. Tracing step by step the events which led to the formation of three separate groups in New York out of the Revolutionary Socialist Educational Society – the entry of the Workers’ party members into the Socialist party, their willingness to work amicably with the Militants, Altman’s underhanded obstructionist tactics, the creation of the R.S.E.S., the vacillation of the Zam-Tyler group, the final splitting of the R.S.E.S – Shachtman proved conclusively that the blame for the existence of two left wing groups must be placed on the lack of a principled struggle waged by the Zam-Tyler group against the right wing represented by Altman.
Trager replied and like Zam did the best he could but he had an incorrect position to defend and the best of us are helpless in such a situation. His best argument was that the Appeal Association of Chicago evidently believed in two groups. He did not realize that at the time the Appeal Association was organized there was no Clarity group in Chicago and only those who were known sympathizers of the Appeal were invited. The members of the Appeal Association in Chicago are now ready, willing and anxious to discuss the formation of a united group on the basis of the “mandatory” resolutions passed at the Institute.
To avoid any possibility of misunderstanding in the future a statement on the internal situation was drafted and adopted by the Institute. In addition to taking a clear position on the need for unity in the party and coming out definitely against the splitting tendencies of the right wing (which intends to use Trotskyism as an excuse to expel all left wingers) the statement reiterates the desire of the Appeal group for unity of the left wing forces and asserts that, if such unity is found to be impossible of achievement, the Appeal group is most anxious to co-operate with the Clarity group to struggle for the unity of the party and for pushing the party towards a revolutionary position. (The statement appears in this issue of the Appeal).
While not so spectacular, questions dealing with the problems of the party in mass work – A.F. of L., C.I.O., and unemployed – consumed as much time as the discussion on the internal situation. The charge that the Appeal group is composed of sectarians assumes ludicrous character in the face of the number of mass workers present at the Institute. But the Socialists who were present and who are active participants in mass work are also interested in theoretical questions. If there was ever a gathering composed of revolutionists who realized that in the revolutionary movement separation of theory from practice is fatal, it was the Appeal Institute. Not only were there reports on the work of Socialists in trade unions and unemployed groups; there were discussions organized by comrades who are active in different kinds of mass work. Not one important aspect of a revolutionary Socialist party was omitted from the various discussions.
From the Institute there emerged a national left wing. The Appeal Association was organized on a national basis. Branches of that Association are to be formed in every part of the country, based upon the positions adopted by the Institute on the questions which are considered to be the basis of a united left wing. A national action committee was elected to co-ordinate the work of all the branches and to formulate the policies of the Appeal which was recognized as the organ of the Association.
But nothing was stressed so much as the idea that the Appeal Association does not consider itself the only left wing group in the party. It is true that the Appeal Association has taken the lead in formulating a position on the important problems confronting the party; it has spoken out forcefully on behalf of unity in the party, on behalf of democracy and freedom of discussion without which there can be no real unity. We shall disdain to answer those people who think that we are maneuvering and that we come out for democracy only because we are in the minority and that should we gain the majority we shall sing a different tune. We depend entirely on the correctness of our position on all questions – theoretical and tactical. And we intend to depend upon the correctness of our position to defeat our opponents and not upon organizational measures. Let them who can not defend their ideas because they are incorrect have recourse to expulsion.
The Appeal Institute, if it has done nothing else, has shown that there is no longer any barrier between the members of the former Workers’ party and the revolutionary Socialists who have been in the party before the entry of the W.P. comrades. Out of nineteen members of the National Action Committee eleven were not members of the W.P. No one will deny the dominant role played at the Institute by the former W.P. comrades but it occurred to no one to make any distinction. In building a revolutionary left wing what counts are ideas and activity and not the past of any comrade or group of comrades.
It would be entirely wrong to claim that the problems of the party and the left wing have been solved by the Appeal Institute. Only a beginning was made; only the foundations were laid for a national left wing and upon these foundations it will be necessary to erect a solid structure in the form of a revolutionary socialist party held together by revolutionary theory and activity. To hammer out of our party a revolutionary instrument capable of leading the workers to ultimate victory is a task which will require time and patience. It is this task which the Appeal Institute has commenced in all seriousness. Basing itself upon revolutionary Marxism which necessarily includes theory and practice, firm in its insistence for unity, democracy, freedom of discussion and discipline in our party, the Appeal Association calls upon all left wing comrades to join its ranks or to co-operate with it in the work of building an effective revolutionary Socialist party.
 

t Goldman: Left Wing Will Not Allow Itself to Be Gagged by the Party Bureaucracy! (August 1937)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Left Wing Will Not Allow Itself to Be
Gagged by the Party Bureaucracy!
Declaration by Albert Goldman for the Left Wing at the Chicago
Membership Meeting in a Reply to Maynard Krueger’s Threats
(August 1937)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 1 No. 3, 28 August 1937, pp. 6–7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Comrades:
It would be idle to deny that we are approaching a very serious crisis in the life of our party, a crisis from which the party might emerge a complete wreck. A short while ago the Old Guard, composed of the most intransigent reformist elements, left the party but that only strengthened the party. We are confronted at present with a different situation, a situation which can be characterized as the beginning of an expulsion drive of the left wing section of the party. While the exodus of the Old Guard left the party free to develop in a revolutionary direction, the expulsion of the revolutionary left can serve the interests only of the Stalinists and the Farmer-Laborites.
A dispassionate consideration of all the factors involved in the present party situation, a willingness to face reality and a fearless determination to compel the right wing of the party and its allies, the centrists of the Clarity wing, to rescind the decisions that threaten to bring bitterness and chaos into the life of the party, might induce the NEC to retreat from its untenable position and thus save the party from the convulsions that are almost inevitable if the NEC persists in its reactionary course.
What led the NEC to pass this gag resolution; what were the factors that caused the NEC to take a step which is unauthorized by the party constitution or the decisions of the last or any other convention, which is in violation of all traditions of party democracy? I shall not go back further than the Chicago convention in order to enumerate the factors leading to the well-nigh fatal resolution, on the nigh fatal resolution, on the [line of text missing]
 
Convention Did Not Settle Problems
It was clear to any intelligent observer familiar with the political currents existing in the party that the Chicago convention held in the latter part of March did not succeed in bringing harmony into the party. The gap dividing the revolutionary left from the various types of reformists was not bridged because it could not be bridged. Between the Wisconsin type of municipal socialists and the Stalinist type of reformism and the social-service brand of socialism – tall of them representing the right wing – on the one hand and the revolutionary Marxists on the other hand, there could be no ideological peace. While at the convention the struggle between the combined right wing and the revolutionists did not come to a head it was clear that the convention did not resolve that struggle. Both sides left the convention with the feeling that the fight was to continue.
To expel the so-called Trotskyists was the aim of the right wing. Since that objective was not attained it can be said that the right wing suffered a defeat. Nevertheless the right wing won a major success and the left received a stunning blow through the suppression of the organ of the Appeal group. It is true that the delegates representing the Appeal group “consented” to the suppression of the Appeal but that “consent” came only as a result of the fact that they were in a small minority and they did not want to create any bitterness which would stand in the way of the peaceful penetration of their ideas amongst the ranks of the party.
To us the suppression of the Appeal was a tremendous blow because we revolutionary Socialists depend on our ideas to win a majority of the party to our side. Every other group depends upon the political backwardness of the party ranks – that is also true of the centrist Clarity group – whereas the revolutionary Marxists can expect no victories without educating the party membership in their ideas. For us a paper to spread our ideas is indispensable but we were willing to be deprived of it in the hope that we could do our educational work by word of mouth.
And now the NEC wants to take our right of educating the party members by word of mouth away from us. And that without any decision of a convention.
 
New NEC Unable to Weather Storm
The centrists or Clarityites obtained a majority on the NEC. That fact left the impression that the party could go ahead on a fairly even keel, under the leadership of a group that had control of the party machinery. No one of course expected that the party ship would sail along without encountering any storms; they were inevitable both from the right and the left but since the centrists had a safe majority they could easily weather the storms. So at least it appeared on the surface.
A closer analysis of the centrist majority in control of the NEC could easily reveal the cracks and fissures in that majority. The more competent observers predicted that these who were nominally in control of the NEC would be unable, in any serious crisis, to hold the reins tight and furnish firm and confident leadership. The Clarityite majority was too heterogeneus, too weak and vacillating, lacking in experience and ability, and above all without any firm Marxian foundation, to chart an independent course. A constant shifting from left to right and from right to left, a straddling of fundamental issues was to be expected from a group whose main stock in trade was an ability or a supposed ability to maneuver and horse-trade.
 
Our Forecasts Justified
The period immediately following the convention proved both of our major premises. One, that the ideological struggle between left and right was bound to continue and, two, that the centrist majority on the NEC would be helpless in any serious situation.
No resolution on Spain was passed at the convention; the arrangements were so bad that the most important problem before the convention was left unsettled. The NEC took it upon itself to formulate a resolution on Spain. It was a typically centrist resolution – “on the one hand and on the other hand”. It characterized the Caballero govern ment as a provisional revolutionary regime, uttered pious hopes about the necessity for going forward to socialism and in effect gave political support to the Popular Front regime.
The left wing was outraged at the resolution. It began a strenuous and systematic campaign throughout the party against it and the campaign met with great success. The success of that campaign infuriated the Stalinist section of the right wing led by Altman and scared the centrists.
 
Spanish Events Intrude
Events were unkind to the centrists. The ink on the Spanish resolution was hardly dry when the Barcelona workers were compelled to take up arms against the attempt of the Popular Front government to disarm them. The revolutionary left, although in political disagreement with both the anarchists and the P.O.U.M., supported them unconditionally against the counter-revolutionary attack of the Popular Front. The right wing defended the Popular Front; the centrists regretted the action of both the government and the workers of Barcelona.
We of the left wing had no hesitation whatsoever to give our support to the Barcelona workers. Long before the Call published articles on these events which showed that the aggressors were the parties of the Popular Front Government we characterized the events correctly. Not because we had any more information on the subject but because we had been following events in Spain from a revolutionary Marxist viewpoint.
Again the revolutionary socialists started a campaign and again we were successful. It goes without saying that a revolutionary Socialist could never keep quiet when revolutionary workers are being murdered by Stalinist and right wing Socialist butchers. We would be betraying the cause of revolutionary Socialism by our silence.
Around the question of the Spanish events the struggle became bitter, especially in New York. It is natural that in those sections of the party where Stalinist ideas are strongest the fight against the revolutionary left is most bitter. I do not claim that Altman belongs to the Stalinist organization. I do claim that in practice his political line is a Stalinist one. His friendliness to the C.P. is notorious as well as the fact that the C.P. never attacks him in its press. While in his political line he is Stalinist, in the inner party regime he has shown himself to be on the same plane as the Old Guard. The same maneuvers and the same tricks characterize his attacks as characterized those of the Old Guard. In his determination not to permit the left wing any opportunity to present its views and in his petty tactics to achieve the expulsion of the left wing he is not a whit inferior to the Old Guard.
Before the Chicago convention Altman undoubtedly favored the expulsion of the revolutionary wing of the party but he dared not raise the question openly. But after the left began its campaign on the Spanish resolution Altman and his followers no longer concealed their intentions. An insistent clamor came from them for the expulsion of the “Trotskyists”.
 
Norman Thomas’ Attitude
Nothing helped the Altmanites in their campaign for the expulsion of the left wingers as much as the attitude of Norman Thomas upon his return from Europe. Thomas’ attitude on the question of Spain was never very clear.
Just as his attitude on every crucial question is never very clear. His visit to Spain where he was the guest of leading figures of the Popular Front Government led him to come out more openly in favor of that government and to become far more critical of the revolutionists who were in opposition to the Loyalist government. His attitude to the workers of Barcelona who defended their right to bear arms showed clearly that in a crisis he would place himself in the ranks of those who are against the revolution.
No sooner did Thomas return from Europe than it became clear that his influence would be thrown in favor of Altman’s campaign for the expulsion of the left. I presume he felt there was no room in one party between half-hearted defenders of the Spanish assassins of the revolutionary workers and the bitter enemies of these assassins.
A factor of great importance in the events that led to the NEC gag resolution is the attitude of Wisconsin. There the party is to the right of social democracy. It was only an accident that caused Wisconsin to remain in the party instead of leaving with the Old Guard. With its comparatively large number of dues-paying members Wisconsin could always demand a price for remaining in the party. The centrists were at all times willing to pay that price.
The Hypocrisy of Krueger
You have heard comrade Krueger in his speech here make a firm statement with reference to his attitude to Wisconsin, to Altman and to the revolutionary left. Krueger is impartial and intends to keep all groups under control. What hypocrisy there is in that statement! Krueger, at this meeting, can talk big to Wisconsin and Altman but his real attitude to them is one of pleading and belly-crawling. It is only towards the left that he is really capable of turning a hard and ruthless first. That is characteristic of all centrists: a threatening voice and a soft hand to the right, blows in the face for the left.
When Wisconsin showed dissatisfaction with the policy of the party on the C.I.O.-A.F. of L. struggle an agreement was reached that Wisconsin can interpret that policy to suit its own convenience. And undoubtedly Wisconsin’s threats to leave the party, unless the left was curbed, had a great deal to do with the adoption of the NEC gag resolution. To appease Wisconsin and to assure its remaining in the party the centrists were willing to muzzle the left. Between Wisconsin and the left wing the centrists choose Wisconsin.
The demoralization of the party under centrist leadership contributed a great deal to the decision of the centrists to muzzle the left wing. They who talk so much about activity and accuse the left of consisting of mere theorizers have not shown the least capacity to mobilize the party for any activity. It is really ridiculous to
hear Krueger accuse us of inactivity. As against Krueger himself the most inactive comrade of the left is tremendously active. But leave Krueger out. Take all those present at this meeting. I thought I knew the party comrades fairly well But it is surprising to see so many whom I do not recognize. The dead-wood of the Clarityites far outnumber the deadwood of the Appealites.
The stay-at-home Socialists are here ready to vote against the left.
 
Bankruptcy of National Office
What campaign did the National Office start since the convention? Did it attempt to mobilize the party membership on the great questions of the day on Spain, on the events in Russia, on the CIO strikes? The only activity that one is conscious of as emanating from the National Office is the drive to re-register the members. Now that in itself is not harmful but one can hardly escape the conclusion that the re-registration was decided upon because the party leadership did not know what else to do and hoped that by some miracle the re-registration would catapult the party into activity. I must also note the small shopkeeper method of raising funds by charging ten cents for every registration.
The centrist leadership was all too anxious to place the blame for its own inability to furnish leadership upon the shoulders of the left wingers whom the centrists accused of devoting too much time to inner-party discussion.
Let me recapitulate the factors which led the NEC, in desperation perhaps, to look for a solution in muzzling the left wing.

The profound differences in principle between the right wing of the party, composed of the Altmanites, Wisconsin and the social worker type following Thomas, on the one hand, and the revolutionary left, on the other.
 
The serious turn of events in Spain, the successful campaign of the left on the Spanish issue.
 
The bitter hostility of Altman against the left especially on the Spanish issue. The return of Thomas from Spain and his alliance with Altman.
 
The threat of Wisconsin to leave the party.
 
The demoralization of the party ranks immediately following the convention, under the leadership of the centrists.

It is an indication of the type of leadership we have in the party that it sought a solution for the difficulties confronting it in a gag resolution. If an intelligent leadership finds a substantial proportion of the membership in opposition to its policies it attempts either to convince the membership through argument or to isolate the minority by consolidating the majority around correct policies. People who cannot cope with the arguments of a minority have recourse to administrative measures even before any discussion and especially when they see the minority gaining ground. The centrist leadership did not attempt to argue with the left wing minority (actually the left wing represents a majority of the active membership); spurred on by the right, the centrists found their solution in the gag resolution. The force that joined the centrists with the right wing was fear of the left.
 
The Heart of the Gag-Law
The heart of the NEC resolution is contained in the following sentences: “All campaigns in the party against party decisions, policies or institutions must be halted immediately”. “While the present reorganization is going on, members are requested to suspend organized attempts to apply pressure for changes of policy and for the initiation of new policy.” “No campaigns against the decisions are allowable and those decisions are to take immediate effect”.
Now the decisions say nothing about the left wing. From a strictly legal viewpoint they apply to Wisconsin, to Altman as well as to the left wing. And Comrade Krueger went to great lengths to emphasize that point. But in effect the only ones against whom the decision will operate will be the left wingers First because they are the only ones interested in carrying out a campaign among the members on questions of policy and second because the right wing will use the decisions as a pretext to expel the left wing.
Comrade Krueger told you how insistent Wisconsin was in its attempt to induce the NEC to change or modify the convention resolutions on war and trade unionism. What does that mean in actuality ? Did Wisconsin carry on a campaign among the general membership of the party with the purpose of convincing the membership that the convention resolution was wrong and that a new one was necessary ? Needless to say that is not the method of Wisconsin. What the Socialists from Milwaukee did was to whisper in Krueger’s ear that a change is necessary in these resolutions or else ... and the “or-else” meant a threat. And I am quite sure that Krueger told the Wisconsintes not to worry, that everything would go along smoothly.
The revolutionary left operates in quite a different manner. If it is dissatisfied with any resolution or decision it immediately appeals to the membership; it carries on an agitation amongst the ranks in order to convince a majority of the correctness of its viewpoint. It is because the left wing carries on an agitation in the open, educating and convincing the membership, that the party leadership was so anxious to muzzle it.
 
Krueger Creates Straw Men
Here I want to mention something that is of great importance in showing that the NEC is trying to becloud the issue. Krueger spoke about the campaign of Wisconsin to change convention resolutions and decisions. And he thundered that neither Wisconsin nor Cannon, Shachtman and Goldman would be permitted to carry on an agitation for changing convention resolutions and decisions. It is so easy to create a straw man and then proceed to demolish him.
Let me ask comrade Krueger: what convention resolutions or decisions have we been camipaigning against? Let him name one. Not that we particularly like all of the resolutions and decisons passed at the convention and not that we think it is criminal to carry on an agitation against them. But the fact is that we have not said or done anything about any of the convention decisions or resolutions. On the contrary, we claim, and I think with some justification, that the NEC has violated the convention resolution on the People’s Front. Certainly the NEC has flagrantly violated the convention decision on the publication of an inner party organ.
Did not the convention decide that an inner party organ be published where all groups would find space for its articles? More than three months passed and not a trace of such an organ.
Why ? Because money is lacking, will be the answer of those responsible. But that answer shows how little the leadership is able to evoke sufficient enthusiasm amongst the membership so that money can be raised to publish necessary papers. But I suspect that it is not so much the lack of money as it is an indifference to a real discussion on vital problem and a fear that in any discussion the left wing will be most persuasive.
If there has been any violation of convention decisions it has been by the NEC and not by the left wing.
 
The Left Wing Has Been Disciplined
I want to emphasize the fact that is is not a crime to be opposed to a convention resolution and to carry on a theoretical discussion against such a resolution. In a revolutionary party where democratic procedure necessarily prevails there will always be discussion on all convention resolutions; what will be demanded of the minority is that it does not act contrary to any convention decision. I defy anyone to point out one instance where the left wing has acted contrary to any convention resolution.
What is in question is not a campaign against convention resolutions but against NEC resolutions on fundamental problems. Is the NEC resolution on Spain a convention decision? Is the NEC gag resolution a convention decision? Not by any stretch of the imagination!
By what authority has the NEC decided that its resolutions and decisions are to be immune from criticism by the membership ? Such a doctrine would mean that an NEC could violate all the fundamental principles of socialism with impunity. Such a doctrine would transform the party into a Stalinist monolithic party and that of course would mean the death of the party as a revolutionary force in the labor movement.
The NEC will be compelled to deal with many new and important problems and if the principle were to be recognized that it can decide on all problems regardless of the opinions of the membership then the party simply becomes an instrument to execute the decisions of the NEC. A revolutionary Socialist, any kind of Socialist with an independent mind, cannot accept such a perverted view of the nature of the authority of the NEC in a socialist party.
 
The Question of Mass Work
According to the resolution itself it is motivated by a desire on the part of the NEC to have the party turn its face to the masses and to carry out the decisions of the convention. Let us analyze these concepts.
No one can possibly object to the necessity of doing mass work. The party leadership connects that necessity with and makes that work dependent upon a cessation of inner party discussion, or better, of any campaign against NEC decisions. At the present moment there are three fundamental problems around which the party should conduct a campaign both amongst its members and its sympathizers as well as amongst the workers in general. They are: the Spanish struggle, the slaughter of the revolutionary forces in Russia and the great battles of the
C.I.O. in this country. Upon all of these problems there are serious differences of opinion and it stands to reason that no mass work can be done without first convincing the membership of the correctness of the NEC policies on these fundamental questions. What shall we tell the masses; around what ideas shall we mobilize them? Around the ideas of the NEC, according to the party leadership. What role should the party play in such a mobilization ? That of mere followers. Such a concept can never set the party into activity and in fact the decisions of the NEC will prove that far from mobilizing the members for active work it will paralyze the party and no work will result.
It is because the NEC does not want the revolutionary viewpoint upon the important problems confronting us to prevail that the gag resolution was promulgated. The NEC, to cover up its inability to furnish any leadership, simply enters an order that mass work be done without attempting to win the party members over to its conception of mass work, assuming that it has any kind of conception on that subject.
 
In Activity We Yield to No-one
Once more I want to label the statement made by our opponents that the revolutionary left wants to make of the party a mere debating society as a complete falsehood. Need I mention the fact that there are party members active in Indiana Harbor in the steel strike? And all of them are members of the Appeal tendency. Take the Appeal group as a whole and take any other group in the party and it will be readily ascertained that amongst the Appeal group there is a much larger proportion of activists. Not that I am satisfied. I recognize our weaknesses but I say that our group is much stronger from the point of view of participation in the class struggle than any other group. The difference is that we insist on having our activity based on revolutionary theory.
Nor is the contention that we must now carry out the convention decisions any more correct than the cry that we must do mass work and not discuss. One does not and cannot carry out a convention resolution by repeating the words of the resolution. A resolution can be carried out only by applying its principles to the events of the day. A resolution indicates a general policy and direction and it is up to the leadership to apply that resolution correctly. And should something occur which is not covered by any resolution, should the NEC refrain from taking opposition on it? Of course not. It must take the best position it knows how and then be ready to defend it before the membership. At the time of the convention no one knew that events in Barcelona would take such a sharp turn. The NEC was nevertheless obligated to formulate a correct attitude on those events and the membership is justified in criticizing the incorrect attitude of the NEC.
But would we not be constantly arguing and thus prevent the doing of any work? Even granting that there would be considerable discussion and even granting that such discussion would interfere with activity, still there is no way to escape it. But it is absurd to contend that discussion interferes with activity to such an extent that it should be abolished. What activity on Spain would there be if there were no discussion? Activities can result, in the long run, from correct policies and not from a prohibition of discussion.
The method chosen by the NEC to develop activity shows its inability to grasp the necessity of convincing the membership. Ideologically, I repeat, if the NEC finds a substantial number opposed to its policies it must either revise them or be prepared to show the majority that its policies are correct and thus isolate the minority if it persists in its opposition too long. There is no other way for a party to function. A party develops in struggle – participation in the struggle of the workers, struggle against opponent parties, struggle within its own ranks. He who fears the struggle must step out of the revolutionary movement.
The sections of the resolution dealing with the support of the Call, the regulation of meeting’s and of the sale of literature are not in themselves bad but indicate the same tendency to settle problems by command. Take the question of the Call. It seems to me that if I were in the leadership of the party and the party organ would not be supported I would either change the nature of the organ or educate the party membership to the correctness of the organ’s policy. But that is asking a little too much from the present leadership. I know only that obedience is due it and it must obtain such obedience by decree. No one questions the right of the NEC to ask that meetings be organized for the purpose of explaining the policy to the members. But it has gone further and practically ordered that no meetings be held except when it calls for them. If any one is acquainted with the Stalinist “enlightenment” campaigns he can see that the NEC has copied another leaf from the book of Stalinist monolithism.
 
Towards an Index Prohibitorum
The decision on regulating the sale of literature is obviously intended to prevent the revolutionary wing of the party from selling Trotsky’s books and pamphlets. What pettiness! Soon we shall have an Index Prohibitorum.
What will be the effect of this foolhardy, undemocratic resolution? Should it actually be carried into practice the end of the party as a living force can be be predicted with certainty. The communist movement can afford to be monolithic; its reformism and its intolerance of opposition weakens it somewhat but the effect is not visible. One of the inducements for workers to join the S.P. must be its democratic procedure; to it must be attracted all the independent revolutionary spirits. It is the freedom of discussion within the party that makes a revolutionizing of the party possible. Destroy that and you have simply a vest-pocket edition of the Communist Party. As such there is no place for it because it can have no historic function.
I do not think that the resolution of the NEC can be realized in practice. It is contrary to the constitution, the resolution and the traditions of the party. Here and there expulsions will result, especially in New York where Altman will use the resolution as a pretext to get rid of left
wingers. I do not think that a revolutionary Socialist can accent such a resolution. Is it conceivable that a revolutionary Socialist can keep quiet on the important struggles of the working class and on decisions of the NEC which violate all concepts of democratic procedure? I am not advocating a wholesale defiance of the NEC; I am just predicting that the NEC will have to expel every revolutionary Socialist from the party. In other words the NEC will have to destroy the party in order to compel a strict observance of its decisions.
Strictly construed this meeting is a violation of the decisions; strictly construed any attempt to initiate a referendum will be a violation of the decisions. Of necessity we shall institute a referendum and carry on a campaign in favor of rejecting the NEC decisions. Will that be construed a violation? I shall wait for the NEC to reply. If it will, then it means that the NEC is determined to split the party; it can mean nothing else.
 
Appeal’s Proposals For the Crisis
What do we of the Appeal group suggest and demand in order to avoid the catastrophe that is being threatened by the NEC resolution? We demand the restoration of party democracy which means the immediate rescinding of the NEC resolution. We demand the execution of the convention decision providing for an inner party organ where we can present our viewpoint. The delegates representing the Appeal viewpoint were induced to agree to the suspension of the Appeal on the promise that an internal party organ would be published. The failure of the NEC to provide for such an organ justifies us in resuming publication of the Appeal. We demand further that no expulsions of left wingers be tolerated. If the NEC fails to take drastic action to stop Altman from suspending or expelling left wingers, it will be conclusive proof that the NEC is intending to split the paity. No arguments of a technical nature will help the situation. At least the NEC must come out with a blast against those who are expelling comrades and refuse to recognize the expulsions because in reality the expulsions are for the purpose of destroying the left wing movement.
These demands are the minimum for the restoration of peace in the party, for the creation of an atmosphere where the left wing feels itself free to work for the revolutionizing of the party. If they are not granted then the onus for the chaotic conditions bound to ensue will rest upon the NEC.
Are these demands so unreasonable? Is it unreasonable to ask for democracy and freedom of discussion? Is it unreasonable that the NEC be asked to live up to the decision of the convention providing for an inner party organ? Is it unreasonable to ask for a stop to expulsions? To ask these questions is to answer them. All comrades of whatever viewpoint should endorse these reasonable demands. To build the party into a revolutionary instrument it is necessary to have freedom to propagate the ideas of revolutionary Marxism. And these ideas and the right to present them, the comrades of the Appeal group will never surrender.
 



The sudden decision on the part of the leadership of the Socialist Workers Party in favor of unity obligates us to attempt answering the question: will it work? Before the SWP leadership changed its position on unity, the answer to that question, although important, was not pressing. There was no use spending much time on it so long as we got no statement from the leaders of the SWP as to whether or not the theoretical and political differences between the two parties prevent fusion.
Ever since the question of unity was raised we have been basing our position in favor of unity on the proposition that the differences on political and organizational questions should not prevent unity. We contended that unity is demanded by the fact that the existence of two revolutionary parties with anti-capitalist programs that are almost identical and with immediate demands for the American scene that are practically the same is very confusing to the advanced workers of this country; it is demanded by the fact that unity would eliminate wasteful duplication, greatly strengthen our forces and create the possibility of growth which two parties fighting each other do not possess. It is, perhaps; this latter factor which is all-important. For if we were to concede that two separate parties could grow as fast as one united party, the advisability of unity, in view of the important political differences that exist, would be somewhat problematical.
If we assume, as we should, that the leaders of the SWP accept, at present, the same general propositions in favor of unity, it would appear that no obstacle to fusion exists and, hence, we should immediately proceed to unification. Unfortunately there are factors the existence of which prevent the problem from being as simple as all that.
It was only in November of last year that a convention of the SWP was presented with a document prepared by the Political Committee of that party, enumerating at least ten good and sufficient reasons which, in the opinion of the highest body of the party, demanded firm opposition to unity. If we were not the revolutionary scum of the earth, according to that document, we were certainly close to it.
The convention almost unanimously adopted a resolution against unity. It is true that the resolution, in addition to mentioning the political differences, also referred to the alleged lack of good faith on our part in proposing unity. But it is nevertheless also true that the overwhelming emphasis was placed on the question of political differences, real and imaginary.
One should not ignore the fact that the personal animosities aroused by the factional fight of 1940 and the consequent split, still exist; one should not ignore the fact that the very question of unity led to factionalism in the SWP and to an intensification of the strained relationship between the parties. We had previously proposed a period of collaboration as a means to get the membership accustomed to working together and thus help eliminate the prevailing animosities. There is nothing like a common picket line or a joint meeting or demonstration to show that the ideas which unite us are at least just as powerful as those which divide us. The acceptance of the idea of a period of collaboration prior to unity is under the circumstances absolutely essential and we consider it a good omen that the SWP leaders have agreed to this idea.
Collaboration, although it can prepare the ground for unity, cannot assure a fruitful unity after fusion is accomplished. It would indeed be tragic if, immediately after unity a factional fight breaks out with the possibility of another split. A very frank discussion of all the main obstacles – political and organizational – to a fruitful unity is one way to prepare the ground for such a unity.
 
Political Differences – No Obstacle
That, to a certain extent, the political differences between us and the SWP are more serious now than they were at the time unity was first broached must be frankly recognized. We thought that for the SWP the question of the defense of Russia had receded into the background. But now the leaders of the SWP have shoved it way into the foreground. The question whether to support the Stalinist camp or the Mikolaczyk camp in Poland had not arisen when unity was first proposed. Once more we must examine and see whether any of the political questions is likely to give rise to a bitter factional dispute.
Only insofar as the question of the nature of the Russian state has a bearing on the question of the defense of Russia can it cause any heated controversies. Within the Workers Party, there are three viewpoints on this question and there is not heated controversy about it because we all are opposed to the defense of Russia.
From the point of view of a possible factional struggle the question of the defense of Stalinist Russia, is far more serious than the question of the nature of the Russian state. As I said before, one of the premises of the resolution on unity was the conclusion of the SWP, after the Stalinist army was on German soil, that the slogan of defense had receded into the background. The SWP leaders, have pushed that slogan into the foreground and are of the opinion that a war of the capitalist nations against Russia is imminent.
Nevertheless the WP is of the opinion that, taking all the circumstances into consideration – and among them are the improbability of an early conflict between Russia and the Anglo-American coalition as well as the advantages of unity, it is better to unite, even though unity may mean the necessity of refraining from voicing our opposition to Russian imperialism in public, during a war.
A serious difference that did not exist at the time when the resolution on unity was first introduced by the SWP minority is the one dealing with the “Polish” question. It is clear that should any civil war break out between a Stalinist government such as exists in Poland and a nationalist movement led by bourgeois democrats, having the support of the majority of the workers and peasants, we would give critical support to the struggle for national independence and bourgeois democracy against Stalinist totalitarianism. The SWP would advocate support of Stalinist totalitarianism. On this question, as on the one involving the defense of Stalinist Russia, the comrades of the WP recognize that they are now in the minority and if they should continue to be in the minority they are willing to take the consequences, that is they are willing to refrain from advocating their position in public.
As convinced as I am that defending Stalinist totalitarianism in any way, shape or form is a crime against the socialist revolution, I am of the opinion that a split is not justified on this issue, primarily because it does not directly concern the American working class. The American workers will not be set into motion by any slogan for or against the defense of Russia or Stalinist Poland. I think a slogan in favor of defense disorients the advanced workers on the question of the nature of socialism but it is far from fatal. The American workers will be mobilized on questions that deal with .the American scene or they will not be mobilized at all. If they should be mobilized on the question of war it will not be on the question of a specific war against Russia.
An exceedingly important tactical difference which stems from a difference in outlook on the Russian state and on Stalinism is the one dealing with the attitude we should assume to the Stalinists in this country – especially in the trade unions. The SWP generally favors support of and united fronts with the Stalinists as against those who might be called social-democrats (Reuther). The WP takes a contrary position.
A united front with the Stalinists, in the generally accepted meaning of a united front, presents no great problem for the simple reason that the Stalinists would not enter into united fronts with Trotskyists. In the unions, however, there are situations where rank and file Stalinists are willing to enter into agreements with us. In such cases there may be a controversy as to the desirability of an agreement in a particular situation but I visualize no great difficulties in dealing with the general problem. Supporting Stalinist candidates in elections is a more serious problem, but here too the WP comrades are willing to assume the burdens of a minority.
The above differences constitute the most important ones. When the Workers Party declares that it is for unity it means that the members have considered the question and are willing to assume the responsibilities of a minority until such time that they will convince the majority of the united party to their ideas of correct theory and political strategy. The differences that have been enumerated are, by themselves, no obstacle to unity, in the opinion of the Workers Party.
 
Organizational Differences
It is well known that the differences in organizational theories and practices between the SWP and our party add up to different concepts of the nature of a revolutionary party. Both parties believe in the principle of democratic centralism but so differently do they define this idea and apply it in practice that it offers a particularly good illustration of the meaninglessness of a general principle under certain conditions.
Are the practical or theoretical organizational differences likely to become serious barriers to a fruitful unity?
In recent conversations with the leaders of the SWP with reference to unity we were told that a condition of unity is that we refrain, after unification is achieved, from discussing disputed questions subsequent to a decision on them by an Extraordinary Party Convention. We deem it necessary to point out that in our party there is no such stringent rule and that we consider it the best practice to leave the door open for discussion even after a convention and a decision.
This does not mean that we do not accept the general principle that a convention decision on a disputed question ends the discussion until the next convention. We accept that rule as a general principle and apply it so that anyone who thinks he has anything new to say can continue to discuss the question in an educational manner.
It is necessary to make a distinction between a pre-convention discussion during which questions are discussed as part of the routine of the branch for the purpose of a convention decision and a post-convention discussion where those who think they have something new to add are welcome to do so in the form of articles in a discussion bulletin or even in the theoretical magazine. Nor is there a hard and fast rule that a discussion cannot be held in a branch on any question previously decided upon by a convention. We leave that matter to a decision by the branch. A point of order to rule out a discussion on a question because of a convention decision would be laughed out of court by the vast majority of our members.
It is also necessary to make a distinction between a theoretical question a decision upon which does not require a specific action and a question where a decision does require such action. A resolution adopted by a convention on the nature of the Russian state does not mean that a member is not permitted to write or speak on that question before the next convention. As a matter of fact, articles have appeared in our monthly magazine arguing for a position contrary to the one held by the majority of our party. We do not favor the idea that our members should stop thinking and writing about the nature of the Russian state because a majority at a convention voted for a certain concept of that state.
Nor do we see any valid reason far putting a stop to a discussion even on such a question as the defense of Russia. Such a course might be justified when there is a war against Russia but not when the slogan is essentially one for the future.
The general rule that is accepted by the majority in our party is probably the following: that discussions should be permitted on questions that have been decided so long as they do not interfere with some party campaign or action resulting from the decision. Even that rule is only a very general one and should not be applied strictly.
New events are constantly occurring; must one get the permission of the National Committee to discuss them? Only if one wants to raise a discussion for the purpose of having the party call a convention to decide the question. In such a case it is necessary to follow the constitutional provisions for the calling of a special convention. But if one simply wants to discuss the significance of some new event and others want to answer and participate in the discussion they should all be encouraged to do so.
To use the sharpest possible phrase and one which may be utilized against us, we can say that we believe in “permanent discussion,” in the sense that we believe in a party where every member feels obligated to give thought to all the problems confronting us and to express his thoughts in writing or in speech. Does not discussion interfere with practical activity? To a certain extent it probably does. But discussion is part of the work of the party and just as necessary as the “practical” part of party activities. Here and there someone in the party discusses to an excess; here and there someone becomes impatient with any discussion, But these are exceptions and we can say without boasting that in our party there is an exceedingly healthy attitude to the problem of discussion as an essential part of party activity.
And the difference between the parties is not only that we have a far greater freedom of discussion; our discussions are of a far freer nature than those in the SWP. We take seriously the idea that Marxism is not a dogma but a guide to action: that it is a method of analyzing social relations and not a set of beliefs to be repeated over and over again. As a result, tradition does not play as much of a role with us as it does with the SWP. As a result, there is far less reliance on quotations from Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky. There are no looks of astonishment and disapproval if some comrade questions the correctness of the great teachers of socialism. An independent, critical attitude is respected and not met with sneers and jeers. We firmly believe that the spirit of Marxism is nothing if it is not critical.
 
Factions and Factional Organs
On the question of the right of a group of members to organize a faction and to issue a factional organ, our party accepts Trotsky’s position as he propounded it in an article in The New International of October, 1939. We believe that it is best to avoid the creation of fractions but we consider that the best method of preventing the creation of factions is to offer such freedom of discussion that serious comrades will think a long time before organizing a faction.
In the article mentioned above, Trotsky does not specifically state that he believes in the right of a faction to issue its own organ whenever it wants to do so. But that is clearly implied.
It seems as if the leadership of the SWP takes the position that permission must first be obtained before a faction can be organized. Or it believes that a faction can be organized but it cannot issue its own organ without permission. This is clearly reversing the traditional position of Bolshevism on the question of factions. In 1921 the Russian Bolshevik Party prohibited factions. Regardless of the correctness or incorrectness of the policy adopted, it shows that the normal procedure was to permit factions. It was only the exceptional conditions of the time that led Lenin to go to the extent of prohibiting factions. Trotsky constantly stressed the fact that this was an exceptional measure. To make a rule of what everyone considered an exception is to violate the letter and spirit of Bolshevism.
There are a number of differences on the organizational question which may not be so important as the ones already mentioned but which clearly indicate different views of the nature of the party.
In our party I feel free to write a letter criticizing the position taken by an editorial in our press. In one instance I have actually done so. This is out of the question in the SWP, where a leading comrade is not supposed to disagree openly with the line of an editorial or even with the line of another leading comrade.
In the SWP, articles from a minority viewpoint can appear in the theoretical organ only on stated occasions (very infrequent ones). In our party such articles can appear at any time. In the SWP, a discussion bulletin is marked “For members only” and the secrecy of the internal discussion bulletin is jealously guarded. We, on the contrary, take the position that we have no political secrets from anyone, especially the masses. Our discussion bulletins are open to everyone interested.
In our party, a member who does not believe in the correctness of the theory accepted by the majority is under no obligation to defend that theory in public. He is only required not to agitate for his own theory in public. I do not accept the theory accepted by the majority of our party that Russia is a bureaucratic collectivist state. I have no hesitation in my public lectures to state that fact. Such an honest attitude to none party people is almost incomprehensible to the large majority of the SWP comrades.
There are tendencies to leader-worship in the SWP which would not be tolerated for one moment in the WP. A recent example of placing the leader in a separate and higher position is to be found in the manner in which a serious mistake made by a Militant editorial was corrected. An editorial appeared in The Militant calling Ruth Fischer an informer because she told the truth about the GPU agent Eisler before a Congressional committee. After almost six weeks of silence an editorial article appeared, written by Cannon, admitting that a mistake was made.
Why was it necessary for Cannon to write and sign the article correcting the mistake? Was not the proper procedure to have an editorial correcting the mistake previously made through an editorial?
Is it not implied, by having Cannon write a special editorial, that the leader of the party is not implicated in the mistake previously made? Is there not the implication that only an unknown editor is capable of making such a mistake?
I am certain that in our party a mistake, if made in an editorial, would be corrected in the same way, or by a statement of the Political Committee.
 
An Essential Condition to a Fruitful Unity
Are any or all, of the organizational differences so serious that they would threaten unity after it is achieved? The answer is an emphatic negative, provided

the minority is willing to abide by the decision of the majority during the time it is trying to win a majority to its side, and
the majority does not prevent the minority from leading a free ideological life of its own.

The second point needs further explanation. For good or ill, the WP consists largely of a group of revolutionists intensely interested in all of the many serious problems confronting the revolutionary movement. To expect them to retire into the background and to keep silent simply because a convention decided against them is to insult their intelligence and revolutionary integrity.
The WP is willing to abide by the decision of the Extraordinary Party Convention on all of the questions raised above -political and organizational. The members of the WP are assuming the risk that the Extraordinary Party Convention will decide against them on all of the questions upon which there are differences. For the sake of unity and the advantages to be derived from it they are willing to assume that risk, in the hope, of course, that they will succeed ultimately in winning over a majority to their conceptions.
When unity was first broached the WP declared its willingness to abide by the decisions of the majority. In that respect there has been no change whatever in the position of the WP. At that time the WP demanded only the recognition of the right of a minority to issue its own bulletin and was willing to promise not to exercise that right for a period. It does not make that demand now because the SWP has gone on record in favor of unity and the WP is therefore willing to abide by the decisions of the Extraordinary Party Convention.
In order to achieve unity and to retain it afterward they are willing to run the risk of temporarily (they hope) giving up those freedoms which they consider precious in the internal life of a revolutionary party. But this does not mean that they expect to be asked that they should remain silent, even among themselves.
If the majority of a party does not want to discuss, a minority would be foolish to force them to discuss. No one can be compelled to discuss. But a minority that wants to discuss problems should not and cannot be prevented from doing so.
In practice that means that the majority must provide the minority with a medium for discussion. Specifically it means that the majority of the united party must publish an internal bulletin where all articles written by minorityites and rejected for publication in the open press can be published. The majority members are not obligated to read those articles and there is no obligation on the part of any branch to discuss any questions. But all those who want to read and discuss must be afforded an opportunity to do so.
We do not expect any controversy whatever before the Extraordinary Party Convention on this question. We confidently expect that the convention will give us much more than that.
To the question: will unity work? the answer is: it will surely work if the minority has decided to abide by the decisions of the majority, hoping through persuasion to win the majority. It will surely work if the majority will bend backward to provide the minority with all the opportunities to discuss all questions, at least among themselves. We can say for the minority that it has decided to abide by the discipline of the majority. We expect the Extraordinary Party Convention to guarantee the minimum which will make the minority feel free to discuss the important problems confronting the movement.
Albert Goldman
 



Editor:
... “those of the bureaucratic collectivists who argued.”
In the great controversy between Max Shachtman and Ted Grant (see The New International, Feb. 1947) as to whom the above clause refers to, I want to be recorded as voting for Comrade Grant
It should be clear to everybody that the word “those” singles out a group of bureaucratic collectivists and indicates that not all of the proponents of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism have the same arguments. The past tense of the word “argue” indicates that the argument occurred in the past.
If Comrade Grant’s sentence is not clear to some people it should certainly be clear to those who followed closely the 1940 controversy. When I read the sentence I unhesitatingly took it for granted that Grant referred to Trotky’s comment on Bruno R. It never occurred to me that he referred to Shachtman.
The fact that Bruno R. is a mysterious person is completely immaterial. By the way, his book, if I am not mistaken, can be obtained at the New York Public Library. The fact that “those” is plural is also immaterial since Grant has the right to assume that Bruno R. had at least one follower.
There is nothing for Max Shachtman to do except to admit having made a mistake – in fact two mistakes: one in his original comment and one in the rebuttal.
And please do not permit him to make the same mistake for a third time.



 


Comradely,
Albert Goldman






The consequences of the victory of the Stalinist army have been so
devastating to the socialist revolution that one would expect the
entire Fourth International to give up the slogan of defense without
extended discussion. But so great is the power of a formula created
by a master, even when the master himself paid little attention to
formulae, that it becomes next to impossible to tear the blind
followers away from it.
To defend Stalinist Russia means not only to offer an explanation
of what we are defending but also, wherever possible, to help the
Stalinist army gain victory. This course was perhaps justified when
we did not know the actual results that would follow from such a
victory. After these results stare us in the face, to help the
Stalinist army gain victory means, regardless of our intentions, to
share in the responsibility for the crimes of Stalinism, resulting
from that victory. It is, to say the least, criminally reckless, to
wish and work for the victory of ah army which is nothing but the
instrument of a group desiring to increase the number of people under
its oppressive rule.
It is unnecessary to elaborate on the consequences of the
Stalinist victory. The most important single factor in preventing the
socialist revolution in eastern Europe was the Russian army. Because
of that victory the strength of the Stalinist parties in western
Europe has been greatly enhanced and the failure of the socialist
revolution to develop in France and other western European countries
can be attributed to the fact that the. workers followed the
Stalinist parties. The victory of the Stalinist army meant the
plundering and looting of eastern Europe and Manchuria; it meant
forced labor and death for millions of German, Polish, Balkan, Baltic
and Japanese workers and peasants.
Expressing their regrets at the consequences of the victory of the
Stalinist army, the official theoreticians of the Fourth
International cling to the formula of Trotsky about nationalized
property and base themselves entirely on that formula. Comrade
Germain writes about the “brilliant” results achieved by the
Stalinists in rebuilding the devastated portions of Russia and barely
mentions the millions of slaves who make these”brilliant” results
possible. These are people who have not advanced on: step since
Trotsky wrote The Revolution Betrayed. They continue with the
pattern created by him and differ only in their figures on production
and consumption.
Perhaps these theoreticians would learn if they had the
opportunity to present the theories and their figures to the
miserable slaves in the. Stalinist concentration camps. Or will It
require the occupation of Belgium and France by Stalin’s
“liberating army” before they get some practical lessons on
Russian economy and production relations? Let us hope they will not
have to go through this bitter experience.
 
Nationalized Property and Defense
Basically we based our defense of Stalinist Russia primarily on
the fact that nationalized property achieved by the proletarian
revolution still existed. We accepted without argument the
proposition that nationalized property is, in and of itself,
progressive as against capitalist property. To a certain extent
therefore our defense of nationalized property was implicitly
based on the proposition that the consequences of that form of
property are necessarily progressive.
Reality showed us that the results of the victory of the army
which defended nationalized property in Russia and the interests of
the bureaucracy were anything but progressive. viewing those results
from the standpoint of the interests of the socialist revolution. The
implicit assumption that the consequences of a “victory of
nationalized property” would be progressive was proved false by
events. They are not Marxists who fail to regard the actual course of
events and cling to a theory that has been proved false.
When we consider the events that have occurred since 1939 we
should be able to realize that Trotsky was mistaken when he
formulated the proposition that we must defend Stalinist Russia so
long as nationalized property exists. It is true that in his
discussions and arguments he implied that the defense of nationalized
property would be followed by progressive consequences. But the
formula itself did not include that thought. It is within the spirit
and method of Trotsky and all other great Marxists who insisted on
analyzing events and not clinging to a theory that we must now
proceed to correct the error made by Trotsky and accepted by us.
Our defense of the Soviet Union should not have been based solely
on the fact that nationalized property was still in existence but
also on all of the conditions under which nationalized property was
functioning. When we defended the Soviet Union in the days when Lenin
and Trotsky were guiding its destinies we did not do so because
property was nationalized. (For a short period it was not
nationalized.) It is far more correct to say that we defended the
Soviet Union at that time because the program and policies of the
Bolshevik party were leading the country in a socialist direction.
With the defeat of the Left Opposition representing the program of
October it became necessary at every stage to indicate the factors,
in addition to the existence of nationalized property, which made it
obligatory for us to defend the Soviet Union. The existence of the
traditions of October in the consciousness of the masses and the
possibility, therefore, of their taking advantage of a war to
overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy was an important factor in favor
of defense. So also was the expectation that a victory of the Russian
army would set the European Revolution into action.
It must be admitted that to regard the existence of nationalized
property as the basic and sole criterion for defense simplifies the
problem enormously. It is a criterion that is more objective than any
other and is more easily measurable. Introducing other factors such
as the existence of workers’ control and the traditions of October
in the consciousness of the masses complicates the problem of
defending or not defending Russia. But simplifying the problem does
not make for a correct solution.
Had Trotsky emphasized that nationalized property functions under
certain conditions and that some of these conditions must be taken
into consideration in determining our attitude on defense he would
have been far more correct.
Let justice be done though the heavens fall. This is the rule
followed by those who cling to the formula: Because there is still
nationalized property Russia must be defended, regardless of the
consequences. The rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy has of course
nothing to do with justice.
 
Possible Theories for Defense
What theory can possibly justify defense of a state when the
victory of its army leads to such dire consequences to the masses of
the defeated countries? If the victory of an army leads to robbery
and pillage, to the execution of the best representatives of the
socialist movement, to the forced labor of millions of people, what
possible theory is there to justify wishing and working for such a victory?
One can claim that the consequences resulting from the victory of
the Stalinist army are temporary in nature; that somehow or other
nationalized property under Stalinism will ultimately increase the
productivity of labor and due to that the masses will gain democracy
and thus place Russia and the Russian satellite states in the path of socialism.
That Trotsky never had that theory goes without saying. He stated
definitely that without the European Revolution Russia will return to
capitalism. The correctness of that theory may be questioned but what
cannot be questioned is that Trotsky never had a theory claiming that
Russia would return to the path of socialism by virtue of the
existence of nationalized property. (I am given to understand that
lately some French comrades have accepted some such theory. If that
is true they will in all probability capitulate to Stalinism completely.)
We based ourselves on the theory that only a socialist revolution
in Europe would give the Russian masses a chance for victory against
the Stalinist bureaucracy. Now it has been shown to those who have
eyes to see that a victory of the Stalinist army prevents a socialist
revolution in Europe. A successful revolution must be predicated
upon the defeat of the Stalinist army.
That the bureaucracy constitutes a burden upon the development of
the productive forces in Russia has been one of our chief tenets.
Strictly speaking there may not be sufficient evidence to conclude
that nationalized property under Stalinism cannot exceed the
productivity of labor reached by capitalism. All indications,
however, point to the truth of that conclusion. Certainly we are
justified in making the a priori statement that slave and
semi-slave labor cannot, in the long-run, be the basis of an increase
in the productivity of labor.
Another theory justifying defense is that the victory of a
capitalist army would lead to even worse consequences. It is indeed
difficult to envision worse consequences than those resulting from
the victory of the Stalinist army. Even the Jews had little to choose
between a victory of the Stalinist or of the Nazi armies. It is true
that the Jews do not generally suffer under the Stalinist regime
because they are Jews, but it is very little consolation to be given
the choice between death in the gas chamber and “life” in the
Siberian concentration camps together with non-Jews.
Certainly as between a victory for the Russian armies and one for
the democratic capitalist armies the choice, for the immediate
future, is all in favor of the latter. To those who present us with
the argument that a victory of the Nazis would have destroyed
completely the possibilities of the socialist revolution for
generations (and this is absolutely true) the answer is that it is
not the victory of the Stalinists that gave the European workers a
breathing spell but the victory of the British and American
imperialists. (It is not, I hope, necessary to state that this does
not mean that we should have supported the democratic imperialists.)
One must indeed be blind not to recognize that whatever independent
working class movement there exists at present in western Europe is
due largely to the victory of the democratic imperialists over Hitler.
Great emphasis has been and is being laid by those who follow the
old line of defense, on the argument that the victory of the
Stalinist army prevents the expansion of capitalist imperialism into
the territory now controlled by Stalinism. This argument was based on
the proposition that somehow or other nationalized property under any
conditions is to be preferred over capitalism under the most
democratic conditions. This argument had validity on the supposition
that the victory of the army defending nationalized property would
lead to progressive consequences from the point of view of advancing
the interests of the socialist revolution.
The consequences of the victory of Stalinism blasted that argument
to pieces and one must now change the theory to conform to the facts.
And the facts show that there are greater possibilities for the
socialist revolution in a democratic capitalist state than under a
Stalinist totalitarian regime. So long as democratic capitalism
lasts, so long have the workers some chance to organize and struggle
for the socialist revolution.
It is highly improbable that in case of a victory of democratic
capitalism over the Stalinist armies, capitalist property rebtions
would be re-established. But if they were and the Russian masses
would once more get a breathing spell the net result would be a gain
and not a loss for them. In the light of the probability of a war
between Russia and the United States and of the possibility of a
victory for the former the question must be posed: would the masses
under Stalinism be better off than they are under democratic
capitalism. Only those who see some mystical power in nationalized
property, which must ultimately lead to socialism regardless of
the totalitarian regime, can answer that question in the affirmative.
For those who do not believe in religion the answer must be that
there is as much chance for socialism emanating from the Stalinist
regimes as from a fascist regime.
Lenin, quoting Goethe, remarked that theories are gray but green
is the living reality. To cling to theories which are contrary to the
facts of life is not in line with Marxist tradition.
 
The Nature of Russian Economy and State
What is this monstrosity which is the result of the degeneration
of what was once a workers’ state?
The development of a social order, totally different from anything
we expected has necessarily given rise to sharp differences of
opinion as to its nature. People who base themselves on the same
general principles of Marx disagree in defining the nature of a
social order which has the characteristics. of everything bad that
has ever afflicted mankind.
We are somewhat in the position of scientists confronted with the
birth of a strange and unexpected specimen. Some conclude that it is
a totally new species and proceed to give it a new name; some insist
that it is very similar to something with which we are familiar and
insist that we have at least the name of the familiar species as part
of the name for the new arrival; the more cautious ones say that it
is necessary to wait and see what developments will take place in the
monster, before coming to a definite decision. Meanwhile let us call
it a degeneration of the species from which it sprang.
For those who have given up the idea of defending Russia the
question of what it is and what to call it is not of very great
importance. No matter what one calls it, it is bad for the human
race. An explanation of its origin is important and most of us,
regardless of the differences we have on the nature of the Russian
state, accept Trotsky’s explanation for its origin. We look at the
monstrosity and in the main agree that it has certain aspects and
functions in a certain way. Above all, we agree that the bureaucracy
or class in power should be overthrown and the political and economic
life of the country be placed under the control of the workers.
Nevertheless the theory that we accept as to the nature of the
Russian state has some importance, as I shall try to show.
It must first of all be recognized that only two theories of its
nature settle the question of whether or not to defend Russia without
any further examination. The Stalinists have no problem of defense
because they consider Russia a workers’ state. Those who consider
that capitalism as described by Marx prevails in Russia, except that
the state has replaced the capitalists, also have no problem of defense.
But if one accepts the theory that Russia is a bureaucratic
collectivist society or that it is a new social order that should be
designated as “state capitalism,” or that it is a degenerated
workers’ state the question of defense is not automatically solved.
What should determine our decision as to whether or not to defend it
is not the label or the theory but whether or not we consider the
economy and the conditions under which it functions as progressive.
 
Bureaucratic Collectivism
The fundamental proposition of the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism is that the Russian bureaucracy, constituting a new
class, owns the industries of that country, exploits the masses of
Russia and has launched upon an imperialist course to dominate and
exploit the masses of other countries.
The minority of 1940 in the Socialist Workers Party (the main
advocates at present of the bureaucratic collectivist theory) had
what then appeared to be an absolutely incorrect position, but which,
in the light of events, has proven to be the correct approach. The
comrades of that minority held that regardless of the fact that one
considered Russia a degenerated workers’ state it should not be
defended. This position was not elaborated and made clear but
essentially, as a method of approach, it was more correct than the
method of the majority which held to the theory that so long as
Russia was a degenerated workers’ state it must be defended.
It seems plausible to conclude that not the least important factor
which led the comrades of the minority of 1940 to adopt the theory
and label first suggested by the Italian Comrade Bruno R. was the
sharp criticism of Trotsky to the effect that they failed to take
into consideration the nature of the Soviet Union in arriving at
their position against defense.
As stated above, to consider Russia as a bureaucratic collectivist
state does not thereby solve the problem as to whether it should be
defended. As a matter of fact the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism, just as the theory of the degenerated workers’ state,
speaks for defense rather than against it. For if Russian society is
some form of collectivism it should be defended as against
capitalism. It can be readily seen that the question of defense
cannot be settled by calling Russia a bureaucratic collectivist state
but by an analysis of its economy, the conditions under which the
economy functions and the consequences that would probably follow
from a victory of its army.
A minor objection to the term “bureaucratic collectivism” –
an outlandish term at best – is that it distorts somewhat the
picture of the actual situation in Russia. Actually the state
property is not owned by all of the bureaucrats collectively; it is
owned by the state and the state is “owned” not by all of the
bureaucrats but by those on the very highest rung of the ladder of bureaucracy.
One must also remember that the term “collectivism” was used
in the socialist movement as a synonym for socialism. If one were to
propose to label that which exists in Russia “bureaucratic
socialism” many would object on the following grounds: (1) there is
no socialism whatever in Russia; (2) the phrase is a contradiction in
terms, for if there is socialism it cannot be bureaucratic, and (3)
why defile the term “socialism”? The very same objections are
applicable to the term “bureaucratic collectivism.”
The most serious objection to the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism is that it tends to raise theoretical difficulties in
the path of the struggle for socialism. Thus far we have based
ourselves on the theory of Marx that the class struggle under
capitalism will result in the victory of the working class and the
establishment of socialism. Bureaucratic collectivism revises that
theory and indicates that a system other than socialism, that is,
bureaucratic collectivism, is just as likely to follow capitalism. At
first it seemed as if the proponents of the bureaucratic collectivist
theory confined the new social order to Russia but with the spread of
Russian domination in eastern Europe it appears as if bureaucratic
collectivism is a serious rival to socialism as the system of society
that will replace capitalism the world over.
This implication in the theory of bureaucratic collectivism is
strengthened by the fact that those who hold that theory contend that
the bureaucracy in Russia is a class. If it is, then, for those who
accept the Marxist concept of a class, it should have a progressive
task in the development of the productive forces and should be
expected to retain its rule for a comparatively long period.
And what would follow the social order of bureaucratic
collectivism? It is indeed difficult to imagine socialism emerging
from the womb of bureaucratic collectivism. The very reason for the
existence of this new social order the world over would be the
inability of the working class to take and retain power. If it cannot
do so under capitalism which permits a certain degree of freedom for
the education and organization of the proletariat how can it reach a
high level of education and organization under a system which
practically enslaves the masses?
One can visualize great conflicts resulting from the national and
social oppression of the masses in a totalitarian society but it is
highly improbable that an educated socialist proletariat should
develop in a police state. And such a proletariat is essential for
the establishment of a socialist society. The perspective which the
theory of bureaucratic collectivism gives us is a bleak one indeed.
To revise Marx when events demand it is not only justified but
absolutely essential. Otherwise one is not a Marxist. The comrades
who insist that the theory of bureaucratic collectivism best explains
the conditions in Russia can surely claim that they are applying the
method of Marx, although rejecting a basic conclusion of the founder
of socialism. Comrade Shachtman has adequately answered the
theoreticians of the Socialist Workers Party on that score. (See Max
Shachtman’s article in The New International of April 1947.)
It is not because the theory of bureaucratic collectivism revises
a basic conclusion of Marx that it should be rejected; it is because,
by its revision, it raises possible theoretical difficulties in the
struggle for socialism that it should be rejected.
It may be argued that the theoretical difficulties are not the
fault of the theory but of reality. But if another theory explains
the facts just as well and does not raise the theoretical
difficulties that are implied in the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism, then such a theory is to be preferred. We can look at
the Stalinist bureaucracy and agree that what it does and how it acts
make of it the greatest enemy ,to socialism. We can call it by any
name we please and it will still act in the same manner. But if
calling it a “class” raises theoretical difficulties in the
struggle for socialism and calling it a bureaucracy avoids those
difficulties that is a good reason for calling it a bureaucracy. The
theory of socialism has for its purpose to achieve freedom for
mankind and unless there are compelling facts to revise it we should
reject every theory that revises it to the detriment of the struggle
for socialism.
 
State Capitalism
Most of those who accept the theory that state capitalism prevails
in Russia do so on the alleged ground that the economic system in
that country is essentially the same as in the United States or
England. According to them in Russia private capitalism has been
displaced by state capitalism – but all the laws of capitalism as
analyzed and explained by Marx continue to operate.
It is undoubtedly true that sections of the Marxist theory of the
functioning of capitalism can be made to apply to the Russian system
of exploitation. But we must view the theory of Marx as a whole and
we must view the Russian economic system as a whole. If we do that it
becomes clear that the Russian system of economy differs radically
from the system of capitalism analyzed by Marx. The Russian system is
in effect a new system of economy.
Many who claim that there is state capitalism in Russia and insist
that it essentially follows the same laws that operate in the
“classical” capitalist system use somewhat the following logic:
In Russia the law of value functions; there is accumulation of
wealth; misery prevails for the masses and a high standard of living
for the few, etc. The same conditions exist under capitalism.
Therefore Russia is capitalist.
In general it can be said that all of the aspects of Russian
economy which the theoreticians of state capitalism point to as
evidence existed in modified form in the early days of the Soviet
Union. The fact is that the ultra-lefts have used the same arguments
to prove that state capitalism existed under Lenin and Trotsky.
Stalin did not introduce the law of value into Russian economy; it
certainly operated in Soviet economy during the days of the New
Economic Policy. One of the reasons for the retreat of the leaders of
Bolshevism from war communism to the New Economic Policy was
precisely because they saw that they were wrong in their attempt to
do away with the law of value. During the period of transition
between capitalism and complete socialism the law of value will
operate to a certain extent even under the best of circumstances.
The difference between a Stalinist regime determined to defend the
interests of the bureaucracy and a Lenin-Trotsky regime striving to
achieve socialism lies partly in this: whereas under Lenin and
Trotsky there was an interference with the law of value for the
benefit of the workers, the Stalinists interfere with it to the
injury of the workers and in favor of the bureaucracy. It is most
probable that if the bureaucracy permitted the law of value to
operate freely the workers would benefit thereby.
To designate the economy of Russia as state capitalist on the
basis that it is practically the same as the capitalist economies
analyzed by Marx is to fly in the face of the facts and that is one
thing Marxists must never do. The ownership by the state of the means
of production and the abolition of competition on the free market
means the abolition of capitalism.
 
State Capitalism – A New Order
It may be possible, however, to contend that the Russian economy
represents a new social order for which the best name is “state
capitalism.” Those who hold this theory do not attempt to prove
that state capitalism exists in Russia by pointing to some laws of
Marxian economics which prevail also in Russia. They face the fact
that Russian economy is totally different from American or English
economy and simply assert that state capitalism is the best label for
the Russian economic system.
Between the proponents of this theory of state capitalism and the
advocates of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism there is a
difference only in label. They both agree that a new class rules in
Russia and a new social order – neither socialism nor capitalism –
exists in that country. There can be only a terminological conflict
between these two theories with the advantages all in favor of the
label “state capitalism.”
That the industries are owned by the state and that the state is
“owned” by the top layer of the bureaucracy are facts which speak
persuasively in favor of calling the Russian system state capitalism.
Also at present there is some indication that in Russia there is
developing a group living off the interest obtained by virtue of the
ownership of bonds. The members of this group can now pass their
wealth on to their heirs. A state which owns the industries and which
has as its primary purpose the exploitation of the masses for the
benefit of those who “own” the state and of bondholders can very
well be designated as a capitalist state and the system which it
defends as “state capitalism.”
Trotsky’s objection to the term “state capitalism” was that
it was used in a different sense in the Marxist movement. It referred
to the ownership of certain industries by the capitalist state under
the prevailing regime of private property. That is not a serious
objection; the reply can be made that what is necessary now is to
find the best possible term to designate a new phenomenon. It is true
that we must invest the term “state capitalism” with a new
meaning in order to apply it to the Russian system of economy but
that should not constitute an insurmountable obstacle.
While I am opposed to the concept that state capitalism prevails
in Russia on the same general grounds that I oppose the theory of
bureaucratic collectivism, I am all in favor of using the term “state
capitalism” as against “bureaucratic collectivism.” Should we
be compelled by the course of events to revise Marx and recognize
that a social system which is not socialism is destined to follow
capitalism, then we should call it state capitalism rather than
bureaucratic collectivism. I strongly urge those who believe in the
theory that there is a new class which rules a new social order in
Russia to drop the term “bureaucratic collectivism” in favor of
the term “state capitalism.” From the propaganda point of view it
is the best tenn available because it is familiar to the advanced
workers and to some extent it creates a connection between the
struggle against the capitalist state as it exists in capitalist
countries and the struggle against the Russian state.
 
Degenerated Workers’ State
I hold that for the present the theory which best describes the
economic and social conditions prevailing in Russia is still
“degenerated workers’ state.” There is one very serious
objection to the term and that is that the word “workers” can be
easily misunderstood and misinterpreted. It seems to be almost
impossible to use the term without having the objection raised that
the workers have no control whatever in Russia and that they are
oppressed and enslaved – all of which is perfectly true – and
that therefore it cannot possibly be even a degenerated workers’
state. From the propaganda point of view the term “state
capitalist” is much better than the term “degenerated workers’
state.” But the theory that Russia is a degenerated workers’
state avoids the theoretical difficulties of the theories of
bureaucratic collectivism and of state capitalism. These theoretical
difficulties are far more serious than the propaganda difficulties
connected with the use of the term “degenerated workers’ state.”
When used at present the term “degenerated workers’ state”
should mean only that Russia was once a workers’ state and has by
this time degenerated to a point where it has nothing whatever to do
with socialism and should under no circumstances be defended. The
term “degenerated,” because of its vagueness, always demanded an
explanation. Stalinist Russia was degenerated when Trotsky advocated
a peaceful elimination of the bureaucracy; it was degenerated when he
changed his mind and said that a violent overthrow of the ruling
clique was necessary.
In The Revolution Betrayed, Trotsky contended that the nationalization of the land, the means of industrial production,
together with the monopoly of foreign trade make of the Soviet Union
a proletarian state. This general principle must be revised. We must
say that what made the Soviet Union a workers’ state was not only
the property relations but the program and policies which directed
the state in the path of achieving socialism. With the victory of the
Stalinist bureaucracy there was a turn away from the socialist path
and now the road leads in the opposite direction from that of socialism.
Where will it lead to? Almost up to the last months of his life
Trotsky held to his theory that it can lead either to a restoration
of capitalism or to the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy and a
march back to socialism. In his last articles in 1939–40, during
the factional fight with the minority of the SWP, he presented the
possibility of a third alternative, the alternative of a degenerated
society such as exists in Russia under Stalinism, if the workers do
not take power. Trotsky went to the extent of saying that the workers
must take power during or immediately after the war in order to
prevent this “declining society of the totalitarian epoch” from
replacing capitalist society. I think we can say that in this
instance Trotsky was too pessimistic.
More than two years after the war we can still say that history
has not yet made a definitive decision. There are still great
possibilities for the victory of socialism, especially in the most
powerful country in the world, the United States. As fighters for the
freedom of mankind through socialism we have no right to give up the
struggle until the decision comes in this country. It is unnecessary
of course to drown out one’s doubts by shouting about the “coming
American Revolution,” as if it is around the corner (leaving a way
out of course by saying that the “coming revolution” does not
mean that it will come tomorrow). We can say truthfully that we do
not know when the decision will come but that we must do our utmost
to assure victory for socialism.
Victory for socialism in this country means the certain defeat of
Stalinism and fascism the world over. Defeat for socialism in this
country means the ushering in of the “declining society of the
totalitarian epoch” which may last for decades or centuries. And,
as Trotsky indicated, such a development will mean the necessity of a
thorough revision of Marxism.
The superiority of the concept of “degenerated workers’ state”
over all other theories lies in the fact that it recognizes that
history has not yet said the last word and that whether or not a new
order other than socialism will replace capitalism will be decided by
the struggle that is still going on in Europe and especially by the
struggle in the United States.
What class rules in Russia? This is the insurmountable obstacle
for those who look upon Marxism as a series of quotations. Surely the
workers do not rule; they are semi-slaves at best. Surely the
capitalists as we know them in this country do not rule; they have
been eliminated in Russia and are being eliminated everywhere that
Russia gains control. The bureaucrats rule and the direction is
toward their development as a new class. If doctrinaires reject such
a concept because according to Marx either the capitalists or the
workers must rule, then our only answer is that they do not
understand the real method of Marx who insisted upon looking at
phenomena in process of development.
Weighing the merits and demerits of the various theories advanced
as to the nature of Stalinist Russia I conclude that, for the present
at least, we should retain the theory of degenerated workers’ state
because it explains the existing facts as well as any other theory
and it does not raise any theoretical barrier to the continuation of
the struggle for socialism.
 






Our readers are acquainted with the negotiations for the unification of the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party in accordance with our policy of publishing important party material of interest to the radical labor and political movement. From the very beginning we have informed our readers and sympathizers of the general progress of unity and from time to time reported on its development. In a recent issue of the New International we published an article by Albert Goldman dealing with some fundamental aspects of unity and the perspectives of the Workers Party. This article was severely criticized by the SWP on two grounds: first, that it was published in the magazine, and secondly, because it expressed the opinion of the Workers Party that it hoped to win the unified party to its theoretical, political and organizational views. The Goldman article is being used in the SWP as an additional reason for them to reconsider the whole question of unity “politically.” That is what they are now discussing.
We are therefore reprinting two speeches by M. Stein and J.P. Cannon made at an SWP membership meeting in New York, and published in one of their internal bulletins (reprinted in a bulletin of the WP) dealing with the question of unity and another article by Albert Goldman in reply to them. This will, we believe, bring information on the state of the unity negotiations up to date. – Editor.





“On unity, our line has changed again.” So sang Cannon and Stein at a recent meeting of the Political Committee of the Socialist Workers Party. (See Bulletin of the Workers Party, Vol. II No. 4, May 27, 1947. The bulletins of the SWP are “secret.”)
What is the present position of the leadership of the SWP on the question of unity? Cannon states in his speech that “in a political sense we are right back where we were at the convention. We have not changed our position.” That should mean that he is against unity because the convention resolution solemnly affirmed that the “SWP rejects the so-called unity proposal of the Shachtmanites and closes all discussion of this question in the party.”
On the other hand Cannon says that “we don’t need to withdraw our unity proposal” made at the recent Plenum of the SWP and Stein chimes in with the statement that “we do not in the least retract from” the Plenum resolution in favor of unity. So we are confronted by this very clear position of clear thinkers: they hold to the Convention position which is against unity and “which we have not changed,” if we believe Cannon; they are still for the Plenum position which came out in favor of unity.
Is there, can there be a better example of double talk? And Cannon has the temerity to accuse me of being guilty of “double talk” in my recent article on unity published in the New International of April 1947. Naturally he does not point to any specific example of “double talk” to prove his statement. To Cannon every straight-forward proposition must necessarily be double talk.
 
The Alleged Mistake
If we believe Cannon and Stein, the change of line in favor of unity was due to a sad mistake, “a chain of comical errors,” in the words of Cannon. Now that they have discovered their mistake they must go back to their Convention position which is against unity (without giving up their Plenum position which is for unity). Their mistake, they lament, was due to their naïveté and their excessive faith in the “Shachtmanites.”
Far be it from me to deny that Cannon and Stein can make mistakes. In this particular case, however, I rise to their defense and contend that they did not make the mistake they claim to have made. Their mistake was an altogether different one. Only those who do not know Cannon and Stein could possibly accept the idea which they now wish to put across, that their naïveté and their excessive faith in the “Shachtmanites” led them to come out for unity.
What, according to Cannon and Stein, was their mistake? They thought, so they tell us, that the leaders of the Workers Party actually “changed their attitude toward the Movement,” They claim they thought we “capitulated.” They assure us they meant nothing bad by the word “capitulation,” but that is immaterial.
Now Cannon and Stein are people of some shrewdness and experience. Their tactics, right or wrong, are based on some facts. What, in our documents, in our conversations with them, or in our attitude could possibly lead them to conclude that we capitulated? What conditions did anyone present to us which we accepted as an indication of surrender?
To give some semblance to the charge of capitulation, Cannon utilizes the fact that we finally agreed to accept whatever decisions the Extraordinary Party Conference may adopt. At first we rejected the proposition that we accept such decisions before we know what they are. In reality Cannon tries to create the impression that we “capitulated” not only on the question of accepting the decisions of the EPC but also on all political and organizational questions. It is not necessary to discuss any “capitulation” on political or organizational questions. Not even Cannon or Stein dares to say that openly. I shall confine myself to discussing the question of capitulation in so far as it has reference to the fact that we agreed to accept the decisions of the Conference in order to attend its sessions.
Here I for one must admit that I misunderstood a phrase used by the comrades in charge of convoking the Conference. In their resolution they stated that an organization must agree to be bound by the decisions of the Conference in order to have a “deliberative voice.” I took that to mean what we usually mean by the phrase “a voice but no vote.” These comrades, however; use the word “deliberative” to mean a voice and vote. Had I understood that I would not have objected so strenuously, although I still think that limiting an organization to voice only is wrong under the present circumstances when such great and important problems face the revolutionary movement and when the Conference has obviously very little authority in the working-class movement.
But the question of the meaning of “deliberative voice” was pushed completely aside very early in our discussion with Comrade Smith, the representative of the Conference Committee. We made it plain to him that we would agree to accept the decisions of the Conference only on condition that unity would result from or precede the efforts of the Conference. Not to have unity and still agree to abide by the decisions of the Conference would be an absurdity.
Smith, who is very close to Cannon, accepted; and I remember distinctly that in our first conversation with Cannon and Stein this understanding was mentioned and it was taken for granted by everybody that unity was an essential condition to our agreement to abide by the decisions of the Conference.
Do Cannon and Stein deny that there was such an understanding? Let them read the joint statement which they certainly read and re-read before signing and they will see that it is expressly stated that our obligation to accept the decisions of the Conference was undertaken with the understanding “that fusion of the two organizations into a united party was achieved.”
The failure of the SWP leaders to explain this to their ranks is part of the deception, the purpose of which is to convince their members that the WP “capitulated.” In his speech before, the Political Committee Cannon said, “In his circular letter to the WP membership he [Shachtman] refers to their disciplinary pledge to the EPC as a ‘formality’ and said that unless ‘unity is achieved’ they would regard their commitment as a ‘mere scrap of paper.’” Cannon does not say so explicitly but he wants his followers to understand that our commitment to abide by the decisions of the Conference has no string attached to it whatsoever. Cannon knows better, but if by chance he really believes that he should read the joint statement.
It should be obvious that while our undertaking to abide by the decisions of the Conference depends upon the achievement of unity, unity is not at all assured by the fact that we undertake to abide by the decisions of the Conference. Unity cannot be ordered by a resolution of a higher body. It must result from the desire of both parties to unite. There is clearly no desire on the part of the SWP to achieve a good unity.
Many times have we explained that in a united party we were willing to abide by the decisions of the majority. Hence we yielded nothing when we undertook to abide by the decisions of the Conference, provided there was unity. And unity depends upon the attitude of the SWP leaders.
If there is nothing in the written documents to support the thesis that we “capitulated” to the SWP or to the “Movement,” the same is true of the conversations that went on during the negotiations. The fact that the SWP leaders never cited a single statement allegedly made by any of our negotiators is proof positive that no such statement was made. Of my own knowledge I can testify to the first conversation we had with Cannon and Stein. The emphasis was laid on the probability of our being able to work together in the united party without friction. We all agreed that the last thing anyone wanted was a factional fight after unity. While on our part we stressed the necessity of complete freedom of discussion as the best means to avoid a factional fight, Cannon argued that the best means of achieving freedom of discussion was to avoid factions. We agreed and we further agreed that we would refrain from discussing any political question decision upon which was arrived at by the EPC.
 
Cannon Discovers His Mistake
Four incidents are supposed to have opened the eyes of Cannon and Stein and to have made them realize how mistaken they were in believing that we “capitulated.” They are:


the introduction to the joint statement on unity, both published in Labor Action of March 24;
the answer of Max Shachtman to Martin’s claim of capitulation;
the publication in Labor Action of the letters of Jack Weber and Ruth Fischer, dealing with the attack on the latter that was published in the Militant;
my article on unity published in the New International of April 1947.


The introduction to the joint statement is a factual account of what had previously occurred on the unity question. What is wrong with that? How does a scrupulously correct statement of facts violate the spirit of the joint statement on unity? The leaders of the SWP could have pointed out any error of fact and we would have been glad to make a correction. It seems that they are somewhat sensitive about their past position on unity.
We could not possibly ignore Martin’s letter to the SWP membership in which he claimed that we capitulated due to the “pressure” of the representatives of the EPC and of the Johnson minority in our party. By failing to state specifically the points upon which we allegedly capitulated the Martin letter tries to create the impression that we capitulated on all of the political and organizational questions upon which we have our own position. To permit such an impression to go unchallenged would be criminal. Not only because we are vitally interested in the principle that leaders of a revolutionary party should under no circumstances deceive the membership of the party but also in order to avoid serious misunderstandings and conflict in the future. We want the members of the SWP to know our position on all questions and that we do not give up a position except openly and on the basis of argument. A good unity can be achieved only on the basis of an honest interpretation of the ideas of the opponent.
To the Cannonites it was not the Martin letter with its misrepresentations and distortions that raised an obstacle to unity but the Shachtman reply which corrected the misrepresentations and distortions.
An editorial in the Militant criticized Ruth Fischer for testifying against Eisler, the GPU agent. The editorial called Fischer an “informer” because she revealed what she knew about one of the murderers in the pay of the GPU. Both Jack Weber and Ruth Fischer wrote letters criticizing the Militant editorial. We published the letters because they dealt with such an important subject. One or two expressions in the Weber letter might have given offense to the Cannonites, from the point of view of “tone.” We asked Comrade Weber to eliminate them; when he refused we published the letter as is. This is our method and we want the world to know it.
And what was there in my article which aroused the rage of Cannon to the point where he called it “greasy hypocrisy,” without of course indicating exactly what points in it are hypocritical? In general it can be said that any honest presentation of a problem would almost necessarily appear hypocritical to Cannon. In my article there is, however, a subject about which he is very sensitive – the leader-cult in the SWP. All who know the members of the upper ranks in the SWP know that it is a calculated policy for some of them to “build up” the leaders, especially the leader. That of course implies that there is a necessity for building them up. Cannon is exceedingly sensitive about this subject and my mentioning it undoubtedly explains his foaming at my article which I claim is a very restrained statement of the differences between us and the Cannonites. I shall plead guilty to the charge of hypocrisy only if restraint constitutes hypocrisy.
The whole theory upon which the Cannonites rely in their criticism of our course subsequent to their turn in favor of unity is that the expectation of unity should mean a cessation of mutual criticism. We reject that concept; we are not in favor of creating a bureaucratic unity on top by agreeing to refrain from criticizing each other. We are perfectly willing to see criticism of our ideas and policies in the press of the SWP and we are prepared to answer.
The Cannonites are fond of repeating that we are sensitive and jittery to criticism and this “proves” that we are “petty-bourgeois.” It would be hard to find a group of people more sensitive to criticism than the SWP leaders.
That Cannon and his lieutenants made a mistake in their maneuverings is clear. But it is not the mistake they are now so anxious to admit. It was in thinking that they could get away with a crude deception to the effect that it was the “capitulation” of the WP that brought about a change in their line on unity.
Less than three months before they came out in favor of unity, Cannon presented a resolution to the convention of the SWP, which rejected unity and forbade further discussion of the subject. The resolution was based on a “political” analysis which proved to their satisfaction that we are everything that is bad from the point of view of revolutionary Marxism. In addition, our unity proposal was a fake. The addition was a mere afterthought. The stress was laid on our “petty-bourgeois revisionism.”
Of a sudden there is a complete shift in favor of unity. My theory is that the shift was caused largely by the fact that leading comrades in other countries must have been repelled by the method used by the SWP leaders to reject unity. They had promised to conduct a “thorough discussion” of the differences but unity was rejected without any discussion unless the document wherein they decided that we are "petty-bourgeois revisionists" can be called a discussion. Some leading comrades in other parties really wanted unity and others accepted the Cannonite line of opposition but thought Cannon was too crude in his methods.
When confronted with the objections of the leading comrades Cannon acted on a hunch and decided to go all-out in favor of unity. He was of course uncertain as to what would develop but he figured he could take a chance and retreat if he had another hunch. Probably he also figured that he could possibly win over Johnson and some of his followers by his maneuver.
It was necessary to present some explanation to the membership for the sudden change of line. Cannon and his lieutenants cooked up the idea of “capitulation” of the WP. This was their mistake. For it turned out to be impossible to put this idea across. The “capitulators” refused to act the part assigned to them. Even some of Cannon’s staunch followers in the ranks declared that they saw no sign of any capitulation on the part of the WP, and continued to oppose unity. Then, when the WP answered and annihilated the claim of capitulation, Cannon had another hunch and decided to go back to the Convention position.
The mistake of the SWP leaders was not that they thought that the WP capitulated but that they thought up the idea of a WP capitulation in order to deceive their members into believing that they did not change their line on unity, but that the WP surrendered.
 
Why All the Shifting?
In the two years since the question of unity was raised the SWP leaders have frequently shifted their position. Is it possible to find some general theory to explain these shifts? Let us first enumerate their various positions on unity.


“We must deepen the split.” This position was held just before the question of unity was raised.
Flat opposition to unity on the ground of political differences. This was the first reaction to the proposal for unity.
A slight turn in favor of unity leading to negotiations with the WP. This shift coincided with a letter from Natalia Trotsky in favor of unity.
A turn away from unity with the statement that they are not for unity nor against unity but must wait and see.
The period when the necessity of a “thoroughgoing discussion” of the differences between the parties became the point that was stressed. Needless to say there was no discussion whatever between the parties.
The final decision of the convention which passed a resolution rejecting unity and forbidding further discussion of the subject.
The sudden and completely unexpected shift to unity following the intervention of some leading comrades of other countries.
The present position which can be characterized as being both for and against unity in principle but working hard to prevent unity in practice.


What a miserable record! And the persons responsible pride themselves on being principled politicians! Such a shifting of positions shows conclusively that the leadership does not act on the basis of some thought-out political principle. The real explanation is not difficult to find if one knows Cannon and his lieutenants. The first “principle” is that they do not want unity because they do not want the opposition of a large group composed of many capable comrades. They have very little confidence in their ability to meet an opponent on an ideological plane. The second “principle” is their natural unwillingness to tell the real reason for their refusal to unite. Hence the necessity of maneuvering and shifting in an attempt to deceive their followers and important leading comrades everywhere. If one tactic leads to complications and difficulties they try another one. And one must not forget the element of “hunch politics” which plays a large role with Cannon. Faced by some difficulty he is capable of coming out for unity and seeing what develops.
It is perfectly true, as he claims, that he offered us unity immediately after his shift. Since we follow a consistent, thought-out line on the question we rejected such hasty unity. First we wanted a period of collaboration to prepare the ground for unity. And second, we wanted to discuss the problems that will face the Extraordinary Party Conference. Cannon made his offer of immediate unity subject to the condition that there should be no discussion after unity.
 
The Present Status of Unity
On the basis of the change of line in favor of unity made by the SWP leaders at their last Plenum and on the basis of our conversations with them, most of us were convinced that it was highly probable that unity would be achieved. Then came two blows which shook our confidence: the Martin letter with its charge of capitulation and the refusal of the Cannonites to have joint meetings on May Day, on the pretext that the contemplated attack by the American imperialists on Russia made it necessary to emphasize the defense of Stalinist Russia at the meetings. Since we would not go along with the idea, joint meetings could not be held. With all the important issues confronting the American workers, especially with the anti-labor legislation being pushed through Congress, the Cannonites had to emphasize the defense of Stalinist Russia.
Now it is perfectly correct that were we the minority in a united party we could not insist that slogans unacceptable to us should be eliminated from meetings. But the fact remains that we are not yet in the united party and until unity is achieved or until unity is absolutely certain in the immediate future we must play an independent role.
Nothing would have done more for unity than successful joint May Day meetings throughout the country. The refusal of the SWP leaders to have such meetings shows how little they are interested in preparing the ground for unity.
And now we have the speeches of Cannon and Stein which in effect cancel our agreement with the SWP as embodied in the joint statement. All this does not mean, I suppose, that unity is absolutely excluded. Our agreement with the EPC stands, that is, we still undertake to abide, by the decisions of the EPC if unity is achieved. If the EPC can effect a real change in the line of the SWP leadership then unity can be revived. But we must understand that unity is not a matter of formal discipline. An unwilling party should not be ordered to unite with another party even if there are enough votes to pass such an order. There must be mutual respect and a desire for unity before it can be achieved and certainly before it can work.
The speeches of Cannon and Stein at the Political Committee meeting show how far we really are from unity. Stein tells the members of the PC that the WP “remains essentially what it had been.” As if there could be any question about it! He can eliminate the word “essentially” and speak even greater truth. We did nothing to lead anyone to suspect that we changed in any way. Stein seems to be of the opinion that unity is not to be had unless the WP changes. If that is his opinion he should say so and quit maneuvering.
Stein also informs us with an air of profundity that the only firm basis for unity is programmatic agreement; failing that there must be subordination of the minority to the majority. For two years we have been saying that there are serious political disagreements between us but that we think we can live together in one party in spite of them. We recognized that we were in the minority and said that we were willing to submit to the majority in action. All we ask for is an assurance that the majority will grant the minority a minimum of freedom in the party. We have gotten no place with our requests for a discussion on the real questions of unity – the questions of how to assure a fruitful unity, where there is worth-while discussion as well as action and discipline.
There are all kinds of threats in the speeches of Stein and Cannon. They have a right to make them and we have a right to ignore them. When Stein tells us that there will be no collaboration except on their terms, he merely says that there will be no collaboration unless we deem their terms acceptable, We are not afraid of terms nor are we insulted by being presented with them. On our part we too offer terms for collaboration but we do not make ultimatums; we are ready to discuss and be convinced by superior arguments.
Cannon tells us that if, after the Conference, the WP still wants unity he will see. And he adds that he will formulate the conditions and we are at liberty to take or leave them. We are happy at least that he permits us to take or leave them. That is really a wonderful concession on his part and we shall certainly exercise that right. And we shall also exercise the right to formulate conditions of our own.
The leader of the SWP seems to be of the opinion that unity means an obligation on our part to accept his ideas about politics and his ideas of the party. He seems to be indignant when he says that Goldman thinks “by coming into the SWP they will change the character of the party.” I don’t think that I used that expression but we certainly hope to be able to change the character of the party and we shall try to do so by winning a majority for our ideas, We want a Bolshevik party and not a Zinovievist or semi-Stalinist party.
If Cannon and Stein want a homogeneous party, as they proudly assert (another name for a monolithic party), they surely cannot have it with us in that party. They must make up their minds exactly as to what they want and stop playing around with hunches.
On our part we have said and still say: we want unity and we want to make a Bolshevik party out of the united party. This is the antithesis of a monolithic party. It is a party where free discussion prevails at all times and where the minority submits to the discipline of the majority in action.
ALBERT GOLDMAN.
********
Speech by M. Stein
We must now review the unity proposal as it was presented to the Plenum in the light of what has transpired since that time. This applies especially to the motivation we originally gave for the unity proposa1. Our motivation at the Plenum, and prior to the Plenum in the Martin letter, was based on the premise that Shachtman and the WP had changed their attitude toward the Movement.
Once we accepted this premise, we concluded that we must give the Shachtmanites every possible chance to reintegrate themselves in the movement. Even when we spoke or their “capitulation,” we interpreted this in the best sense, that is, as a turn toward the Movement from which they split seven years ago. When they decided to accept the terms for participation in the Extraordinary Party Convention we interpreted this as an important step in our direction and were prepared to greet this development and extend to them a helping hand. That was the motivation for the Plenum resolution.
Since then the Shachtmanites have done their best to convince us that we acted on the basis of a misunderstanding. We judged the WP leaders and their attitude toward unity by their signed statement and by impressions gained in conversations or reported conversations. This served to obscure our knowledge of these men and their politics, based on long experience. We then read into their statement of February 10 a change of line, which was not there in reality.
We must now purge ourselves, so to speak, of the illusion we had about the Shachtmanites changing for the better. Such illusions can lead only to bitter disillusionment when the truth becomes known, as it has become known. There is a lot of disillusionment in the party today with the unity proposal, and a strong opposition is rising up against it. There is a realization that the motivation we gave for the unity proposal has not been proved correct. Everything the WP has done since the appearance of the joint public statement has served to sober up the party on this score.
Had we broached the question of unity with the WP correctly, we would have oriented ourselves upon the following factors: The failure of the WP to emerge as a viable force after seven years of struggle against us as party against party; the isolation of the WP, its stagnation, its lack of perspective, and the internal conflict of irreconcilable tendencies within it. Then we would have posed the question as to whether this situation warranted on our part an offer of unity to the WP.
They tried a unity maneuver against us which lasted for some time but which came to smash against the firmness of our party. They tried this through the disloyal minority inside our own party and the fraudulent “unity” campaign in their public press. Their object was to create either a split in our party or to effect a “unification” which would lead to a bitter factional fight and a bigger split. There was not a trace of good faith in their approach to the question. This is equally true, it is now clear, of their present attitude to the new unity proposal.
Once their original “unity” maneuver was smashed, the question was posed whether or not it is advantageous for us to accept unity with them, with the object of removing them as a rival party and in this way facilitating the building of the revolutionary party. Had we posed the question in this way, I am not sure what the answer of the Plenum would have been. But I know that I for one would have favored such a move. I would not of course have proposed concentrating the party’s activities on such a unity effort. In reality, there would be no need for it, since we can easily take it in our stride.
But it is profitless now to speculate on this aspect of the question. The task now is to reorient ourselves along practical and political lines. We must acknowledge openly before the party that we made a mistake in attributing to the WP a political change in the direction of the Movement which they did not really make. The Shachtmanites remain Shachtmanites. The WP remains essentially what it had been. Shachtman’s demagogic agitation about the Martin letter, the hostility with which he met it, only serves to demonstrate this all the clearer. Shachtman is now out to demonstrate that he did not “capitulate,” that he remains true to his revisionist program, to his Menshevik concept of an all-inclusive party. If anything, he has revealed himself as in no way different from the right-wing in his party. As far as I am able to judge, he is now heading the right wing.
After we acknowledge our mistaken appraisal, we should orient the party along the lines of a correct approach to the question of unity. What do I mean specifically? Proceeding from the general proposition that we are committed to unity by the Plenum resolution and that we do not in the least retract from it, we proceed to present this problem of unity to the party and the outside world as it really stacks up. We have to purge the whole unity proposition of all false concepts and illusions.
First, we have to go back to the split of 1940. That split revealed a revolt of the petty-bourgeois opposition inside the SWP against our program and against our organization methods. The petty-bourgeois minority could not submit to the discipline of the proletarian majority of the party. That was the meaning of the split. We must recapitulate this once more.
Then followed the seven years war of party against party. During that time the WP tried to demonstrate that, once they had liberated themselves from what they called the “conservative bureaucracy of the Cannon clique in the SWP,” they would build a party by their own “dynamic” methods. What have they accomplished? They ended up with a smaller group than they started with. Even though they started out with forces numerically almost equal to ours, they quickly demonstrated that they could not build a party either with their politics or organization methods, or with their “dynamism.”
Then they, together with Goldman and Morrow, made a “unity” proposal. This proposal was falsely motivated from the beginning. They said that once we had relegated the defense of the Soviet Union to the background, a unity proposal became realistic. We have never answered this point publicly but we should do it now. This was a completely false premise from the beginning. The defense of the Soviet Union was placed in the background by objective circumstances and can be placed in the foreground by other objective circumstance Our alleged change of position on the Russian question is no basis for unification of the two parties. This is a false motivation and we must say so.
We posed the question correctly two years ago. We said that the only firm basis for unification is political agreement, and failing that, the subordination of the minority to the majority. They have advanced the theory that through collaboration of the two parties in practical day to day work the ability of the members to get along with each other will be tested, and that this will establish a firm basis for lasting unity. This is another false concept we must reject.
The only firm basis for unity is programmatic agreement, and not the personal compatibility or incompatibility, of individuals with each other. The Bolshevik party is based on program; agreement on program is the cement that holds it together. Failing that, there must be subordination of the minority to the majority; not formal, hypocritical subordination, but the real thing in the Bolshevik meaning of party discipline Because of the peculiar nature of this proposed unification, there must be all the more emphasis on this point.
We must open up a clarifying discussion along these lines. We must also discuss their Menshevik concept of the all-inclusive party and counterpose to it our own concept of a party. We are for the homogeneous party a party based on one – and only one – program. Our unity resolution is not meant as a concession to the concept of the all-inclusive party, as they have mistakenly represented it but as a party of our irreconcilable struggle against it. Our unity proposal does not signify the slightest conciliationism toward Shachtmanism on the question of organization, or on any other question.
Their jitteriness, and nervousness; the present campaign they have undertaken to solidify their ranks – that is, to harden them for a faction fight in the event of unification; the polemical articles they write in such hostile tones; the open forums and classes they hold against our views – indicate that they are afraid of the prospect of living in a proletarian party and subordinating themselves to the proletarian majority of the party. We must explain that too.
They are now engaged in an “enlightenment” campaign to poison and prejudice their members against us. While they are speaking of collaboration to wipe out hostility they are actually creating a wall of hostility between the membership of the WP and ourselves. They are attempting to poison their membership against our political line, our organizational concepts and our leadership.
We must expose the whole fraud that is part and parcel of Shachtman’s approach to unity, while we purge ourselves of illusions on this question. What will we accomplish by this? I don’t attempt to predict the end result. But the very least we can do is speak the truth, to speak it boldly and pose the question as it really presents itself. We will thus arm our own party, and that is the most important thing. If, after a period of this kind of clarification, the WP should decide that they still wish to go through with the unification, there will be no illusions or misunderstandings, either on their part or ours, as to the basis on which this unification is taking place.
We will thus be writing down in advance the precise terms of the unification and preparing our party to carry out these terms to the letter. It is possible that the right-wing in the party when confronted with the realization of what unification with us really means, may recoil from it. If they do that is their business. In any case, if they do so, that will only demonstrate and confirm their fear of living in a proletarian party which imposes a real discipline on its opportunist minority.
On the question of collaboration: We must take just as firm an attitude on this question. We will collaborate, but only on our basis, i.e., wherever they are willing to accept our line. Between now and a possible unification we must have the same kind of approach as if they were already inside the party. The SWP is the party because we have the majority. The WP acknowledges this, and this should be the basis for collaboration.
Our members should not hesitate to discuss this whole question with the WP members, especially their newer people. If these are interested in a genuine unification they must start out by a reexamination of their whole course, the split of 1940 and the seven years since then. The WP leadership is not doing this and we should do it for them. If we do this it will also educate the new members in our own party.
********************
Speech by J.P. Cannon
I am in agreement with the remarks of Stein and wish only to emphasize a few points. It isn’t very pleasant to have to admit a mistake. It is doubly unpleasant to have to admit a mistake that helped to mislead others, especially the Plenum of the National Committee. That, however, is the rather disagreeable position we find ourselves in, myself in particular.
Reviewing the whole fight from the beginning more than seven years ago, I think we were fundamentally correct all the way through, up to and including the last party convention, in our fight against the Shachtmanites, in principle as well as in our strategy and tactics. The line was absolutely right. And none of us had the slightest idea of changing the line that we had carried through, including the line of the convention.
I consider what happened since the convention as a chain of comical errors, which I am sure we can correct without damage to our cause. First came the unexpected decision of the WP to accept the conditions laid down by the Movement for participation in the EPC. We interpreted this action of theirs as a turn in the direction of the Movement, as a capitulation to its terms which they had previously rejected. That is the way we accepted it. That was the basis of our decision at the Plenum. And when in the letter of Martin, which was sent out with the agreement of other comrades, we spoke of their capitulation, we didn’t do it in a derogatory sense, but in an entirely different one.
As we saw it, they had come to the turning point where they would have to go one way or the other, and at the last moment they made a turn to the Movement, accepted its conditions and thereby capitulated to it. And we decided to give them credit for that move, to give them a helping hand. That was the basis of our recommendations to the Plenum, where the unity resolution was adopted.
By that we demonstrated that we are communist politicians and not gang-fighters. In spite of all that had happened, all the personal animosity, all the slander, etc. at the moment they took a political turn in the direction of the Movement we were prepared to give them a helping hand, to open the door for them to come into the party and to give them liberal terms. The second thing we demonstrated – which I am not so proud of – is that after all our experience with these people, we showed a certain naiveté. It is somewhat embarrassing to be obliged to acknowledge that, in this case at least, experience did not bring wisdom; that good nature and good will obscured political judgment. That is a very sticky feeling. I really didn’t think that even the Shachtmanites would be stupid enough to think they could play a maneuverist double-game with the EPC.
Everybody at the Plenum had plenty of ground for animosities against these people, whose mistakes have often amounted to crimes against the Movement. But the moment the Plenum members saw – or rather, thought they saw – that the Shachtmanites were turning toward the Movement, they were willing to have them come into the party and give them good terms. Why, we even gave them better terms than those they agreed to in their meetings with Smith. We gave them credit ill advance for carrying out their decision in good faith, and offered to expedite the unity even before the EPC, provided the discussion was finished beforehand.
We followed that up with our meetings with them and the Joint Statement on unity, in which we rounded a few corners to make it easier for them, without, however, violating the instructions of the Plenum. We agreed to present their return to the party in public as a merger of the two organizations, for example, accepting their verbal declarations that they know this means their coming into the SWP, etc.
Then things began to happen. First through an inadvertance, when the Martin letter to the NC members came into their hands. Long experience has taught me that inadvertences never change a fundamental course – but they often show its real direction. The Martin letter was utilized by them to reveal what their real purposes are, and this has served a useful purpose for us.
Shachtman has made it perfectly clear, in his letter to the membership of the WP and in subsequent actions, that there was a comical misunderstanding on both sides. As he represents the matter, they understood that we had changed our position; that we had sharply reversed the line of the convention, and under the pressure of the Movement had changed our whole approach to the question and accepted their formula for the unification. In other words, that it was we who had “capitulated.”
Shachtman makes it clear that our interpretation of their action in sending the letter to Smith was a misunderstanding on our part, that they meant no capitulation to the Movement. When they deny heatedly, not to say hysterically, that they have “capitulated” – as though they consider it dishonorable to bow to the rules and discipline of the Movement – they only reveal that they haven’t changed a bit, that they stand exactly where they were before.
The series of events which followed are known to you. At the time they were signing the Joint Agreement that they wouldn’t take Weber into their party, they had Weber’s article against us in their hands and were preparing to publish it in Labor Action and solidarize themselves with him – without even notifying us, without mentioning the matter in the Joint Committee. That revealing incident only shows their disposition to abide by the form of an agreement while violating it in spirit and essence. This way of acting is just a little bit too clever to be clever. We will have to bear it in mind and rely more on guarantees than promises in the future.
As you know, we did not publish our Plenum resolution. This was done deliberately, as we explained to them, to give them an opportunity to present the new unity agreement to the public in a Joint Statement with us. We observed the spirit of the agreement by publishing the Joint Statement without comment. They, however, published it with an introduction attempting to justify their “unity” maneuvers in the past. By that they reopened the whole question of the past for discussion. There were two or three other incidents of the same kind. The publication of the Ruth Fischer letter, without notification or consultation, was a crass violation of all normal procedures when two parties are seriously meeting in negotiation for a unification and loyally cooperating to bring it about.
The campaign now raging in the WP against Johnson – who sincerely stands for unity – is conducted in a real Burnhamite spirit. The obvious purpose of their campaign against Johnson is to discredit those who take unity seriously and to solidify and harden their people to come into our party fighting, with the perspective of another split. That is their idea. Outside of the single thing we noted – their acceptance of the conditions of the Movement, which we took too seriously at face value – there is nothing whatever to show any change of attitude on their part, either politically or organizationally. And even that letter has since been repudiated in essence by Shachtman. In his circular letter to the WP membership he refers to their disciplinary pledge to the EPC as a “formality” and said that unless “unity is achieved,” they would regard their commitment “as a mere scrap of paper.”
So, in a political sense we are right back where we were at the time of the convention. We have not changed our position. They have not changed. Goldman writes an article in the latest issue of their magazine with his usual compound of misrepresentation, greasy hypocrisy and double-talk designed to trick and trap the unwary. As for “unity” he blandly explains that by coming int0 the SWP they will change the character of our party. He doesn’t know how wrong he is. They continue all the old, denunciations of our party in the old tone. Their object, obviously, is to poison and harden their people to formally accept the conditions of discipline until they get set in the SWP. Then would follow the next stage: the fight to break up the party as we have built it, and convert it into a Shachtmanite party, a windbag’s paradise, with permanent discussion, driving out the workers and diverting us from, our basic task of recruiting new workers and training them, for the Bolshevik struggle against capitalism.
Such is the reality from which we must proceed. I agree with Stein that we should begin a political offensive against the Shachtmanites within the formula of the unity proposal, We don’t need to withdraw our unity proposal. What we need to do is interpret it and apply it in the light of the new developments. We are still willing for them to come in and accept our line. But we must explain what we mean by that, so that there can be no more misunderstandings on either side. We do not withdraw our unity resolution, but just simply slow the tempo of its application. We should forget about this good-will offer we made to them of a quick unification to do them a favor. Take our time. The members are discussing it. Let them take their time and discuss it thoroughly. Discuss it in the press.
I, personally, am quite sure now that there can be no unification before the Extraordinary Party Convention. Our Plenum resolution distinctly specified that their disciplinary obligation to the EPC must be “carried out in good faith.” Let us wait and see what they do with the “scrap of paper” they signed. After that, if they still want unification – I, personally, am pretty sure they will revolt against the decisions of the Extraordinary Party. Convention despite their signed pledge – we should have a special convention to decide the question. No more joint statements; from now on decisions to be made by our conventions and plenums, precisely formulated and closing the door on any double interpretations, and telling them: take it or leave it. That is the form, I think, for the further developments on the unification proposal.
We have the inestimable advantage of a homogeneous party which has been built and unified in struggle. We have a leadership united in its entirety on the fundamental questions, and in its attitude toward Shachtmanism from a political point of view. So we don’t need to have any great fears about big differences of opinion. What differences of opinion we had prior to the Plenum were not fundamental at all. It was the question of how best we were going to serve our program. These differences are not like those we had with Goldman and Morrow. That is why the opposition to the unity in the first place didn’t impress us as a hostile opposition. Nothing more was involved than the question of whether our method or theirs was best calculated to serve the program to which we all subscribe. I don’t doubt that even these tactical differences will easily be eliminated in the further course of developments – if we avoid any more unnecessary “misunderstandings” and dispense with excessive good nature in scrutinizing any more “scraps of paper” which the Shachtmanites may sign.
(The above is reprinted from Internal Bulletin (SWP), Vol.IX No.3, May 1947.)
 



Dear Comrades:
In your editorial statement Socialist Policy on the Marshall Plan, published in Labor Action of May 17, you assert that I do not “understand the nature of the Marshall Plan.” After pondering your lengthy explanation I find that my understanding of the plan practically coincides with yours, that is, that it is essentially a plan to strengthen American capitalism in Europe. In order to justify your opposition to the plan you use more words and call American capitalism more bad names but this changes nothing.
The question then is: should a socialist oppose a concrete plan for aid to Europe because he does not approve of the motives of those who propose the plan? You say – yes, even if our vote means the defeat of the bill proposing aid. It is quite true that you insist over and over again that you are for aid to the European people but under the circumstances your repeated assertion is pathetic and meaningless. For the European people cannot get any aid except through the bill which was recently passed by Congress.
Undoubtedly the section of the European masses which is not under the influence of Stalinism understands the motives of American imperialism in offering aid, just as you and I do. But they are not foolish enough to reject that aid because the representatives of American capitalism have purposes of their own in giving the aid. The European people, in all probability, do not feel that they are enslaving themselves to American capitalism by accepting aid.
It is necessary to remember the distinction between the motives of the proponents of the Marshall Plan and the particular bill which offers aid to the Europeans. Opposition to the European Recovery Bill would be justified only if the aid offered would do actual harm to the European masses.
You obviously do not feel too secure in opposing the Marshall Plan because of the motives of its proponent’s. You proceed to add that there are “conditions and strings” attached to the bill which make it mandatory for a socialist to oppose it. And here you unconsciously strike a humorous note.
One of the “conditions and strings” is that the aid offered is not sufficient. We readily grant that. But is that a reason for voting against a bill which offers great quantities of grain, coal, oil and machinery? It is only a reason for proposing to amend the bill but not for opposing it.
Another condition is the “dumping of worthless goods.” But why should one oppose a bill which grants valuable material simply because worthless goods are also offered? The European people might refuse to use the worthless goods and use only the valuable material. You point out with justified indignation that horse meat is offered to the Europeans. Although I have a suspicion that some hungry Parisian people might not share your indignation you can count on me to vote for an amendment to supply beef instead of horse meat.
And you appear to be very excited about the attempt to “tie the foreign currencies to the American dollar.”Let me assure you that socialism can come into existence in spite of the fact that the European currencies might be tied to the American dollar.
The other conditions you mention are also unsatisfactory from the point of view of a socialist, but the important thing is that neither singly nor together do they prevent the Europeans from getting some relief or create a barrier to the establishment of a socialist order.
If the European masses not under Stalinist influence had a collective voice they would probably say:
“We are indeed grateful to you, leaders of the Workers Party, for being in favor of aid to the Europeans. But you are opposed to the only bill which promises us some relief. If you could you would vote against the bill and pre-vent us from getting relief. Under the circumstances can you blame us that we are happy that you are insignificant in numbers and in influence? Naturally we would be happy if you were to get a majority overnight so that we would receive real help from you. But until you get such a majority we hope you will remain as insignificant as you are now. For we need and we want the aid of the Marshall Plan – yes even the horse meat which we do not like but which in a pinch can satisfy our hunger.”



 


Comradely,
Albert Goldman



 



Dear Editor:
I was indeed surprised when I read, in Comrade Bern’s article in Labor Action of April 12, that “we opposed the Marshall Plan.” I presume that by “we” Bern means the Workers’ Party, and I must confess that I do not remember having seen anything in the Party press which indicated that the Party had come out in opposition to the Marshall Plan.
It may be that the Party had adopted a resolution opposing the Plan and failed to publish it in the press. This would be bad because it was certainly our duty to publish a statement on such an important subject. It may also be that such a statement was published and escaped my attention. In either case I wish to go on record to the effect that in my opinion comrade Bern and all others who agree with him are committing a blunder.
 
Basic Aim
Bern says that “we oppose the Marshall plan because of its fundamental nature and because of the strings attached to it.” According to Bern its fundamental nature is “a military plan for the stabilization of Europe as the advanced base for American imperialism and its allies in the event of a shooting war against Russia.”
It seems to me that the fundamental purpose of the Marshall proposal can be stated differently and more correctly. Its basic aim is to reconstruct the economy of Europe as a weapon against Stalinist Russia. The capitalist proponents of the plan hope that in case either of peace or war the rebuilding of ruined Europe will make it more difficult for the Stalinist regime to gain control of Western Europe.
It is of course to be taken for granted that the American representatives of the capitalist class have no altruistic motives in proposing to send help to the European people and to aid in rebuilding European economy. But surely we are not so mechanical as to permit the aims of those who propose to help Europe to be the only factor which determines our position.
Since we are not in agreement with that aim we are justified in not supporting the Plan. However, since we cannot possibly oppose sending help to the European people and aiding them in reconstructing their economy, it is impermissible for us to oppose the Plan.
It does not follow that if we cannot support the Marshall proposal we must therefore oppose it. Can we not simply explain the meaning of the Plan and why we do not support or oppose it?
 
Positive Proposals
Were we in the fortunate position of having a representative in Congress, his proper course would be to explain the meaning of the plan, abstain from voting, and explain his abstention.
I shall go further and say that if our vote determined the defeat or adoption of the plan, it would be incumbent upon us to vote for it, with an explanation. For it is impossible for us to stand in the way of relief to the Europeans or to prevent there building of its ruined industries. (I do not claim that the Plan will succeed or that the relief will be properly given, but that is immaterial to the issue.)
We are not confronted by a situation where the alternative to the Marshall Plan is one for the reconstruction of Europe on a socialist basis. The alternative to the attempt to reconstruct Europe on a capitalist basis is to permit the industries of Europe to remain in ruins, to permit the people of Europe to remain hungry, and thus to aid the Stalinists. It must be remembered that were we in a position to defeat the Marshall Plan and proceeded to do so, the real beneficiaries would be the Stalinists.
Naturally it is our duty to make positive proposals with reference to the administration of the Plan, such as to have the European socialist parties play a dominant role in the control of the Plan. Also, we would be justified in opposing the Plan if conditions were attached to it which would harm the European working class, such as a condition to denationalize an industry. Bern speaks about the conditions attached to the Marshall Plan, but he mentions none, and I do not know of any of such a nature that opposition becomes mandatory upon us.
Socialism, comrade Bern should constantly remind himself, is not aided by ruined industries. Nor have we ever accepted the doctrine of “the worse the better.”
It is time that we cease following the old and simple formula: If the capitalists are for it, we are against it.



 


Albert Goldman
April 14, 1948



 



Dear Editor:
The basic fact in the Palestinian situation is that approximately seven hundred thousand Jews constituting a nation are threatened with expulsion from their homeland and even with possible extermination. Like any other people, the Jews of Palestine have a right to defend themselves against any attempt by any group to deprive them of their homeland. All the crimes of the Zionist leadership – past, present and future – cannot take that right away from them.
An attack upon the Jews in Palestine could be justified only if one could prove that they are imperialist exploiters or agents of imperialist exploiters, oppressing a backward people. No one in his right senses would make such an assertion, let alone try to prove it.
 
True Character of Struggle
A group of Arabs organized and led by the most reactionary elements of the Arab states surrounding Palestine have launched an attack against the Jews. There are of course Palestinian Arabs who are fighting the Jews, but the dominant group under the leadership of which the struggle is being waged is composed of feudalistic reactionaries from the various Arab states.
The probable consequences of a victory of this group will be the expulsion from Palestine of hundreds of thousands of Jews, if not their actual extermination. The probable consequences of the victory of the Jews will not be the expulsion or extermination of the Arabs but the assurance, for a short period at least, of a tiny homeland for the Jews. To defend the right of a nation to whatever homeland it has is the duty
of every socialist. This means that we must give material aid to the Jews fighting for their right to live in Palestine. We must of course do our utmost to show we have nothing in common with the Zionist leadership; we must continue the sharpest criticisrn of that leadership – its policies and its despicable methods of waging indiscriminate war against all Arabs. But so long as there are Arabs attacking the Jews with arms in order to expel or exterminate the Jews of Palestine, so long must we give material aid to the Jews.
One cannot solve the problem confronting us in Palestine by finding a formula in Lenin’s writings, where the conditions of a progressive
nationalist struggle are enumerated. One needs only to recognize the facl that a group of Arabs, organized by reactionary feudalists, have launched an attack on the Jews with the minimum objective of compelling the Jews to submit to the will of the Arab leaders. And from this fact one must conclude that a socialist must furnish material aid to the Jews.
It may be that tomorrow the Irgunists or some other extremist nationalist group among the Jews will try to drive the Arabs from sections of Palestine occupied by them. In that event we shall have to defend the Arabs against the Jews. Right now this is not the case.
 
“Cease Fire”
To ask both sides to “cease fire” is very nice. No one can seriously object. But if the attacking Arabs do not choose to listen to us and continue their fire, shall we stand on the sidelines and persist in imploring them to “cease fire” and do nothing else? Shall we refuse to lift a finger to help prevent the expulsion or extermination of the Jews?
Such a position befits pacifist souls who wring their hands in anguish at the wickedness of the world. It does not befit socialists who fight any attempt by anybody to destroy the homeland of a people.
To call the war in Palestine fratricidal does not help us a bit. Alas, all wars, just and unjust, are fratricidal.
Nor does it help any by pointing out that the Jews are not in the position of a minority fighting against oppression by any imperialist power. Is it not sufficient that the Jews at the present moment are fighting for their very existence in Palestine? To call upon them to “cease fire” when attacked is a little thoughtless.
 
Against Partition
Must we be for partition because we defend the right of the Jews to live in Palestine, against armed aggression by a group of Arabs organized and led by reactionary feudalists? Not in the least. We should be against partition now just as we were against partition before. We should continue our agitation for a united, democratic Palestine with the right of Jews to immigrate and the right, – the democratic right – of a minority to a separate existence if that minority wants such an existence.
We should make clear that we are only for the right to a separate existence and not for the exercise of that right. We are absolutely against secession or partition. But if a national minority, contrary to our advice, sets up its own state and the majority by force attempts to prevent it, then we defend the minority against the majority.
If we are against partition, does this not mean we should join the Arabs in the struggle against partition? In Comrade Judd’s article dealing with the question of the struggle in Palestime there seems to be such an intimation. Such a conclusion can be the result only of the most formalistic thinking. As if we and the Arab reactionary leaders are fighting against some abstract principle of partition.
Our motives in opposing partition are altogether different from the motives of the Arab leaders. We are against partition because we deem it to be against the interests of the Jewish and the Arab masses. The feudal leaders of the Arab states are against partition because they do not want to see the Jews have a homeland in Palestine. They are not fighting against the Jews for fear the Arab masses will suffer as a result of partition but because they would be deprived of an opportunity to rule all of Palestine.
Our position against partition is one thing; our fight to save the Jews from expulsion or extermination is another thing.
It is clearly the duty of Jewish and Arab socialists in Palestine to agitate against partition and for a democratic Palestine; it is also their duty to defend the Jews against any armed attack organized by any group.
 
Imperialist Rivalries
For reasons of their own, the imperialist nations, working through the United Nations, may send troops to enforce partition. Later on the struggle in Palestine may become part of an imperialist war. When and if that should happen we may have to change our position. But so long as the dominant character of the struggle in Palestine remains the attempt of the Arab leaders to exterminate or expel the Jews, so long must we give material aid to the Jews. Neither the crimes of the Zionist leaders nor the crimes of the imperialists justify any other course.
Albert Goldman, Feb. 26
 



When Sidney Hook attributes failure of nerve to all those who, overwhelmed by the unexpectedness and hideousness of the war, retreat into the realm of religion and mysticism, he is on solid ground and makes out a very good case. (See his articles in the last three numbers of Partisan Review.) In every period of great upheaval and violence many persons in the general progressive movement give up the struggle for a better world as utterly hopeless and find solace in the abstractions of religion and metaphysics. Insofar as Hook attacks all forms of religious belief and insists on the use of reason and scientific method no thinking person can have any quarrel with him. But Hook then goes on, in the same articles, to create an amalgam by including the Trotskyists among those who have lost their nerve when confronted by the problems of the war. In doing so he has not only done violence to common sense but, one is tempted to say, he is actually attempting to forestall the accusation that he himself has lost his nerve. He has not taken refuge in religion, but he has found peace and safety in supporting the war.
It is difficult to conceive how, even in the remotest sense, failure of nerve can be ascribed to the Trotskyists, who worked out a basic theory before the war, anticipating all the arguments presented by the supporters of the war, and remained firm in their convictions after the outbreak of the war. Failure of nerve is a term appropriate to those who, because of the unexpected, change their ideas, but is hardly applicable to those who predict an event and, when it occurs, follow the theory which they had formulated beforehand. Whatever the Trotskyists and their theory could be accused of, they can hardly be accused of a failure of nerve.
Three things (among many others) can be said about those whose nerve failed them when the war came. They changed their ideas about the war; they support it; they face no possible prosecution at the hands of the government. All three are applicable to both Hook and the religionists and not one is applicable to the Trotskyists.
But let us dispense with this terminological argument and proceed to the main issue – whether Hook or the Trotskyists are correct in their respective positions on the war.
 
Hook’s False Description of Our Stand
To help him in his argument Hook presents a completely incorrect picture of the Trotskyist position. According to him the Trotskyists consider the war of “no concern to socialists”; believe that Roosevelt and Hitler “should be fought at the same time”; “that Roosevelt should be fought first because Lenin taught that the main enemy of the working class is its own government.” What Hook does is to take some isolated phrases found in revolutionary socialist literature and present them as the systematic position of the Trotskyists on the war.
The real position of the Trotskyists can be summarized as follows: no support to any power fighting the war for imperialist purposes; continuation of the struggle for socialism during the war. Essentially that was Lenin and Trotsky’s position during the First World War. It is true that in addition, other ideas and slogans were advanced and discussed during the First World War which leftist sectarians still insist upon placing at the center of a revolutionary program. These leftists do not understand that certain ideas and phrases were valuable during the First World War because they served the purpose of sharpening the cleavage between reformist and revolutionary socialists and of educating revolutionary cadres in intransigeance after the unexpected political collapse of the Second International. But these ideas were not and could not be part of the essential position of the revolutionary Marxists towards imperialist war. For example, there is no justification for giving the phrase “revolutionary defeatism” a meaning separate and apart from the general Marxist attitude towards the war. Since revolutionary socialists never believed in helping an enemy government defeat their own government, the expression “revolutionary defeatism” can be correctly understood only in the sense of continuing the revolutionary struggle for socialism during the war. Likewise the slogan “the main enemy is at home” is only another way of saying that so long as the proletariat does not possess state power it has no chance to struggle for its own interests against any foreign oppressor and must necessarily confine its efforts against the capitalist enemy at home. The basic idea of the revolutionary Marxist position towards an imperialist war is: no class peace during a reactionary war.
Hook is distorting our position when he says that the war is of no concern to the Trotskyists. Nor is it correct to say that the Trotskyists are “neutral.” They do not stand aside and view the war with indifference. They conceive their duty to be to educate the masses to the real nature of the war, to help them in their struggles against the capitalists during the war and to prepare them to take governmental power in order to abolish war and fascism. This is neither indifference nor neutrality.
Correctly understood, the position of the Trotskyists on the war makes completely irrelevant such a question, raised by Hook, as whether the Trotskyists are willing to permit Hitler to invade England without lifting a finger to oppose him. Non-support does not mean that the Trotskyists, any more than others, can refrain from working or fighting. So long as we Trotskyists are supported only by a minority of the population there is nothing for us to do except to submit in action to the position accepted by the majority of the population. Nor can our position of non-support directly affect the military outcome of the struggle. Either the working class comes to power under the leadership of the Trotskyists, in which case the war against Hitler is immediately transformed into a war for socialism against capitalism, or the working class remains subject to the capitalists and then the Trotskyists have no alternative other than to work and fight as other workers have to do.
 
The Dilemma Which Faces Hook
The attitude of the Trotskyists may have an indirect effect on the military struggle only in the sense that they defend the right of the workers to strike against the employers for higher wages and better conditions. Hook does not say whether he supports or condemns strikes. If he carries his support of the war to a logical conclusion he should do what the Stalinists and other reformists supporting the war do: condemn the strike of the miners.
If, on the other hand, he does not permit his logic to interfere with his sympathies for the workers, and he supports the strike of the miners, then he is doing just as much to “hamper the war effort” as the Trotskyists who do not support the war. It may be said that John L. Lewis supports the war but still calls the miners out on strike. But John L. Lewis is not a logician. Logic demands that he who supports the war should oppose any continuation of the class struggle because it may affect the military outcome of the struggle.
The central question is whether one believes in continuing the struggle for socialism during the war. Hook may claim that, although he supports the war, he still believes in continuing the struggle for socialism. He favors an independent Labor party and certain economic demands for the workers. But he does not treat the question of how the workers shall fight for their demands. The strike weapon remains the primary means of achieving the economic demands of the workers, and Hook evades this crucial question.
Perhaps Hook will claim that, if the opportunity is afforded during the war, he will favor the taking of power by the working masses. But, if the majority of the people want to establish a socialist government during the war, Hook must reckon with the overwhelming probability that the capitalists will resist the attempt of the workers to take power. A conflict will ensue which cannot fail to affect the outcome of the military struggle.
It is only by posing the questions of one’s attitude toward strikes or to an attempt by the workers to take power that we can discuss intelligently the question of how far we are willing to permit the military front to determine our attitude in the struggle on the home front. Either Hook believes in giving to the military struggle precedence over all other considerations, in which case his attitude of fighting for socialism during the war is a mere pose. Or he really believes in supporting the workers in their struggles during the war, in which case his support of the war is just as bad for the military front as the non-support of the Trotskyists.
Obviously one cannot avoid assuming certain risks. The victory of a foreign oppressor is certainly an evil. To cease the struggle for socialism is also an evil. Revolutionary socialists consider the latter the greater of the two evils. For to cease the struggle for socialism during a reactionary war is to cease to struggle for it at any time. Hook may prove to be an exception, but the verdict of history upholds this general principle.
Suppose the British Labor Party were to change its character and attempt to lead the workers to power during the war. It must certainly be assumed that the British capitalists will offer resistance and in the ensuing struggle the military front might be endangered. But then one must consider the tremendous gains which would come from a victory of the British working class. It would immeasurably increase the chances for victory over Hitler. Not only because the English people would throw their hearts and souls into a war for socialism, but because of the repercussions within Germany of a socialist victory in Britain. Hitler could not possibly stand up against it for long. The risk that British labor runs with its policy of supporting the war and of class peace is infinitely greater than the risk it would assume with a policy of non-support and making a serious effort to establish a socialist government.
 
The Character of the War
Our refusal to support the war is based on the fundamental premise that it is a war for imperialist purposes. Almost daily new evidence piles up to prove that assertion.
Upon what does Hook base his support of the war? In his articles in the Partisan Review he does not expressly say either that this war is imperialist in character or that it is one for democracy against fascism. Twice he uses the expression of a “war against Hitlerism,” leaving the impression that he considers the war to be against Hitlerism as a system; in other words, that it is a war against fascism.
If Hook could prove that this is a war for democracy against fascism, he would convert the Trotskyists to material support of the war. By our attitude to the Civil War in Spain we showed that, if we consider a conflict to be one between bourgeois democracy and fascism, we give material aid to the forces representing bourgeois democracy. Hook has not, as far as I know, undertaken to prove the impossible, namely, that this is a war for democracy against fascism.
Although he does not state flatly that he considers the war to be imperialist in nature, his articles can be “explained only on the assumption that he is of that opinion but considers its imperialist character unimportant in comparison with other factors. Those liberals and Social Democrats who claim this is a war for democracy are in constant difficulty. The conduct of the war is such that it is impossible to reconcile it with the idea that the war is being fought for anything else but imperialist interests. Many liberals have decided to recognize the war in its true colors and yet to support it on the simple proposition that the working class has greater rights in England and America than in Germany, and that it is better to live in democratic imperialist countries than in fascist imperialist countries. Hook is in that group.
It is of course undeniable that the workers still have greater rights in democratic imperialist countries than in fascist countries. The question is whether this furnishes any kind of an adequate criterion upon which to base a policy of supporting the war.
Acceptance of this criterion reduces itself to the proposition that those workers should support the war who have greater rights. On this basis the Southern Negroes should not support the war, for it would be difficult to contend that their rights are any greater than those of the German, Italian or Japanese workers. On this basis, furthermore, Hook should have urged the workers of Greece, the government of which was as brutal a dictatorship as that of Hitler or Mussolini, not to support the war. He should give the same advice to all workers in countries allied with the United States and England that are under dictatorial regimes. I am certain that Hook can name a few countries both in South America and in Europe that are allied with the United States and are far from democratic.
The Trotskyists support the war of the Soviet Union and of China; in the case of the Soviet Union, on the ground that it is a workers’ state although a degenerated one; in the case of China on the ground that its struggle against Japan is a struggle of a colonial nation against an imperialist nation. The fact is, and will undoubtedly be admitted by Hook, that the totalitarian regimes in the Soviet Union and in China are just as bad as those in Germany, Italy and Japan from the point of view of lack of democracy. On the basis of Hook s criterion, then, there is no reason why the Chinese workers should support the war.
Hook does not deal with the question of the support of the war by the Chinese, Soviet and other workers living under a dictatorship. If he flatly stated that these workers should not support the war, I would be compelled to admit that he is at least logical. To be logical and still maintain that the workers of the dictatorship countries allied with the United States and England should support the war, it would be necessary for him to contend that the victory of the United States and England will, in some mysterious way, bring democracy to all dictatorships now allied with the democratic capitalist countries. This is a proposition that Hook will hardly advance.
 
The Consequences of the War
In supporting the war Hook relies mainly on his central proposition: “If Hitler wins, democratic socialism has no future. If Hitler is defeated ... it at least has a chance.” The consequences of a war, says Hook, are relevant in deciding what attitude a socialist should take towards it. It is quite true that the consequences to which a war leads is a factor of vital importance in determining the attitude of a socialist towards it. But the important question is what consequences a socialist must consider germane in determining his attitude towards a war.
The criterion of consequences is used by Marxists in a very precise and restricted sense. By the term “consequences of the war,” insofar as it is a relevant factor in determining support or non-support of a war, Marxists understand not all possible or probable consequences, but such as inevitably flow from the victory or defeat of one side or the other.
The consequences of a victory of the North in the American Civil War could have been nothing but a shift of power from the slaveocracy of the South to the capitalists of the North. Marxists therefore supported the North because the capitalist system of the North was progressive in comparison with the outmoded form of production prevailing in the South. The consequences of a victory of a colonial country over an imperialist country would inevitably be the weakening of imperialism. Marxists therefore support a colonial country as against an imperialist country.
The consequences of a victory of German and Japanese imperialism would be that the markets, raw materials, and spheres of influence now under control of English and American imperialism would be transferred to German and Japanese imperialism. The consequences of a victory for American and English imperialism would be the elimination of rival imperialisms.
Lenin thought that the consequences of a defeat for Russia in the First World War would be revolution. And so it turned out. But Lenin did not for that reason support the imperialist enemies of Russia. Marxists have always said that social upheavals will follow this war. They did not, for that reason, favor the war.
One can make out a plausible argument for the proposition that defeat of the United States by Japanese imperialism is very likely to lead to a great strengthening of the American revolutionary movement. It would be such a blow to American capitalism that it would place the sharp alternative of fascism or socialism on the order of the day. But no revolutionary Marxist would use that speculative possibility as a basis for supporting Japanese imperialism.
It is my personal opinion that the defeat of Hitler is more likely to lead to revolutionary upheavals in Germany and the rest of Europe than the victory of Hitler. That may be a reason for my wanting to see Hitler defeated, but it is no reason whatever for me to support any imperialist power which fights and can only fight for imperialist objectives. As a Marxist I base my position on the motive forces which brought the war into existence and the consequences of the war which are directly related to these motive forces.
Hook, on the other hand, uses the term “consequences of the war” in a much broader sense than that given to it by Marxists when they refer to consequences of the war as a factor in determining their attitude towards it. He would have us determine our attitude towards a war not by an analysis of the objective factors but by speculating on possible and probable results.
In addition to this basic factor of the character of the war, there are other factors that weigh heavily against the one selected by Hook. The Trotskyists, by refusing to give support to a war waged for imperialist purposes, thereby indicate their solidarity with the millions of enslaved colonial peoples. They indicate also their solidarity with the masses of Germany, Italy and Japan who will be worse off if their countries are defeated. I am afraid that many German workers argue like Hook: it is terrible to be under the yoke of Hitler but it will be worse to be under the yoke of our foreign enemies. They therefore conclude they must support German imperialism. Hook’s support of the imperialists will scarcely help those German workers to free themselves from their identically false position.
It is highly significant that the Trotskyists, under the most adverse conditions, are building a revolutionary party without which no successful socialist revolution can come, even if Hitler is defeated. Are they doing that because they do not support the war? Perhaps it would be too difficult theoretically to make out a cause-and-effect relationship between non-support of the war and building a revolutionary party. History, however, has proved at least once that they who did not support an imperialist war and continued the struggle for socialism during the war were the ones who led workers to power. And it stands to reason that those who believe in continuing the struggle for socialism during the war are certain to be building a party for that struggle; the others are too busy supporting the war to build a revolutionary party.
 



In Morrison’s column in The Militant of September 25, wherein he tried to explain why the Italian revolution failed to develop, Morrison said: “A revolutionary situation brought to the highest tension by the fall of Mussolini passed without a revolution.” I was surprised when a comrade protested against this statement on the ground that it is incorrect to say that there was no revolution in Italy. My surprise became astonishment when other comrades also stated their belief that there was a revolution in Italy.
The resolution adopted at the last Plenum of the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party, and published in the December issue of Fourth International, does not seem to have settled the question. For I and others, who go on the assumption that there was no revolution in Italy, accept the resolution as well as those comrades who insist that there was a revolution in Italy.
Does the difference arise as a result of a disagreement as to the course that events took in Italy? This can hardly be the case, although the discussion on the question may bring out a difference of opinion as to the actual course of events. It is most likely that we all agree on the facts and that our differences are terminological in character, arising as a result of different meanings given to the term “revolution.” Even if that is all that is at issue, it is necessary that we discuss the question so that the problem is clearly understood. It is true that at times a terminological difference can lead to different political conclusions, as was shown in the case of our struggle against those who insisted that the Soviet Union is not a degenerated workers’ state but a bureaucratic-collectivist state. I see no possibility of any difference in political conclusions arising as a result of a different interpretation given to the events in Italy. Nevertheless, to avoid the confusion that must inevitably result if some insist that there was a revolution while others contend that there was no revolution in Italy, it is important to discuss the matter.
As a result of the defeats of the Italian army, the workers, peasants and soldiers were filled with bitter resentment towards the Mussolini regime. Above all they wanted an end to the war. Beginning with March of this year the workers in the industrial centers went out on strikes and staged huge demonstrations. A serious revolutionary situation was developing.
 
The Overthrow of Mussolini
The Italian ruling class was confronted with the central problem of finding the best means to avoid or suppress a revolution. It could not depend upon its own army to save it from revolution for the simple reason that the army also was infected by defeatist and revolutionary ideas. The Italian revolution could be suppressed by the use of the German army. But this meant continuing the war on the side that offered very little chance of victory.
The dominant section of the Italian ruling class, represented by Badoglio and the King and even by some in the higher ranks of the fascist hierarchy, had arrived at the conclusion that the winner in the war would not be Hitler but the democratic imperialists. To make peace with the latter meant losing less than to continue the war on the side of Hitler until he was defeated. All factors dictated the necessity of an attempt to avoid an uprising of the masses by either making peace with the Allies or actually shifting to their side.
Mussolini had first to be removed both to avoid a revolutionary uprising and to make peace overtures to the Allies. Roosevelt and Churchill would find it somewhat difficult to deal with Mussolini because that would have made it too obvious to the masses of the “United Nations” that the war has nothing to do with any struggle against fascism. Whether Mussolini was removed after negotiations for peace with the Allies were commenced, or whether Badoglio and the King understood that Mussolini had to be removed before overtures could be made is not important. The Italian dictator had to leave the scene to permit the capitalists to attempt solving their very serious problems.
The removal of Mussolini followed the pattern of a typical palace revolution where one section of the ruling clique eliminates its leader and replaces him with someone else from the same clique. The Plenum resolution correctly speaks of the fall of Mussolini as a coup d’etat. Churchill and some right-wing liberals dignify the ousting of Mussolini by calling it a revolution, but their purpose in doing so is to get the support of the masses for the Badoglio regime.

Arising as a result of the defeats suffered by the Italian army, the revolutionary situation existing prior to the fall of Mussolini reached a point of white heat with his fall. The masses were set into motion on a huge scale and were held back from revolution only by the presence of the German army and by the hope of the masses that Badoglio would succeed in making peace with the Allies.
 
The Revolutionary Possibilities
Would the German army have succeeded in suppressing a revolt of the masses? It is idle to speculate. But it must be remembered that unarmed or poorly-armed masses have no chance against a well-armed and disciplined army. From that correct proposition reformists draw the conclusion that a revolution is impossible, forgetting that a conscript army is composed of the same human material as the masses and is also seized with a revolutionary spirit during a revolutionary situation and is affected by the revolutionary action of the workers. The proof of this proposition can be found in the fact that the Italian army as such could not be relied on to fight against the Italian workers. At any rate the Italian masses did not go ahead with their revolution partly because they did not want to come into conflict with the German soldiers who have not yet been seized by the revolutionary spirit.
One needs only to consider the situation of that section of Italy where the German army has control to realize that the Italian masses can do nothing against an undefeated German army that follows the orders of its officers. In the industrial heart of Italy where the revolution was most powerful, the German army is in complete control. Had the Italian masses acted quickly, immediately after the fall of Mussolini, they could have established a workers’ government and organized an army to fight the German army. But for such quick action a powerful revolutionary party having the support of the masses was indispensable. Under the fascist regime such a party was unable to develop.
Aside from the fact that the Italian masses faced the German army, they also hoped that Badoglio would succeed in giving them peace. The successor of Mussolini very cleverly proposed the kind of peace that the masses longed for – one that provided for the complete neutrality of Italy, with the German army leaving and the Allied armies not coming in. Such a peace was of course impossible. As a matter of fact peace for Italy, so long as the war was going on, was a fantasy. Only a struggle for peace was possible and such a struggle could be waged solely by a workers’ government basing itself on the European revolution and winning support from the English and American workers.
The most significant action of the workers and one which most accurately reveals their attitude in the period immediately following the fall of Mussolini is the half-hour strikes which they staged every day. It was a daily reminder to Badoglio that he was tolerated only for the purpose of obtaining peace.
With the unconditional surrender of Badoglio and the invasion by the Allied forces, Italy, as was expected, became a battle-ground and the revolutionary situation was arrested. There was no test between the forces of revolution and those of reaction. That test must now wait for another day.

Where and when, then, was there a revolution in Italy? I use the term not in the general sense of a fundamental change but only in the sense which it has when one refers to the February or October revolution in Russia or the November revolution in Germany. In the sense, that is, of a fundamental change of regime, directly resulting from a struggle of the masses. There is no necessity to discuss the difference between a political and social revolution nor need we discuss revolution as a process, because these questions are not germane.
Obviously one can speak of the “revolution in Italy,” meaning either the forces existing in the social structure driving towards a revolution or the coming revolutionary change. In the same sense do we speak of the European revolution. But this is something different from making the flat statement that there was a revolution in Italy.
Revolutions in recent times are characterized not only by the fact that fundamental changes in the regime take place as a direct result of the struggle of the masses, but also in that the power is actually transferred into the hands of the masses, in the first instance. If the workers are not sufficiently conscious of their own interests they turn the power over to those who are considered representatives of the people but who, in practice, serve the interests of the capitalist class.
In the Russian revolution of February 1917, the workers, supported by the peasant soldiers, overthrew the Czarist autocracy but turned over the power which they had in their hands to the socialist (Menshevik) intellectuals who in turn gave it to the Provisional Government representing the Russian capitalists.
There is a tendency to equate the Badoglio regime to the Provisional Government of Russia after the revolution of February 1917. A very superficial analogy. In Russia, after February 1917, Soviets were immediately organized and governmental power was lodged in them. But since they were under the leadership of Menshevik and Social-Revolutionary compromisers, the power of government was transferred to the Provisional Government. Had the Italian workers overthrown Badoglio, established Soviets and placed compromisers in the leadership, who in turn would have permitted people like Sforza to rule, we would have had a situation similar to the one that existed in Russia following February 1917.
The Italian masses were on the verge of overthrowing the Badoglio regime and had this happened it is not excluded that Workers’ Councils would have retained the power. Although a new generation of workers has grown up under the fascist regime, a generation that has no knowledge of the October revolution, a large section of the working class includes within its revolutionary consciousness an understanding of the Bolshevik idea of having the Workers’ Councils exercise government power. It is quite possible that, under the leadership of this layer of the Italian workers, the preliminary stage of a bourgeois democratic regime can be and would have been skipped over. The failure of the Italian revolution to develop leaves that problem unsettled.
The fact remains that at no time after the palace revolution removed Mussolini did the masses or their representatives dictate or direct who should be in the government and what it should do. The ousting of Mussolini set the masses into motion on a large scale but they did not overthrow the government and take power into their own hands.
It may, however, be contended that in addition to successful revolutions there are unsuccessful ones, the best example being the Russian revolution of 1905. Can it be said that there was an unsuccessful revolution in Italy?
To say that the Russian revolution of 1905 was not successful is only partly true. As a result of the political general strike in October 1905, the Czar was compelled to grant a Duma with a fairly liberal election law. The power was not altogether taken away from the autocracy but there was a sufficiently fundamental change in the regime, coming as a direct result of the struggle of the masses, to justify using the term revolution to describe the events. Moreover, the 1905 revolution also includes an attempt by the workers to destroy the autocracy altogether and to gain power for themselves. The October general strike was only part of the revolution. In December there were armed insurrections in Moscow and elsewhere. In other words, there was a test of strength between the workers and the regime, and the workers were defeated. The fundamental characteristic of an unsuccessful revolution is a conscious attempt on the part of the workers to overthrow the government and establish a different government.
The seizure of the factories by the Italian workers in September 1920 can be considered an unsuccessful revolution. For it was not simply a sit-down strike to achieve economic demands. It was an act of workers who consciously aimed at taking over the factories permanently. There was no revolutionary party to assume the leadership of the masses, and the reformist leaders persuaded the workers to evacuate the factories.
At no time was there any decisive test of strength between the Badoglio regime and the workers. The key to the nature of the situation during the fifty days between the fall of Mussolini and the invasion of Italy by the Allies can be found in the half-hour daily strikes. The Italian workers were mobilized and ready to act. Anxious above all to have peace but unwilling to have the Allies take possession of Italy, they gave Badoglio a chance to achieve peace. The half-hour strikes indicated that the masses were ready to act and would act if Badoglio did not give them the peace they wanted. Before they had a chance to act, the unconditional surrender was announced and the invasion was on. With the transformation of Italy into a battlefield the masses had to retreat.
A revolution is characterized by the independent action of the masses, but not every time the masses act independently do we have a revolution. Demonstrations of the masses, no matter how large and imposing, even when they bring about changes in the existing government, are not necessarily revolutions. In Russia, between February and October 1917, the workers and soldiers staged several huge demonstrations resulting in governmental changes but it occurred to no one to call these changes revolutions. The demonstration that took place in Petrograd in July 1917 was an armed one and undoubtedly exceeded anything that occurred in Italy after Mussolini’s fall. It was characterized by Lenin as something less than a revolution and more than a demonstration, showing how careful Lenin was in designating the nature of important actions of the masses.

Some comrades may feel that since fascism in Italy was destroyed and since, in general, it was expected that fascism would be destroyed as a result of a proletarian revolution, there must therefore have been a revolution in Italy. That would constitute reasoning not on the basis of actual events but on the basis of doctrine, a type of reasoning alien to the spirit of Marxism.
When Lenin, upon his return to Russia from exile, presented his April theses advocating the taking over of power by the Soviets, leading Bolsheviks accused him of going contrary to his theory of the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. He answered them in the words of Goethe that “theory is grey but green are the facts of life.” As we all know, Lenin at no time minimized the importance of theory. He meant to indicate that a Marxist must base his theories on the facts of life and not on any doctrine previously propounded.
 
Forecasts and Reality
It is almost certain that in the writings of Trotsky and other comrades who wrote on the subject assertions will be found that fascism will be destroyed only by a proletarian revolution. It happened, however, that a combination of factors led to the destruction of fascism in Italy without a proletarian revolution. Only superficial people and charlatans will seize upon an error in predicting a concrete event as an indication that the basic line is incorrect. Our basic line is that fascism as a threat to the proletariat will be destroyed only by a proletarian revolution. That does not mean that under certain circumstances, in a particular country, the capitalists themselves will not move to get rid of fascism. Our basic line means that capitalism has reached a stage when, in the last analysis, the alternative confronting mankind is either fascism or socialism.
The ease with which the capitalists, represented by Badoglio and the King, were able to overthrow Mussolini is explained by the fact – which Trotsky indicated – that the fascist regime had been transformed into a military-police dictatorship. It is inconceivable that the Italian capitalists could have ousted or would have wanted to oust Mussolini in the early days of fascism when it had a powerful mass base.
Fascism comes to power on the basis of a mass movement composed largely of lower middle class elements and de-classed proletarians. It loses that base when it becomes evident that it will not and cannot fulfill its demogogic promises of the days when it was making a bid for power. It must then rely solely on the military and police machine that it creates while in power; and the leader of the regime can then be overthrown by a palace revolution. Mussolini, in the later stages of his rule, was practically in the same position as a dictator of any of the Latin-American countries.
In ousting Mussolini and in proclaiming the end of fascism the Italian capitalists conclusively verified our basic doctrine that fascism as a government is not established on the basis of a new social system but is simply a form of government resorted to by the capitalists to destroy all vestiges of democracy in order to save their social system. When to retain fascism means the probable loss of their wealth and power the capitalists will not hesitate to get rid of it. The theories which proclaimed fascism as a new social system have been proved false.

Conclusions
It is obvious that the revolution in Italy has begun. I use the word “has” because the revolution has not been crushed by the invasion of the Allies; it has only been interrupted. When recently the students at the University of Naples shouted for the elimination of the monarchy against the liberal speakers who favored a regency, they thereby indicated that the masses are ready for revolutionary action. And one must remember that the masses are far to the left of the republican students. If the German army is driven out of Northern Italy, where the Italian industrial workers are concentrated, we can confidently expect that they will not be satisfied to remain under the rule of the Allied armies.
But to say that “a revolution has begun” is not the same as saying “there was a revolution.” Trotsky, writing about the sit-down strikes in the French factories, at the time Blum became Premier, asserted that the French revolution had begun. No one now speaks or writes as if there was a revolution in France in 1936.
It is best to be accurate in characterizing an event even if inaccuracy does not lead to any serious consequences. It certainly avoids confusion. It is best to say that the Italian revolution began and to avoid saying that there was a revolution in Italy.
December 15, 1943
 






EDITOR’S NOTE: Continuing the discussion on the national question in Europe, on which we have published articles in each issue since September, we publish comrade M. Morrison’s contribution. Other comrades have indicated that they intend to contribute articles to the discussion in subsequent issues.



The terrible oppression to which the peoples of the occupied countries are subject has naturally led some very serious comrades to propose that the slogan of national liberation be adopted for all countries in Europe now under the heel of German imperialism. A close study of the connotation of the slogan and of all the factors involved in the present European situation is necessary before deciding whether to accept or reject the proposal.
Now that a victory for Hitler appears much less likely than it did a year or so ago, when a few comrades presented the Three Theses (published in the December 1942 issue of Fourth International), it may be argued that the question need no longer be discussed. This argument is not at all convincing. For, in the first place, the same problem may arise with the occupation of Europe by the forces of the Allies and, in the second place, the proposal involves a question which, since it has been raised, should be discussed for the sake of theoretical clarity.
All parties adhering to or sympathetic with the Fourth International have as part of their program the right of all nations to self-determination. This principle of the right of nations to self-determination is of course also applicable to imperialist countries that have been defeated and occupied by Hitler’s army – France, for instance. France is now in the category of oppressed nations. It must be understood, however, that recognition of the right of France to national freedom does not mean that revolutionary Marxists would support the war carried on by any section of the French ruling class against Germany. When the war began it was imperialist in character and the defeat of one of the imperialist nations does not alter the character of the war.
In the light of the fact that we accept the principles of independence of nations and the right of self-determination, it must be assumed that those in our movement who now propose the slogan of national liberation for the occupied countries mean something more than the mere recognition of these principles. The slogan of national liberation is raised by us in China, in India and in other colonial and semi-colonial countries. It must be assumed that the comrades who propose the raising of the slogan for European countries mean that we apply it in the same way in these countries as we do in China and India. This is not explicitly stated either by the authors of the Three Theses or by Marc Loris in his articles in the September and November 1942 issues of Fourth International. It is almost certain that such is the case with the Three Theses. It is not so certain as far as the articles of Loris are concerned and therein lies one of their ambiguities.
Whenever Marxists have advanced the slogan of national liberation it has been under circumstances where they were willing to support a struggle for independence even when it was under bourgeois leadership. In China we support the struggle for national liberation against Japanese imperialism in spite of the fact that it is under the leadership of Chiang Kai-shek representing the Chinese capitalists and murderer of tens of thousands of revolutionary workers. In India we support the struggle for national independence against British imperialism regardless of the fact that it is under bourgeois leadership. True, we distinguish ourselves from that leadership and we give it no political support. Nevertheless we support the struggle.
Our support of such struggles is based on the proposition that the struggle of colonial and semi-colonial countries for and achievement of independence weakens the imperialist system and furthers the growth of the productive forces of the oppressed nations. In addition, national freedom is a democratic demand and any struggle for national freedom is one which Marxists are in duty bound to support even though it is led by capitalist elements. At all times, socialism must stand out as the champion of freedom and democracy for the oppressed masses and nations.
Were we to adopt the slogan of national liberation for the occupied countries of Europe, consistency would demand that we pursue the same course in these countries as in China and India, that is, that we support the struggle for independence even if led By representatives of capitalism. Assuredly, enough quotations can be found in the writings of Lenin to show that when a nation is under the heel of an oppressor, revolutionary Marxists are obligated to struggle for the independence of the subject nation and to support such a struggle even if under the leadership of bourgeois elements. But it is quite elementary for all Marxists that to solve a new problem it is not at all sufficient to quote Marx or Lenin or Trotsky. What is necessary is to use the method that our teachers used, that is, to start from the concrete and analyze all the factors of a given situation.
 
The Central Fact in Europe: The War
The central factor in the European situation at the present moment is that an imperialist war is still raging in the world to determine whether German imperialism or Anglo-American imperialism is to control Europe and the colonial world. Revolutionary Marxists refuse to support either one of the imperialist camps. They refuse to support the governments of the small European nations invaded by German imperialism. Not because they are indifferent to the fate of small nations but because the governments of these small nations represent a class whose interests are inextricably tied up with the interests of the big imperialist powers. Had Germany’s invasion of any small country been independent of the imperialist conflict all revolutionary Marxists would have gone to the defense of the small nation. But it is impossible to separate the current struggle of the small nations of Europe from the imperialist conflict and because we refuse to be involved in this conflict we refrain from giving support to the small nations of Europe.
If we retain the meaning that Marxists, up to the present, have given to the slogan of national liberation, that is, the sense in which we use it in China and India, it is difficult to see how its adoption would not entail supporting those sections of the bourgeoisie of the occupied countries who are participating in the struggle against the German occupation. But the struggle of the bourgeoisie of the small nations of Europe, at the present time, is part and parcel of the imperialist conflict. In effect, then, to adopt the slogan of national liberation as an independent slogan, retaining its historic meaning, would mean to change our course and support the small nations of Europe in the imperialist conflict. I do not think that anyone intends to propose such a change in our course.
Are we not, however, supporting the Chinese struggle against Japanese imperialism, even though China is allied wjth Anglo-American imperialism? We have explained that our support of China is predicated on the fact that the Chinese struggle in its origin was clearly one against imperialism and that China’s formal alliance with the Anglo-American imperialism has not as yet changed the essential character of its war. Analyzing all the factors in the war China is waging against Japan we, conclude that it continues to be independent of the imperialist war; doing the same thing with reference to the small nations of Europe we conclude that their war continues to be part of the imperialist conflict.
When asked whether the slogan of national liberation for Europe is similar to or analogous with the same slogan in China, comrade Loris went off on a tangent to show that Lenin criticized Rosa Luxemburg and other Marxists for making a distinction between the European countries and the colonial world. The distinction which must be recognized at the present time between China and the small countries of Europe is not the general distinction made by Luxemburg, Radek and others. They falsely held that the slogan of self-determination is applicable to the colonial world but is not applicable to European countries. The distinction I insist upon is one between a country where the struggle for national liberation can be considered as independent of the imperialist conflict and countries where the struggle by sections of the bourgeoisie against German imperialism is inseparable from the imperialist conflict.
If the slogan of national liberation means to support a struggle even though led by bourgeois elements then its adoption means, under present conditions in Europe, to support a struggle which we refused to support when Hitler first invaded the occupied countries. Is there any sense in refusing to support the Greek or Norwegian or Yugoslav governments at the time of the invasion and supporting them after the countries have been occupied? Now that the countries are occupied the struggle pursued by the fallen governments or their representatives within the occupied countries is the same struggle waged by them when their countries were invaded. Were we to come out with the slogan of national liberation it would appear as if we are not willing to defend independence before it is lost but only to regain independence after it has teen lost.
It may be contended that Loris, at least, does not mean to use the slogan of national liberation as justifying support to any struggle within the occupied countries led by bourgeois elements. That is not at all clear from his articles. In previous answers to written questions (published in an Internal Bulletin of the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party) he strongly implied that support of the struggle led by Mikhailovitch is possible. I think he has changed his mind on this question as he is careful, in his articles written subsequently, to avoid saying anything implying such support.
The Mikhailovitch example shows how dangerous it would be to adopt the slogan of national liberation for the European countries. If we support the struggle of Chiang Kai-shek, why not that of Mikhailovitch? It so happens, however, that the latter is the minister of war of the Yugoslav government in London and that the war he is carrying on is only a continuation of the war which he waged at the time of the invasion. Mikhailovitch is no worse than Chiang Kai-shek but the war led by him cannot be distinguished from the imperialist war while that led by Chiang Kai-shek is independent of the imperialist conflict.
It should not be concluded that it is impermissible, under all circumstances, to support a struggle led by a Mikhailovitch. Lenin mentioned the possibility of the political subjugation of all of Europe by some imperialist power, in which case the struggle for national liberation would come on the order of the day. Were Hitler victorious, it is quite possible that after a certain period the struggle for national liberation would, even in Europe, become the central struggle, with the revolutionary Marxists wholeheartedly supporting it.
But a definitive victory and the subjugation of Europe is only a historical possibility. It is as yet far from an actuality. It seems that the authors of the Three Theses as well as comrade Loris, when proposing the adoption of the slogan of national liberation for the occupied European countries, could only have done so by assuming Hitler’s victory as definitive. They do not take into consideration the fact that the imperialist war is still going on. To ignore that factor is to ignore the most important factor in the whole situation.
Loris places great emphasis on the fact that the struggle for national liberation is now being waged largely by the workers; and he states that Germany’s occupation of the European countries raises the national problem in a unique manner. These statements indicate that he does not view the adoption of the slogan as necessarily implying the support of a struggle for national liberation even if led by bourgeois elements. In this he separates himself from the authors of the Three Theses who appear to be willing to accept all the logical implications of the slogan. In fact the phraseology of the Three Theses is so vague as to justify the inference that the authors intend to ignore all class distinctions. If that is what they mean, it constitutes a fundamental break with Marxism.
There is of course no law making it obligatory to give the slogan of national liberation a meaning which would necessitate the support of a struggle led by capitalist elements. But certain difficulties arise if one insists on the use of the slogan in a sense different from its historical usage in Marxist literature. In the first place, it will be constantly necessary to explain that we are using the slogan in a different sense than that given to it in the past. Confusion will also result from the fact that in colonial and semi-colonial countries we mean by the slogan that we support a nationalist struggle even if led by a Chiang Kai-shek or a Gandhi. In general it is advisable to retain the historic meaning of a slogan and to give it the same political content everywhere.
Furthermore, to use the slogan of national liberation in the European countries, independently of the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe, is actually to place before the eyes of the workers the goal of national liberation under the capitalist system. As indicated above, it might be that we shall in the future be compelled to do that very thing, but to do so now would constitute a serious error.
 
The Socialist United States of Europe
Socialism has been on the order of the day, as far as Europe is concerned, for many years. Objective conditions have been more than ripe for the unification of Europe on the basis of proletarian regimes in the various countries. This does not mean that a struggle for national independence was excluded in the isolated countries where such independence had not been achieved. It means only that revolutionary socialists emphasized over and over again that the national problems confronting the European masses could be solved only by a Socialist United States of Europe. The betrayals by the official socialist leadership of the European countries, particularly of Germany, permitted the reactionary force of fascism to gain the adherence of the middle classes and bring to Europe the agony which is now its lot.
No doubt, the masses of the occupied countries prefer that which they had prior to Hitler’s conquest to the misery which they are experiencing at the present moment. But it would be a mistake for Marxists, at this time, to shift, in the slightest degree, from the central slogan of their propaganda in the past years. For in the minds of the masses there must also be a serious doubt that the restoration of the conditions existing prior to the conquests of Hitler will in any way solve their problems. They have not yet forgotten their misery under the pre-Hitler regimes and, while they may not know and understand all the reasons for the rise and success of fascism, they know that capitalist democracy did not prevent the fascists from gaining power. More so now than at any other time is it necessary to stress the idea of a Socialist United States of Europe.
The fact, stressed by Loris, and we accept it as a fact, that it is the workers who are putting up the fiercest struggle against German oppression, makes it all the more necessary for us to give the struggle a socialist character and aim. What shall we tell the workers to struggle for? For national liberation implying a return to the pre-Hitler period or for the proletarian revolution which would give them both national and social freedom?
Loris speaks of the necessity of having independent states before proceeding to have a Socialist United States of Europe. Ignoring the schematicism inherent in such a formulation, it tends to imply that the workers, in their struggle against the German imperialist oppressor, should aim at national independence under capitalism before going over to the task of the proletarian revolution and a Socialist United States of Europe. It is difficult to see why, if the workers are the mainstay of the struggle against the foreign oppressor, they should not aim to achieve a Socialist United States of Europe. At the very least it is the duty of revolutionary Marxists to concentrate the attention of the workers on that aim rather than on the aim of national independence. Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that the workers are struggling only for national independence under capitalism, it still remains our duty to raise a slogan which would direct them into the right channels.
It would seem that Loris agrees with this viewpoint, for he expressly states that “to speak of freedom now and to remain silent about the only means of attaining it, by the proletarian revolution, is to repeat an empty phrase, is to deceive the masses.” But if, at the same time, he proposes the adoption of the slogan of national liberation without expressly stating that it should not be used independently, he practically nullifies his statement about the necessity of the proletarian revolution to attain freedom.
It goes without saying that under no circumstances should a revolutionary party ignore the natural and justifiable sentiments of the masses for national freedom. The masses must at all times see in socialism a champion of the right of self-determination of nations. That is true during the imperialist war as well as before or after it. It is not at all a question, as Loris puts it, of abandoning the demand for national freedom during the war.
It does not at all follow, that, in order to be the champions of national freedom, we must under all circumstances use the slogan of national liberation. At the present moment, in the occupied countries we must concentrate on three things. We must refuse to support or participate in any way in the imperialist war; we must stand out as the champion of national freedom; we must emphasize the necessity of socialism as the solution to the problem confronting the European masses. Insofar as one slogan is capable of indicating these manifold tasks, the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe best serves that purpose.
To any question whether we are for national independence, an unhesitating answer in the affirmative must be forthcoming, with the explanation that in order to achieve it the masses must struggle for power to the workers.
We must be careful not to confuse the question of the proper political slogan with the question of whether we should support a particular group of workers struggling against German oppression. Under all circumstances revolutionary Marxists are obligated to support workers struggling against either a foreign or native oppressor.
Where there are groups of partisans offering resistance to the German imperialist conqueror it is necessary to study the composition and leadership of a particular partisan group before revolutionary Marxists decide to join or support it. If it is a group led by representatives of the official government, then it is participating in the imperialist war and support of such a group is out of the question. If it is a group of workers and peasants who are driven to take up arms against the foreign oppressor, it may be advisable and necessary to join and support such a partisan group and try to give the struggle the direction which we would like it to have, try to educate the workers and peasants to adopt our slogans. In the extremely complicated conditions existing at present in the occupied countries there can be no rigid formula worked out to serve under all and any conditions.
There can also be no question about the necessity of fighting for and supporting democratic demands such as the right of free speech, free press and free assembly. Democratic demands are to be supported regardless of whether one expects a proletarian or bourgeois democratic revolution to follow the reign of fascism. When the masses begin the revolt against the fascists it will be our duty to urge them to establish Soviets and take over the governmental power. They may not follow our advice. In all probability the parties of revolutionary Marxism will not be strong enough, if the revolt against fascism should break out in the near future, to have a decisive influence over the workers at first. A combination of liberal democrats, reformist socialists and Stalinists may gain control of the masses before they accept the leadership of revolutionary Marxism. No one is in a position to predict the exact course events will take.
At all times we participate in the struggle of the masses for greater freedom and at all times we point out to the masses the path which they should follow to attain that freedom. The masses must know that our central aim is to establish a Socialist United States of Europe. Any slogan which at this time will tend to take away the attention of the masses from this central idea is incorrect and harmful to the socialist revolution.
We cannot say what changes we shall make in our program if either one of the imperialist camps succeeds in subjugating Europe, politically and economically. We can only say that, while the imperialist war is still raging and while in the memory of the masses the conditions prevailing before the conquests of Hitler are still fresh, the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe must continue to be the central political slogan of revolutionary Marxism.
 

t Goldman: Yankee Imperialism Plays for Big Stakes at Lima (December 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Yankee Imperialism Plays
for Big Stakes at Lima
(December 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 53, 10 December 1938, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The task facing the representatives of American imperialism at the eighth Pan-American Conference to be held at Lima, Peru, beginning on Dec. 9, will be to extend the “good neighbor” policy.
That policy, which consists of substituting silk gloves for the naked fist is the method used by U.S. imperialism to assure its supremacy in the Latin-American countries, does not actually begin with the present administration. When Calvin Coolidge sent Dwight Morrow, partner of J.P. Morgan, as ambassador to Mexico in 1927, he in fact adopted that policy. President Roosevelt extended it to apply to all Latin-American countries, labelled it as such and made it popular.
Under present conditions the “good neighbor” policy demands amplification. American imperialism sees grave possibilities of losing the Latin-American market as its own special preserve. And facing a real threat of being deprived of the Far East as a market and field for investment by the victorious march of the Japanese armies, it is determined to keep the western hemisphere for itself. Agreed on Hemisphere Control Not that it is reconciled to the loss of China. Certain sections of the American capitalist class, particularly those of the middle west, see no great profits to be reaped by fighting the Japanese imperialists for the right to exploit China. These mid-western capitalists advocate an exclusive concentration upon both American continents. Other capitalist groups are unwilling to surrender the Chinese market without a struggle. All sections of the capitalist class, however, agree that the western hemisphere belongs to them.
Faced with the situation where competing imperialist powers, especially Germany and Japan, are making serious inroads in the Latin-American market, American capitalism finds it necessary to obtain the active co-operation of the Latin-American countries. To be a good neighbor implies nothing more than a willingness to be friendly and to offer aid in case of need. It is more of a passive than an active attitude. What is required now, as far as American imperialism is concerned, is an active union of all Latin-American countries, under its tutelage, to defeat all possible competitors. To achieve that active union will be the goal of Secretary Hull and his fellow-delegates.
 
Obstacles to Overcome
Certain difficulties must be overcome by U.S. imperialism. It has been pointed out that in the last analysis American capitalism, in order to compete successfully, must be able to sell better goods at cheaper prices. All other methods of conquering the Latin-American market are subsidiary, at least for the present, when the idea of annexing Latin America and keeping competitors out by force has not been given serious consideration. American capitalism feels confident of its ability to compete with any rival capitalist country.
The advantage which a totalitarian capitalist regime has over a democratic capitalist country is considerable. U.S. capitalism has to overcome the disadvantage of lack of centralization and the existence of a working class that is still free to struggle for higher wages and better conditions. Should its wealth and superior industrial machine fail to bring victory to American imperialism in its economic war with the poverty-stricken totalitarian regimes, then more forceful measures will be taken both in the form of an attempt to reduce the living standards of the American workers and of keeping its rivals out of Latin America.
Knowing that they are being courted on all sides, the Latin-American capitalists are holding out for a high price. They demand not only good and cheap commodities but also entertainment and flattery. The capitalists of this country have decided to be very careful in their salesmanship methods and fortunately for them the pastor-like Secretary of State, Cordell Hull, suits their purposes in all respects. The most sanctimonious platitudes are ready to roll off his tongue at every opportunity.
If he doesn’t fool the politicians he at least convinces a great number of people both in this country and in the Latin-American countries that the United States is interested in nothing else than to build up friendly and neighborly relations between all countries of the western hemisphere for their mutual benefit and for protection against dictatorships.
 
Path Is Not Smooth
The path is not altogether smooth. The stern attitude of the Roosevelt government in attempting to protect the oil properties of the American capitalists in Mexico will require explanation and Secretary Hull will not find the task an easy one. The claim that the United States is interested in guarding the democracies of the western hemisphere will sound a little hollow in view of the dictatorial character of the vast majority of the Latin-American countries. But all these are regarded as minor problems. In the great task of entrenching American imperialism in the Latin-American nations, black can be easily made to appear white, especially by such a religiously devout gentleman as the Secretary of State.
 



THE PUBLICATION IN English of a number of essays by the late Menshevik leader Martov under the title of The State and the Socialist Revolution [1] is intended by its publishers, the semi-syndicalist, semi-anarchist, semi-socialist International Review group, to furnish theoretical arguments for all those who behold in Stalinism a necessary and inevitable product of Leninism. The social-democrats anxious to justify the treacherous role of their Menshevik brothers during the Russian Revolution, the intellectuals disheartened and disillusioned by the ugliness of Stalinism and yearning for democracy, peace and righteousness, the pseudo-scientific Marxists eager to defend their passivity by quotations from Marx, will all utilize Martov’s arguments against Bolshevism to assail the movement which accepts the essentials of the Bolshevism of Lenin and rejects Stalinism as the very antithesis of that Bolshevism.
It was not a bad move to choose Martov as the theoretical champion of the various groups and tendencies hostile to Bolshevism. His long history in the revolutionary movement, his knowledge of the works of Marx and Engels, his internationalist position during the World War enable him to play a comparatively effective role as an opponent of Bolshevism on moral and intellectual grounds. And besides, he can be transformed into something of a prophet. For did he not, even during the life of Lenin, condemn the lack of democracy in the Soviet Union and is that not sufficient proof that he foresaw the development of Leninism into Stalinism?
No serious Marxist can have the slightest objection to any attempt to reevaluate Bolshevism in the light of the experience of the last decade and a half. If Bolshevism has been tried and found wanting it is necessary to recognize that fact and proclaim it throughout the world. The interests of the working masses transcend all considerations of prestige and he would indeed be disloyal to those interests who would cling to an ideology which in practise has brought nothing but harm to the working-class movement. But it is equally bad to throw a system of ideas overboard merely because of unexpected and disappointing results. With the intellectuals who have reached the conclusion that Stalinism is the natural outgrowth of Leninism it is a case not of a reasoned analysis but of an emotional reaction to an admittedly terrible situation. If they are looking for a solid theoretical basis to justify their emotional reaction they will have to find something more substantial than the arguments offered by Martov.
 
“Soviet Mysticism”
Beginning his pamphlet with an attack on what he calls “soviet mysticism” Martov falls into a mysticism just as bad, if not worse, than that which he attributes to the Bolsheviks. According to Martov the Bolsheviks invested the Soviets with a magic power. They conceived of them as perfect instruments for the realization of the victory of the proletariat, applicable at all times and under all conditions. It is undoubtedly true that in the days of Lenin when the revolutionary Marxists were compelled to defend the necessity of the dictatorship of the proletariat in the form of Soviets as against the dictatorship of the capitalists through parliamentary forms of government, the stress was laid on the superiority of Soviets as against a parliamentary regime with the inevitable result of some exaggerations due to over-emphasis. Not having had any experience with Stalinism the proponents of Soviets, in the early days of the revolution, did not discuss the problem of their possible or probable degeneration and the causes for such degeneration. By and large they conceived of them as democratic instruments affording the proletariat a far greater opportunity for initiative and self-expression than that offered by a parliamentary regime and therefore far more suitable to the needs of proletarian democracy.
If nothing else, the constant attempts by Lenin and other prominent Bolsheviks to rid the Soviets of bureaucratic distortions prove that Martov has created a straw man in attributing to any responsible Bolshevik thinker the idea that Soviets contain something in their very nature which guarantees the victory of the proletariat.
If any one is guilty of mysticism it is Martov who evidently is of the opinion that, once having taken over state power, the Soviets are destined to function as the instrument for the dictatorship of a minority. No matter what the conditions may be when the Soviets assume power, no matter what takes place afterwards, it is inevitable that they should serve as a means used by a minority to dictate to the majority. Martov’s criticism of the functioning of the Soviets in the days of Lenin may or may not be justified but it remains an intricate puzzle why any one should consider that the manner in which the Russian Soviets functioned is something inherent to Soviets as such regardless of time, place and conditions. It is difficult to see how Martov in criticizing the practises of the Russian Soviets should have failed to discuss the problem whether the Soviets functioned as they did because of specific Russian conditions or because Soviets by their very nature are incapable of functioning in a democratic manner.
The question of course is not whether the mere existence of Soviets absolutely guarantees the victory of the proletariat. The destruction of the Russian Soviets by the Stalinist regime is sufficient proof that such is not the case. Assume for a moment that the Soviets, immediately after the October Revolution, could and would have functioned in the most democratic manner imaginable, it still remains true that the continued existence of soviet democracy and of the Soviets themselves would be determined, in the last instance, by social and economic factors and not by the mere existence of democracy, or by the degree of education possessed by the proletariat or by the good will and intentions of the party leading the Soviets.
As pointed out by Trotsky in his Revolution Betrayed, the political safeguards described by Marx, Engels and Lenin as essential to a workers’ state are not sufficient to prevent its degeneration. Economic and social conditions are far more powerful factors in determining the development of a soviet regime than any political measures taken to guard against a bureaucratic degeneration. Against adverse economic conditions the best intentions in the world and the greatest number of political safeguards are helpless. Under favorable conditions democracy within the Soviets is absolutely essential to assure the building of a socialist society. But it cannot prevail over unfavorable conditions.
Martov’s treatment of the whole subject necessitates a discussion of the relative merits of Soviets and parliament for the exercize of working-class rule. We can readily accept his definition of the dictatorship of the proletariat as “the power used by the proletariat to crush all resistance which the exploiting class might oppose to the realization of the socialist and revolutionary transformation”, but that still leaves the question open as to the state form through which that dictatorship can be exercized most effectively.
Theoretically there is nothing to prevent the exercize of the dictatorship of the proletariat through a parliamentary regime. Just as theoretically it is possible to conceive of the working class gaining power by getting a majority in a bourgeois parliament. Parliament could be reformed to a point where those characteristics which Marx noted as belonging to the Paris Commune and which Lenin considered essential for Soviets would also be part of the parliamentary system. Establish a unicameral system, place the executive branch of the government under the complete control of the legislature, give the right of election and recall at all times, establish the principle that the remuneration of the representatives should be no higher than the average wage of a worker and you have a parliament through which the dictatorship of the proletariat can easily express itself. We can go further and say that the feature which most sharply distinguishes Soviets from parliament and which affords the greatest opportunity for the industrial workers to dominate the state, that is, the establishment of the factory as the basic electoral unit, can also be made part of the parliamentary system. But then there could be no further argument, for the parliamentary system would be transformed into a soviet system. We would leave the realm of historical reality and enter into the domain of pure abstraction.
History offers no proof whatever that parliaments can be reformed so as to assume all of the characteristics of what we deem to be essential to Soviets. On the contrary, the indisputable fact is that even in the most liberal period of capitalist domination the parliamentary system did not offer a great deal of democracy. It was only when the Paris Commune and the Soviets came into being that we saw a recognition, in principle at least, of the necessity of completely democratizing the state.
The most decisive factor, however, in raising Soviets or workers’ councils to the dignity of a state apparatus is the fact that in the period of revolutionary crisis they constitute the organizations that unite the masses in the struggle for power. In the course of the final struggle against the capitalist ruling class, organizations are created which include and are capable of mobilizing the vast majority of the exploited masses. It is then no longer a theoretical question of the relative merits of Soviets and parliament. The latter represents the capitalist ruling class and the former expresses the desire of the proletariat to achieve power. Even prior to the actual seizure of power the Soviets assume to function in certain respects as a state and what is more natural than that the successful outcome of the struggle should invest them completely with state powers. The parliamentary regime representing the interests of the capitalist class having been defeated, the organizations of the working masses take its place.
 
Democracy and Soviets
In accepting the thesis that economic and social factors were primary in determining the manner in which the Russian Soviets functioned in the early period of the revolution and the course of their development after Lenin’s death, we do not ignore the necessity for and the influence of democratic procedure and of the conduct of the party in the leadership of the Soviets. It cannot be too frequently repeated, and the fate of the Soviet Union under Stalin makes it obligatory upon us to do so, that socialism cannot be achieved without the completest soviet democracy. But he leaves the firm ground of Marxism who would make a fetish of democracy, something more than a means to achieve socialism. We can and must enunciate general rules of democratic procedure but not to recognize that there may possibly arise situations (necessarily, they must be extraordinary) when it would be justifiable to deprive a minority group of its rights is to forget that there is such a thing as a class struggle.
Martov’s labored argument on behalf of universal suffrage assumes that under Soviets there would necessarily be a restriction of suffrage. The suffrage would of course be broadened by granting the right to vote to a great number of people who are not permitted to vote under capitalism. And under normal conditions there should be no necessity for depriving bourgeois groups of the right to vote. The proletariat does not make its revolution with the intention of depriving any one of any right except the right to exploit labor. Universal suffrage must be recognized as essential to soviet democracy and only the most compelling reasons would justify a temporary violation of that rule.
Together with universal suffrage there must exist under a soviet regime the right of groups to organize and adhere to their own parties in opposition to the dominant party; freedom of press and of assembly; the protection of the individual against arbitrary acts of government officials; a fair and impartial trial for everyone accused of a violation of any law. In other words all the democratic rights which a bourgeois democratic republic boasts about but limits in actual practise should prevail in a soviet republic. And not only for workers but also for members of the former ruling class. A proletarian government under normal conditions has nothing to fear from any bourgeois group.
Unfortunately the proletarian revolution first occurred in economically and culturally backward Russia. That backwardness together with the fierce civil war that followed the revolution left their mark upon the character of the soviet regime. Opponents of proletarian revolutions in more advanced countries confuse themselves and try to confuse others by transferring the specific characteristics of the Russian Revolution and the Russian Soviets to all future revolutions and soviet regimes. There are many innovations introduced by the Russian Revolution which will be adopted by the working classes of more advanced countries but there are just as many features which the American workers, for instance, would never think of copying.
It would have been perfectly legitimate for Martov, and it is now for any one else, to argue that certain tactics followed by the Bolsheviks were wrong. That it was wrong, for instance to give the factory workers five times the electoral power granted to the peasants, that it was wrong to arrest enemies or alleged enemies of the revolution without first obtaining a warrant, etc., etc. One would be compelled to examine the particular feature under dispute with reference to the situation existing at that time. As it is Martov and his present followers want everybody to believe that all of the tactics followed by the bolsheviks were and are considered matters of principle applicable to all revolutions and under all conditions.
As revolutionary Marxists we shall defend the democratic rights of all groups under soviet rule but we must reject the idea that democratic rights are so sacred that they can never be violated even as against enemies of the revolution. The interests of the revolution transcend all other considerations and in normal times those interests can be furthered by the utmost democracy for all groups, including the enemies of the proletariat. To deprive any group of its democratic rights involves the possibility of dangerous consequences, just as injecting a powerful drug into a sick body is involved with danger. But in the world of reality one has to take some chances of making even dangerous mistakes. Only members of the Civil Liberties Union can fight for democracy for all peoples at all times.
It can be admitted that here and there there may have been and probably were needless restrictions on the democratic rights of groups and individuals but for that not only were the civil war and famine conditions to blame but also the attitude of the parties who were opposed to the Bolsheviks and now howl about the “Bolshevik dictatorship”. It is quite certain that had all the parties that were represented in the Soviets submitted to the Soviets after the Bolsheviks obtained a majority, there would have been a great deal more of democracy than there actually was. The decision of the Right factions and of the Martov group to leave the Soviets and the subsequent defense of the counterrevolution by some of the Right Mensheviks and Social Revolutionists created a situation where it was impossible for the Soviets to function in as democratic a manner as was desirable.
If the Bolsheviks under great stress at times violated soviet democracy, the social-democrats would have nothing to do with working-class democracy. They clung to democracy only when it meant their right to control the Soviets and with it the right of the capitalists and landlords to control the nation. In their desire to assure the victory of the working class the Bolsheviks may have made mistakes, but in their attitude of hostility or passivity to the revolution the social-democrats of all varieties were guilty of crimes against the working masses.
 
Marxism, Blanquism and Passivity
According to Martov all the errors of the Bolsheviks can be traced to their failure to understand the necessity of waiting for the proletariat to be completely educated to the realization that socialism is desirable and necessary. The Bolsheviks, if we believe Martov, represent the tradition of Blanquism which stood for the idea of an active minority gaining power during a period of revolutionary ferment when the uneducated majority is willing to follow the extreme faction. Having achieved power this minority would change the capitalist psychology of the majority by education. The Bolsheviks, in other words, are metaphysical materialists in contrast to Martov and others who were anxious to postpone the revolution to some future date and are therefore justified in classifying themselves as dialectic materialists.
No revolutionary Marxist will quarrel with the general propositions enunciated by Martov to the effect that the social consciousness of the proletariat is determined by its social life; that the conditions of capitalist society compel the proletariat to enter on the road of struggle against those conditions and in the course of the struggle both the environment and the consciousness of the proletariat emancipates itself mentally and culturally.
But Martov’s formulation, correct in a general way, cannot solve a single serious problem, let alone the problem of problems, the question of the social revolution. While he does not forget to mention that the conscious will of the revolutionary vanguard has something to do with the process of educating the proletariat, his whole attitude can be correctly described as a passive one, hoping for a well-mannered revolution to occur in the far-distant future.
It has been explained over and over again that Marxism differs from Blanquism not because the latter believes in the decisive action of a minority but in that it considers the necessity of having the action of the minority depend upon prevailing social factors, including amongst them the degree of education and the state of mind of the working class and the lower middle class.
What heights of education must the proletariat reach? What is the degree of understanding that it must hare of the socialist outlook? Martov would have agreed that the possibility for examining the masses to test their knowledge of socialism is excluded. He would have agreed even that all that the masses can be expected to comprehend, under the adverse conditions of capitalism, is that the present system is unbearable and that it is necessary to take over the factories and produce for the welfare of the people. The world of reality does not permit the working class to acquire knowledge gradually. Under conditions of capitalist decay the proletariat is confronted with the choice: take power or suffer the consequences of fascism and decades of ruthless oppression. The pedantic approach of Martov has nothing in common with revolutionary Marxism and can only serve the reformists with an excuse for their betrayals.
Martov’s emphasis on the abstract proposition that there must be an educated proletariat leads him to underestimate completely the effective role of the vanguard. Granting the overwhelming importance of objective conditions, it is senseless to think that the workers can achieve victory without a leadership formulating correct tactics and strategy. The masses do not come together on their own initiative and decide when and how to take power. They who loudly proclaim that the workers require no leadership are in reality against any leadership but their own.
The existence of an active minority is part of the general environment, and its activities have a bearing both on the change of the environment and the transformation of the mental attitudes of the masses. Were we to agree with Martov we would have to conclude that the educational activities of the minority leading a class that is in power are without any effect. But what an unreasonable conclusion that would be. If the capitalist minority can and does mould the thinking of the masses through control of all educational and propaganda facilities why can not the party placed in power by the workers utilize the means at its disposal to teach the workers the ideas and practises of socialism?
The intellectuals who are in mortal fear of a disciplined party will do us a great favor if they will figure out how the proletariat can emancipate itself without any leadership. We must unfortunately admit that dangers of bureaucratic development exist in every party, but the fact still remains that to reject the necessity for a party means to reject the proletarian revolution and to invite fascism.
Measured by every standard and even taking into consideration the actual results of Stalinist degeneration, the action of Lenin and his party are more than justified before history. The present Martovs can sit back and bemoan the fate of mankind; the revolutionists will build the Fourth International and follow in the footsteps of Lenin.
 
Footnote by ETOL
1. The three articles in this collection are: Marx and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat, The Ideology of “Sovietism” and Decomposition or Conquest of the State which are all available in the Julius Martov Internet Archive.

t Goldman: Anti-Lynch Bill (February 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Anti-Lynch Bill
A Speech I Did Not Deliver In The United States Senate
(February 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 8, 19 February 1938, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Gentlemen: Some of you feel that you have already done your duty, that is, you have done what appears to you to be politically advisable. Thirty-seven of you who are in favor of the anti-lynching bill voted to close debate and proceed to a vote. You think that you have thereby cleared your skirts and can go back to your Negro constituents with the claim that you are a friend of the Negro people. What else could anyone expect from you? Did you not vote in favor of closing debate and thus bring the bill to a vote, something which the two dozen Southern senators refuse to permit by their filibuster? And now there is no use continuing the attempt to pass the bill because the filibuster will prevent this august body from considering other important measures!
Undoubtedly you will succeed in convincing some of the Negro people that you were sincere in your efforts to pass the Wagner-Van Nuys anti-lynching bill. But I assure you many white and Negro workers will see through the hypocrisy which is glaringly evident in the bill itself and in the attitude of the large bloc of senators supporting the bill for political reasons.
 
Hypocrisy of Northern Democrats
I am afraid that I must agree with the reactionary, white-chauvinistic Senators from the South that the bill was introduced with the sole purpose of enabling the Northern Democrats to make sure of the Negro vote. It is common knowledge that many of the Senators from the Northern States, where many Negro voters reside, are actually against the bill but dare not come out openly in opposition to it. The purpose of the bill is essentially to fool the Negro voters. As a matter of fact, all of you are constantly occupied with the task of fooling not only the Negro people but all the people. If you and your like did not succeed in deceiving the wide masses do you think they would tolerate the capitalist system for one moment? Do you think the white and Negro workers would permit themselves to be exploited, would suffer hunger and misery, would consent to be cannon fodder in capitalist wars if they were not deceived by the capitalist politicians, press, school and church?
By the way, let me call your attention to the greatest hypocrite of all of you, the man who sits in the White House, President Roosevelt. This great friend of the people, the Negro people included, I presume, is as silent as a sphynx. Not a word has he uttered in favor of the bill, not a sentence has he written urging his supporters to vote for the bill. This shrewd politician hopes to make the Negroes think that he favors the bill and at the same time avoid antagonizing the Southern Democrats by actually coming out in its favor. He will certainly be happy if the bill never passes so that he will not be forced to sign or veto it.
 
Weakness of Bill
Let us consider the provisions of the bill and see whether it will bring about the desired effect of stopping the inhuman lynchings of innocent Negroes? In the first place, it should be known that the bill does not attempt to punish any leader or member of a lynching mob. If it is possible under present conditions to stop lynching, it can be done only by a vigorous prosecution for murder of the leaders and members of a lynching mob and not by the method proposed in this bill.
The Wagner bill threatens to penalize the official in charge of any prisoner who is lynched or the governmental subdivision where the lynching occurs. Before any official can be successfully prosecuted it will have to be proved that he wilfully neglected to use all diligent efforts to prevent the lynching. I hope that no one is foolish enough to believe that a prosecutor, assuming even that he is interested in obtaining a conviction, will have an easy task before a jury in the South. The burden of proof, of course, will be on the prosecution and that practically guarantees an acquittal. In the case of a governmental subdivision, which under the proposed law will be liable to the party injured or to his relatives in the sum of from two thousand to ten thousand dollars, the burden of proving that the official used diligence is on the government. Even there it will not be so difficult to prove that the officer did his best to prevent the lynching and was overwhelmed by superior force.
In some states there is a law which makes a governmental subdivision absolutely liable for all damage done to property in the course of a riot. Wagner could certainly have treated the Negroes at least in the same way, that is, the bill could have provided absolute liability on the part of any governmental subdivision where a lynching occurs. But property is more sacred than Negroes.
 
Motive of Southern Senators
Why are the Southern Senators so bitterly opposed to a bill; the effectiveness of which can be questioned even for the purpose it is intended to serve? Should the bill pass, white masters will continue to have their properties; they will continue to exploit both Negro and white workers; the share-cropper will continue to live on the brink of starvation; and the Negroes will still be spat upon, reviled and terrorized. The Northern States have shown that lynching can be limited to revolutionary workers, as in the case of Frank Little, or that it can be done with all the legal forms, as in the case of Sacco and Vanzetti, without in the least disturbing the well-being of the capitalist class.
The arrogance of the ruling whites in the South knows no bounds. They will not permit any encroachment upon their right to do as they please with their “niggers.” And then there is a possibility that the Negroes, even though they may be mistaken, will think that there is some power to protect them against the brutality of the white bosses and this thought might cause them to lift up their heads. The Senatorial representatives of the white ruling class of the South are anxious to prevent the slightest concession to the people who created all the wealth of the South.
 
How Lynching Will End
It is necessary that the Negro workers clearly understand the nature of this anti-lynching bill and the motives of those who have introduced it and support it, as well as those who are opposed to it. The Democrats who allegedly support it, do so because they see a chance to assure themselves pf a huge number of Negro votes. The Senators who oppose it are unwilling to yield an inch of their right to keep the Negro in utter degradation.
The Negro workers must understand that even if the bill is passed (and it has very little chance of passing) it is doubtful whether it will have any effect upon lynchings. I shall vote for the bill because, as weak as it is, it might conceivably have some slight effect in saving the life of a Negro. The Socialist Workers’ Party states clearly that a far more effective method than this bill to stop lynchings in the South is for the Negro and white workers to organize and shake their united fist in the face of the white masters. Only a united struggle of white and colored workers will improve the horrible conditions of the working class of the South. Do not rely upon the charitable feelings of the masters; do not depend upon the good will of the Northern Democrats. Rely only upon your united strength.
 
Against Capitalism
And it is not enough to struggle against lynching alone. There is very little choice between being lynched and starving to death. Lynching is only one of the results of the conditions under which both Negroes and white workers are compelled to live. So long as the white capitalists are permitted to rule this country, so long will there be unemployment, war, terror, starvation, lynching.
Not an anti-lynching bill will do away with lynching, but a bill introduced by a workers’ government abolishing the right of the white ruling class to own the wealth of this country and exploit the workers of all races and creeds. For the Negroes to gain complete economic, political and social equality, and for the white and Negro workers to live as brothers free from the exploitation of capitalists, it is, necessary to create a workers’ government.
 

t Goldman: Illinois Poll Shows Need for Labor Party (November 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Illinois Poll Shows Need for Labor Party
Workers Corralled in Voting for Crooked Gang
(November 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 51, 26 November 1938, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

CHICAGO – What was obviously a middle-class revolt against the New Deal throughout the country hit Illinois as well. The sharp drop in the price of corn and wheat created resentment amongst the farmers; the generally bad business conditions for the lower middle class of the cities engendered dissatisfaction in the ranks of that class. The result was a loss of faith by those two elements of the population in the ability of the Roosevelt New Deal to solve their problems and the only place they had to turn was to the Republican party. This once more illustrated the Marxian maxim that if the middle class gets no decisive leadership from the left it turns to the right.
The Republican sweep did not, however, succeed in winning the important contest for the United States Senate. The Republicans recaptured four seats in the House of Representatives and apparently have gained control of the State Legislature. But their march to victory was stopped by the powerful Democratic machine of Chicago.
 
Majority Whittled Down
Scott Lucas, running for Senator on the Democratic ticket, lost to his Republican opponent by 100,000 votes outside of Chicago but obtained a plurality of more than 200,000 in Chicago. The majority of over half-a-million which the Democrats obtained in Cook County in 1936 was whittled down to about 40 percent of that figure.
If the Republicans didn’t win, neither did the New Dealers. In any contest for first place for reactionary politics most of the Democratic candidates would have nothing to fear from the Republicans. The successful candidate for the U.S. Senate, Scott Lucas, is as reactionary as they make them. The Republican newspapers attribute his victory to the fact that, while a member of the House of Representatives, he voted against Roosevelt’s Supreme Court Bill. Behind Lucas stood the Horner-Courtney faction of the Democratic machine, representing respectable Big Business. Courtney, the present State’s Attorney of Cook Country, delights in raiding all labor unions not controlled by men who do his bidding.
 
Supported by Underworld
Lucas was also supported by the notorious Kelly-Nash machine, closely allied with the underworld and in charge of the police who murdered striking steel workers for exercising their right to picket. These two factions, though fighting like cats and dogs in the primaries, for the right to control the lucrative business of governing the people, found no difficulty in getting together during the election.
There isn’t a single New Dealer in the whole Democratic crowd of Chicago but for the sake of a victory a most cynical partnership was entered into between the respectable Horner faction, the underworld of the Kelly-Nash group and the Roosevelt New Dealers. One can judge the liberalism of the Kelly-Nash group by the fact that the reactionary Chicago Tribune, after the election, contained an editorial expressing gratification over the victory of that group on the local scene.
* * *
L.N.P.L. Backs Unholy Front
The workers undoubtedly supported the Democrats. In the first place they were told to do so by Labor’s Non-Partisan League largely under the influence of the Stalinists. Not that the League carried on an extensive campaign; it hasn’t enough belief in its own program to do that. Whatever the Communist party could do to help along the unholy combination of Horner, Kelly and the New Dea! was done.
However, the C.P. was somewhat impartial. The astute leadership of that party looked very carefully and found good-men-and-true to the ranks of the Republican party and since the C.P. is really serious about the Democratic front it acted logically and endorsed the good Republicans.
It must be admitted that even without the urgings of Labor’s Non-Partisan League and the C.P., the workers would have voted for
the Democratic party. To them the Democrats represented the New Deal, and between the New Deal and the reactionary Republicans they chose the former. The presence of a real Labor party with a program meeting the needs of the workers would have made a tremendous difference in Illinois and elsewhere. Not that victory would have been assured but there would have been a far different spirit arising from an independent struggle for independent candidates on a militant program. The so-called Labor party in Illinois consists of not much more than the local leaders of the decrepit Socialist party, supported by a number of local trade unions. The party was unable to get on the ballot because the Democratic politicians feared the possibility of losing some votes to it. At that and without any campaign, some thousands of workers must have written in the name of the Labor party candidate for Senator. The Socialist Workers’ party supported the write-in for the Labor party candidate. The Chicago S.W.P also issued a special 2-page election edition of the Socialist Appeal.
 

t Goldman: House Defeats Ludlow Amendment 209 to 188 (January 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
House Defeats Ludlow Amendment 209 to 188
(January 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 3, 15 January 1938, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





By the narrow vote of 209 to 188, the House of Representatives in Washington; under heavy pressure from President Roosevelt, and with the solid reactionary bloc casting its ballot for the majority, defeated the amendment of Representative Louis Ludlow providing for a national referendum to be taken before war can be declared against another country by the United States.
Carrying on a vicious chauvinistic campaign against the amendment for the past several weeks, were all the forces of reaction, all the war-mongers, patrioteers; ably seconded by the American section of the Stalinist Foreign Office – the Communist Party. The Browderites stood in a single camp not only with the Big-Army-and-Navy President, but with Stimson, Landon and the Old Guard of the Republican Party.
Not a single, labor organization in the country presented the point of view of the revolutionary working class on the Ludlow amendment. Those that did not support it outright, criticized it only from a reactionary pro-war standpoint. We present below the Marxian view of the amendment, presented in the form of a revolutionary anti-war criticism by our comrade Albert Goldman.





An old problem in a new form is raised for the revolutionary Marxists and for the working class in general by the LaFollette-Ludlow proposed amendment to the constitution, which Would make it necessary, before congress can declare war, to refer the question to a referendum, except in the case of an actual invasion. It is only necessary to apply the accepted principles of revolutionary Marxism to solve the problem correctly.
 
Pacifist Cure-All
Revolutionary Marxists, especially since Lenin’s vigorous polemics against pacifism, have consistently taken the position that any policy which pretends to solve the problem of war independently of the class struggle creates illusions and is therefore detrimental to the interests of the. working class. It was on the question of the advocacy of disarmament advanced by middle-class pacifists as a cure-all for war that Lenin developed his struggle against pacifism. The LaFollette-Ludlow amendment falls into the same general category as the policy of disarmament. In so far as it adds an element of democratic procedure it carries even greater dangers to the revolutionary struggle against war. Will the proposed amendment have any efficacy at all in preventing war? We shall not speak here of a war which will commence by an actual invasion of any territory belonging to American imperialism. The amendment does not require a referendum in such a case. We shall confine ourselves to such cases where the American imperialists will be convinced of the necessity of an appeal to arms and where they can not afford to wait until the enemy invades their territory.
 
Marxist Conception of Cause of War
Unless the Marxist conception of the fundamental cause of imperialist wars is to be discarded the answer to the question: will the amendment prevent any kind of war? must be a very emphatic negative. An imperialist war (and the United States can fight no other kind of war) is not caused by the invasion of any enemy power. It is caused by imperialist rivalries for markets, for raw material, for fields of investment and these rivalries are inherent in imperialism. They exist long before the declaration of war and the act of invading enemy territory.
It would be far more sensible for pacifists to advocate a referendum on the question of preventing our capitalists from making foreign investments. Possibly the pacifists of “socialist” persuasion will go to the root of the problem by presenting the bright idea of abolishing war by inferring the question of the existence of capitalism to a referendum vote. For the revolutionary worker it is quite evident that to abolish war it is necessary to destroy capitalism itself and therefore to consider the struggle against war as part of the struggle against the capitalist class.
One can say with the utmost certainty that a provision in the constitution requiring a referendum could not possibly prevent the government from entering into war if the decisive section of the capitalist class deemed it necessary. Should we assume the impossible, namely, that the Ludlow amendment would become part of the constitution, one of three things would follow in case the capitalist government would be convinced of the necessity of going to war against an imperialist rival. Either Congress would declare war without a referendum on the pretext that our territory was invaded or a referendum would be taken quickly in the midst of a tremendous war incitement with a favorable vote absolutely certain, or the requirement of a referendum would be ignored altogether. Judging by recent experience the probability is that future wars will all be “undeclared” wars. It is absurd to think that any kind of a constitutional amendment would prevent the ruling class from guarding its interests. There are already many constitutional provisions which are ignored in an “emergency” and one more will be immaterial.
 
Objections of Capitalists
Why then does the big capitalist press raise such lusty objections to the Ludlow amendment ? It is a mistake to think that because certain sections of the capitalist class object to certain measures that they represent any danger to the rule of the bourgeoisie. Almost every measure of the least liberal character was fought strenuously by the reactionaries but that does not mean that when such a measure was passed it affected adversely the vital interests of the ruling class. Bourgeois democracy, it is true, prefers to cover itself with legality and hence it is preferable in the eyes of the ruling section not to have any provisions in the constitution or on the statutes which they might have to disregard but in a crisis bourgeois democracy ignores bourgeois legality completely or at best interprets the law to suit its interests. Just as it is certain that the capitalists class will disregard all its laws in case the proletariat threatens its existence so is it certain that it will not permit any laws to stand in the way of its making war when that is essential.
For the workers, however, especially for the politically advanced workers, the question can not be settled by the undoubted fact that the necessity for a referendum will raise no barrier to an imperialist war. It is also important to understand that the attitude of the workers on the question of supporting or opposing a war must not be determined by the irrelevant factor of who struck the first blow. What is important and conclusive is the nature of the war. It will be a struggle for imperialist booty on the part of the American government whether it is invaded first or itself takes the initiative in invading some other country. And revolutionary workers can not support an imperialist war regardless of the immediate events that led up to that war.
One of the most dangerous aspects of the amendment is its “democratic” nature. Does it not require a popular vote and is that not exceedingly democratic? Undoubtedly there are people sufficiently naive or formalistic in their thinking who will support the amendment on account of its democratic character. But to forget that democracy under the capitalist regime is essentially the right to deceive the masses is to forget the very essence .of correct working-class politics. We can very well envision a tremendous war propaganda, a referendum during which the revolutionary opponents of war will be ruthlessly suppressed and a huge majority rolled up in favor of war. What follows? That the war has been formally consecrated by the vote of the people. And the formal democrats will then be under the necessity of supporting the war on the ground that the majority voted in its favor.
It goes without saying that revolutionary workers would not fall for such argument but we must recognize the possibility of greater confusion if a referendum should precede a formal declaration of war.
 
Attitude of Lovestoneite Leadership
That the pacifists and liberals who call themselves socialists should favor the Ludlow amendment is to be expected. Lacking any Marxian base for their thinking they grasp at every formula, outside of the bitter class struggle, offered to solve the problem of war. It was left to the Lovestoneite leadership to lend a Marxist coloration in support of the amendment. In the January issue of the Workers Age an editorial favoring the amendment bases its argument on the proposition that “Today, it is this resolution which marks the vague, the half-formed line dividing the pro-war and anti-war forces in America, separating those heading for military dictatorship from those calling for a measure of democracy on such a vital issue.”
So, the people are now divided into pro-war and anti-war forces and our politics are to be determined not by the necessity of educating the working class to the real nature of imperialist war and rallying the workers as a class in the struggle against imperialist war but by the advisability of taking our stand with the forces who call for a measure of democracy on such a vital issue.
The editorial proceeds to explain its support of the amendment by asserting that it “would offer at least the possibility of raising our voice against the predatory wars of American imperialism.” As if we could not raise our voice without a referendum and as if American imperialism would permit us freely to raise our voice in time of crisis. “Not so much as an effective means to end war but as offering a tribune for anti-war agitation in the struggle against capitalism, do we support the movement that is gathering around the LaFollette-Ludlow amendment.” Is it necessary to support an amendment which will create illusions and confusion in order to carry on agitation against imperialist war? Should not Marxists take advantage of the agitation around the amendment to explain the nature of imperialist war and thus help clarify the minds of the masses about such a vital question? Our agitation can be a thousand times more effective if we do not support the amendment. For then we can really explain how wars can be abolished. The Lovestoneite centrist leadership succeeds in covering itself with revolutionary phrases in a great many situations but when vital problems arise it also succeeds in exposing its real nature.
 
Attitude of Communist Party
From the leadership of the Communist Party nothing could be expected except opposition to the Ludlow amendment. Difficult problems confront the Communist party bureaucrats. To pose as the champions of peace when in reality they are the most consistent advocates of war involves them in many contradictions. They have succeeded in rallying many workers and middle-class people who believe that the Communist party leads the struggle against war. The Ludlow amendment appears to be an excellent measure to such people. The Communist leaders, in common with all the realistic politicians of the capitalist class, want no hindrance whatsoever to quick action against a possible enemy of U.S. imperialism, especially if that enemy happens to be hostile to the Soviet Union. It is therefore compelled to line up with all the conscious forces of the capitalist class and thus come into conflict with many of its supporters who are sincerely against war.
The opposition of the Stalinists to the Ludlow amendment and our refusal to support it is an excellent example of the possibility of diametrically opposing and hostile forces voting together for totally different reasons. The C.P. opposes the amendment because it wants American imperialism to go to war against Japanese and German imperialism since the latter two threaten the safety of the Soviet Union. We do not favor the Ludlow amendment because it will have no effect on the question of war and will create dangerous illusions and throw the working class off from the track of the class struggle against war. The C.P. favors collective security of the capitalist states to prevent war and considers the Ludlow amendment ineffective. We also consider it ineffective but we favor the proletarian revolution to prevent war. That some of the arguments of the Communists are borrowed from the Marxist arsenal (see Hathaway’s article in the Daily Worker of Jan. 6) merely proves the old proverb of the ability of the devil to quote scripture.
The position of the revolutionary Marxists is unambiguous. We are opposed to all imperialist wars but we realize that such wars cannot be prevented by anything except the overthrow of the capitalist regimes and the establishment of workers’ governments. Our struggle against war consists of two elements: the constant education of the masses as to the nature of and cure for war and our participation in the class struggle for the purpose of organizing the masses for the overthrow of imperialist governments. The issue of war is only one of the issues upon which we attempt to organize the masses and at certain times may become the most important issue but we do not separate that issue from the general class struggle at any time.
We too will take advantage of the agitation around the Ludlow amendment. But we shall tell the American workers that it will not have the slightest effect upon imperialist wars. Some wise-acres will allege that we oppose a popular referendum before war is declared by congress, thereby favoring that war be declared without a popular referendum. The question of the referendum is absolutely immaterial. We oppose the idea that any kind of a referendum will help the workers in the least. What is material is the necessity of the workers to understand the nature of war and to have no illusions about it.
Around the Ludlow amendment we must carry on an agitation that the only solution for Was is the destruction of the capitalist system.
 



TO say that a change in the situation dictated a change in tactics can be interpreted in two ways. It can be inferred that the tactic previously followed was correct in the light of conditions then existing and that the new tactic, which may be directly contrary to the one previously followed, is also correct because of the change in the situation. Or the inference can be made that a change in conditions made clear the incorrect policy previously applied and that the present policy has corrected the former one.
In the case of the proposed re-orientation of the Socialist Workers’ Party on the labor party problem it can be truthfully said that both of the above inferences can be made. Our tactic in rejecting the labor party slogan, at a time when there was practically no movement for a labor party, was correct and because of the radical change in conditions it is now correct to adopt that slogan. Our formulation with reference to the labor party question, however, a formulation which prevented us from shifting our position quickly when circumstances demanded a shift, was too rigid to be correct. It was a case of an incorrect reason for a correct tactic.
Our statement that it is not the business of a revolutionary party to help in the formation of a labor party could result in a correct tactic only in a period when there was no serious movement for the formation of a labor party. But that formulation applies to all times and under all circumstances. Consequently, when a substantial movement for independent political action came into being, the abstract character and incorrectness of that formulation was thrust upon us because it interfered with the adoption of a correct tactic of supporting a labor party movement.
What was most effective in impressing leading members of the party with the necessity for a change both in tactic and formulation was the practical experience of the trade-union activists. With the organization of Labor’s Non-Partisan League the political life of the trade unions, especially of the CIO was awakened. Resolutions for and against independent political action, proopsals to support Democratic candidates and other political resolutions were being constantly introduced necessitating a definite attitude on the part of our members in the trade unions.
One of two courses could be followed. To oppose the formation of any labor party and to advance the SWP as the party which the workers should follow now and in the immediate future or to propose that the trade unions should organize their own party. It is highly significant that while there was some hesitation on the part of the activists in suggesting the second policy, practically no one thought of advancing the first policy as a practical measure. It appeared to those active in the trade unions as too unrealistic a policy to deserve serious consideration.
Reality came in conflict with theory and when that occurs Marxists do not hesitate to give up theory.
 
When Is a Movement Progressive?
It is not enough, however, to support a movement simply because it embraces large numbers within its scope. It is necessary to analyze the nature of the movement and its tendencies and determine whether or not it will aid the labor movement to advance in a revolutionary direction before we decide to support it even critically. In short, before throwing our support to any movement, we must be convinced that it is progressive in character.
At a time when the plague of semantics has descended upon us one must watch his step very carefully in using any word which has not been defined exactly. What is “progressive” and what is “retrogressive”?
We designated, for instance, the struggle of the Ethiopians against the Italian imperialists as progressive in character and on that basis we supported the former as against the latter. Any number of sectarians of both the right and left variety pooh-poohed the idea that the war on the part of the Ethiopians was progressive in character. Was not Haile Selassie as brutal a taskmaster as Mussolini? Were not the Ethiopian peasants horribly mistreated by the aristocratic Ethiopian landlords? No noticeable difference could result from a victory of either side. Hence no support of the Ethiopians or the Italians. We, however, considered the Ethiopian struggle in its relationship to the whole imperialist system, in the light of the general struggle of the colonial and semi-colonial peoples for freedom from imperialist exploitation and of the effect which a victory of the Ethiopians would have upon the struggle of the working masses throughout the world. Viewing the Ethiopian struggle from that general viewpoint, from the viewpoint of the development of the forces arrayed against capitalist imperialism, we declared that struggle to be progressive and offered whatever support we were capable of giving.
At the very beginning of the fascist revolt against the Loyalist government we came out for material support of the latter on the ground that the war of the Loyalists against the fascists was progressive. We still adhere to the same opinion. To oppose our position, sectarians pointed to the shooting of revolutionary workers by the Negrin-Stalinist regime. We did not permit that to swerve us from our position, though we intensified our political struggle against the Loyalist government. We still consider that a victory of the Loyalist Government is preferable because that will afford the workers a greater opportunity to march forward.
We may not be able to define the term “progressive” with the exactness that will satisfy super-critical semanticists but for the purposes of a political party that is hardly a legitimate requirement. From the point of view of revolutionary Marxism any movement which sets forces into motion against the capitalist system and weakens that system, which serves to heighten the class-consciousnes of the workers, and makes possible a further advance is progressive in character.
Would the formation by the trade unions of their own party, separate and apart from the avowed capitalist parties, constitute a progressive step? To determine that we must of course consider conditions as they are and not as we would like them to be. It would be folly to claim that a labor party movement would be progressive under all circumstances. The discussion must necessarily be limited to the present situation. Nor would it be germane to the subject to discuss whether the formation of a labor party is the most probable development. Whether or not a labor party will actually come into existence is immaterial in a discussion on the question whether or not the formation of a labor party would constitute a progressive step.
At the present time the American workers are still tied to the two capitalist parties; they do not conceive of these parties as representing exclusively capitalist interests; they accept without question the idea that a capitalist party can also represent their interests.
 
Labor and Political Action
A movement begins which, by and large, is clearly in the direction of separating the working class from the capitalist parties. (For an analysis of that movement, see the article by Burnham and Shachtman in the August issue of The New International.) It is true that Labor’s Non-Partisan League supports Democratic candidates; it is also true that the whole movement is exceedingly unclear in its aims; it cannot be denied that the trade union bureaucrats place obstacles in the way. But it is impossible to interpret recent developments in the labor movement in any other way except as an attempt by the workers to find a path which would lead them to their own working-class party.
Reasoning abstractly it is possible to admit the existence of such a movement for independent political action and to contend that it is our duty to turn it towards the revolutionary party, that is, to offer that party as the vehicle for the working masses to express their sentiments for independent political action. We take it for granted that revolutionary Marxists must attempt to channelize a vague and inchoate movement for independent political action such as we are confronted with at present. They must try to give it a definite organizational objective and that objective must be of a character which will appear reasonable and necessary to the workers. Under the circumstances, to present our party to the workers as the instrument which they should use to express their desire for independent political action would be a futile gesture. It would evoke no response from them whatsoever. This statement is made not only on the basis of a general knowledge of the present state of consciousness of the working masses but on the strength of the well-nigh unanimous testimony of all revolutionists active in the trade unions.
The only organizational aim which is understandable to the workers and which has a real chance to set them in motion, is the formation of a labor party. To insist upon counterposing our party to the Democratic and Republican parties means, under present conditions, to fail to use whatever influence we can wield in the labor movement for the purpose of strengthening the tendency towards independent political action. We are justified in asking the question of our opponents: do you prefer the present situation to a situation where the trade unions would have their own party? Of course it will be indignantly denied that a labor party is the only alternative to the present lack of any working-class party; it will be emphatically asserted that the revolutionary party is the logical alternative but emphasis and repetition do not alter the sad reality. It is not what we would like to have but the actual response of the workers that should determine our tactics.
 
Scholastic Distinctions
A subtle distinction is made between the labor party movement and the crystallization of that movement into a labor party. The former is progressive, the latter reactionary. It is difficult to see how it is possible to separate the movement from its immediate and logical organizational objective. As I indicated before, without presenting to the workers a serious objective which appears feasible to them, the labor party movement ceases to have any significance. A movement for independent political action which has no organizational objective appearing realizable to the workers is bound to end in nothing at all. To say that the movement for a labor party is progressive while the actual organization of such a party is reactionary is equivalent to saying that the struggle of the Ethiopians is progressive while a victory would be reactionary. Schoolmen might be able to understand such reasoning but not ordinary workers.
Just as subtle a distinction is the one that is made between what is progressive for the workers and for the revolutionary party. It is an elementary principle of Marxism that every advance made by the working masses is an advance for the revolutionary party. Considering the vanguard as part of the class and not as a group looking down upon the class with a condescending air, no other conclusion is possible. Carried to its logical conclusion such a distinction would mean to consider the proletarian revolution as the sole progressive step for us; everything else may be progressive for the masses but not for us. This would naturally lead us to the position of those sects that are satisfied with issuing an ultimatum to the capitalist class demanding its unconditional surrender and upon the failure of the unsympathetic capitalists to comply with the demand, retire to the class room.
The argument is advanced that a labor party could play a progressive role in the period of capitalist up-swing but not in a period of capitalist decline. And the reason for that is the fact that in the former period a labor party could gain concessions from the capitalist class but not so in the latter period. It is difficult to see why the possible achievements of a labor party should be taken as a criterion for its progressive character. Even a revolutionary movement is unable, in a period of capitalist decline, to gain as much for the workers as in a period when capitalism is making huge profits. This is not to say that a militant movement cannot gain more for the workers than a reformist one. It simply means that in the period of decline the working class must fight harder for less than in the period of capitalist up-swing. Not the possible achievements of a labor party but the mobilization of the workers as a class on the political arena, setting them into motion against the capitalist class, are the factors which should determine our attitude with reference to supporting the labor party movement.
 
Formal Logic and Reality
But will not the labor party be reformist in character? Will it not support an imperialist war, and so forth and so on? Would such an argument deter us from actively participating in the organization of trade unions? Will not the bureaucrats of the trade unions be just as reformist, will they not support an imperialist war just as enthusiastically as the bureaucrats of the labor party? Yes, we know that there are differences between trade unions and a political party but any argument based on the future activities of a labor party is equally applicable to the trade unions. It is the general effect which the organization of trade unions has upon the working class that determines our attitude towards them. The same general rule should apply with reference to our attitude to a labor party.
How can we reconcile support of the labor party movement with the necessity of telling the workers that only a revolutionary overthrow of the present system can solve their problems? Must we not tell the workers the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? Yes, we must. But those experienced in the field of propaganda for workers understand that it is impossible to go through the whole gamut of revolutionary Marxism on every occasion. What to say, how and when to say it are questions involved in the general problem of effective propaganda. To show that it is necessary for the trade unions to create their independent political party and at same tune to guard against the illusion that the problems of the working class can be solved without a revolution led by a revolutionary party, requires great attention and skill. But once we are convinced that the labor party movement is progressive in character and that it is our task to develop and strengthen that movement, the difficulties, whatever they may be, are of secondary importance.
They are not confronted by difficulties who lead a secluded and cloistered existence. Those who want to intervene actively in the actual life of the labor movement must be prepared to face and solve many exceedingly difficult problems.

t Goldman: Franco's Refusal to Withdraw Foreign Troops Ends Non-Intervention Farce (August 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Franco’s Refusal to Withdraw Foreign Troops
Ends Non-Intervention Farce
Note Reveals Italian and German Plan for More Aid
(August 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 35, 27 August 1938, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

To the proposal of the Non-Intervention Committee that Franco send his “volunteers” back to Italy and Germany, the leader of the Spanish fascists replied that he wants belligerent rights before any withdrawal and that an equal instead of a proportional number of men be withdrawn from both sides. This is tantamount to a flat rejection of the Committee’s proposal and everybody, with the possible exception of the Committee itself, accepts it as such.
This leaves matters exactly as they were for the last two years. The fascist powers will continue to send men and armaments for Franco’s forces while the great “democracies” will undoubtedly retain their virtual embargo against the Loyalist Government.
 
Quick Victory Impossible
The chief explanation for Franco’s rejection lies in the serious military reverses he has suffered within the last month. Had he been able to continue his march on Valencia and had he felt confident that the end of Loyalist resistance was really in sight, he could have very well afforded a more affable reply to the proposal of the Non-Intervention Committee. But the hopes which his successful spring offensive aroused for a speedy capitulation of the Loyalist forces did not materialize. On the contrary the Loyalists launched two success-full counter-attacks with the result that, at the present moment, the fascist offensive has been stopped and an immediate victory appears out of the question.
Under the circumstances, Franco, necessarily under instructions from Mussolini and Hitler, is frank enough and bold enough to announce indirectly, but nonetheless clearly, that he needs more help from Italy and Germany, and that he does not intend to be hampered by any agreements from getting that aid. And via Franco’s rejection, Hitler and Mussolini have once again announced to the world their intention of guaranteeing a victory for their puppet.
Unpleasant as Franco’s (or rather Mussolini’s) intransigence may be to Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, the prediction can be safely made that the latest slap in the face of the Tory Government will not change its policy of reconciliation with Mussolini. It is true that last April it was expressly stated by the British Government that it “regarded the settlement of the Spanish question as a prerequisite of the entry into force of the agreement [between the British and Italian Governments], but what that meant was that the British Government was perfectly willing to wait for a Franco victory before the agreement would be declared officially in force. It would be absurd to suppose that the British politicians did not know of Mussolini’s determination to achieve victory Franco. They, like Mussolini, hoped for an early fascist victory.
 
British Busy Elsewhere
The conclusion that the British Government will not be seriously exercised over Franco’s note is strengthened by the fact that it is right now preoccupied with the task of putting the screws on Czechoslovakia. It is not at all improbable that the note from Burgos was sent just at this time to create a diversion in favor of Hitler. A jab from behind by Franco is as good a hint as any that the British Government better do all it can, through its emissary Lord Runciman, to assure Hitler’s domination of Czechoslovakia.
What will the Daladier Government of France do? It may grumble, but tied as it is to British diplomacy, it is not in a position to follow an independent course, even though the imperialist interests of France demand that Spain be ruled by a government which will not interfere with its route to the French colonies.
But what the French or British Governments do is not half so important as what the French workers do to assure that the Spanish-French border is open so that war supplies can reach the Loyalist forces. The recent military successes show clearly that the Spanish workers are far from having given up the battle. The fact that Negrin has to make positive denials of his purported negotiations for a truce with Franco shows that the Popular Front leaders would not dare to come out openly in favor of reaching’ an agreement with the fascists. Such a peace is possible only over the dead bodies of the Spanish workers.
 
Workers’ Aid Needed
Should the French workers begin a real struggle against the non-intervention farce (which guarantees intervention on the part of the fascists only), the Spanish workers would be tremendously heartened. So much so that they might even begin to speak once more in sharp terms to the Loyalist Government which, because of its desire to save Spanish capitalism, has been looking to the French and British capitalist governments for aid against the fascist governments.
Undoubtedly both the Communist and Socialist parties of France will raise a howl about the necessity of relaxing control over the Spanish border. But so long as the Daladier Government knows that neither party will do anything more than howl, it will continue its policy of preventing real assistance from reaching the Loyalist Government.
The victory of the Spanish workers depends upon the ability of both the Spanish and French workers to free themselves from the paralyzing hold of the treacherous reformists of all types and to fight fascism with the methods of social revolution.
 

Spurns United Front for GPU Victims in Spain (August 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page



S.P. Spurns United Front
for GPU Victims in Spain
(August 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 35, 27 August 1938, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

On August 1st, the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party addressed a communication to the Socialist Party, the Independent Labor League (Lovestoneites) and to the Anarchist group of Carlo Tresca requesting the establishment of joint action against the frame-up trial of loyal anti-fascists and political opponents of Stalinism being prepared by the Spanish office of the G.P.U. in Barcelona.
The letter pointed out that the planned trial was only a climax to a long series of persecution and repression by Spanish authorities against revolutionary workers and urged that action be taken to prevent a Moscow trial on Spanish soil. Five proposals for united front activity were suggested.
Five Proposals
1. Telegrams of protest to the Spanish government; 2. Setting up of a lawyers’ committee to go to Spain as defense counsel; 3. That the trial be suspended until the accused had full opportunity for free choice of their own counsel; 4. Organization of an International Labor Commission to attend the trial; 5. Letters along these lines to well-known intellectuals and trade unionists.
Replies to this communication signifying their willingness to join in common action have been received from Carlo Tresca and the Lovestoneites. The Socialist Party, however, rejected the proposal. Because of the urgency of action in behalf of the victims of the G.P.U. and because the issue in question reveals the sincerity of all organizations involved, we are reprinting below the text of the correspondence with the National Executive Committee of the S.P.:
 

S.P. Replies
Dear Comrade:
Your letter of August 1st was presented to the National Action Committee of the Socialist Party at their regular meeting last night.
They asked me to transmit to you their decision in the matter. It was the decision of the National Action Committee not to accept your proposition for united front action on the Spanish trials for the following reasons:

The Socialist Party has been engaged in a consistent campaign in the interest of the working class in Spain. By official protest and statement and by various means they have made known to the Spanish government the position and desire of the Socialist Party, and they expect to continue that independent activity with all the resources at their command.
 
We believe the political difference in our attitude toward the Spanish government is so basic that the difference could not be reconciled by any kind of united action.
 
We believe, because of these differences, that such united action would not be of specific aid to those we seek to help at the present moment.




 


Fraternally yours,
(Signed) Roy E. Burt
Executive Secretary






S.W.P. Writes Again
Attention: Roy E. Burt,
Dear Comrades,
Your rejection of our proposal to create a united front of all working class organizations interested in defeating the Spanish fascists and consequently in the liberation of all anti-fascists now in the jails of Barcelona was indeed a surprise to us, especially in view of your claim that you are actively interested in behalf of the anti- fascist prisoners.
We consider the matter of freeing them of such vital importance to the anti-fascist movement that we deem it necessary to comment on the reasons which you give in your letter for refusing our effort to create a united front.
Reason 1) You state that “The Socialist Party has been engaged in a constant campaign in the interest of the working class in Spain,” and that you “expect to continue with independent activity.”
It is exceedingly difficult to reconcile such a statement with your rejection of our offer. Does it not appear incongruous that because of your interest in the Spanish workers, you should refuse to act jointly with other organizations on behalf of these workers? It seems to us that because of that very interest, you should gladly accept our offer to build a united front on behalf of the Spanish political prisoners, for it is obvious that our joint efforts would be more fruitful than our separate activities.
Reason 2) You state that “We believe the political difference in our attitude toward the Spanish government is so basic that that difference could not be reconciled by any kind of united action.”
Undeniably there are basic differences between us. You believe in supporting the Loyalist government politically, while it is our policy to reject support politically to the Loyalist government – a government which jails revolutionary anti-fascists – confining our efforts to material support. We beg to point out that our proposal for united action does not aim to reconcile any differences, but to help free the revolutionary anti-fascists. Why should basic differences prevent us from acting jointly? The very concept of a united front presupposes basic differences. In the particular instance of helping Spanish political prisoners, we can take these basic differences for granted. We can continue to discuss and debate them without in the least interfering with joint meetings, joint resolutions, and similar joint activities pertaining only to the question of liberating the Spanish political prisoners and thus help defeat fascism in Spain.
We are hopeful that you will consider a change in your attitude, and if you do, we shall be most glad to come to a most definite agreement as to the nature and scope of our joint activities.



 


Comradely yours,
Albert Goldman
Acting National Secretary



 

t Goldman: Who Owns the Courts? (August 1938)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Who Owns the Courts?
Spotlight on Capitalist Justice in Harlan
(August 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 34, 20 August 1938, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

It would indeed have been surprising had the Federal government obtained a conviction in the case against the coal bosses of Harlan and their thugs charged with conspiracy to violate the rights of the miners under the Wagner Act. To those who fail to see the clever demagogy of the Roosevelt regime, the case In itself is surprising. Starting from the correct premise that the Roosevelt government is a capitalist government, it seems peculiar that capitalists should be dragged into court for violating labor’s rights.
If capitalist democracy would at all times function openly in the interests of every individual capitalist, it would not be half so difficult to convince the workers that it is in reality capitalist dictatorship. Even fascism must at times try to create the impression that it protects the workers against the employers. Much more so does capitalist democracy function in a manner so as to confuse and deceive the masses. And it is hot necessary to attribute to all the acts of a liberal capitalist government, like the Roosevelt regime, an intention to deceive. It can simply be said that the sincerity of a liberal officer will, in the long run, be ineffective and will serve merely to create greater illusions.
Don’t Convict Bosses At any rate the Harlan trial serves the purpose of proving that capitalist courts are not designed for convicting employers charged with violating the rights of employees. While under certain circumstances a conviction in such case is not impossible, it is certainly highly improbable. It is generally recognized that defendants have less chance of obtaining an acquittal in the Federal courts than in state courts. That is true not only because judges in a Federal court have much more extensive powers to comment on the evidence and let the jury know how they feel about the case, but also because there is, to certain extent, less politics and more preparation on the part of the prosecution.
But the case in Harlan was not one against ordinary criminals nor against workers prosecuted for their activities on behalf of labor. The prisoners at the bar were respected and leading members of the community, and those who were not so respected did the dirty work for those who were.
 
Swindlers Sometimes Sacrificed
It frequently happens that important figures of the capitalist world, when caught red-handed, will be prosecuted and convicted for swindling thousands of gullible people. To ward off the wrath of the small business people, a swindling banker or a crooked politician will at times be offered as a sacrifice.
In the Harlan case, however, the defendants were not only leading lights of the community, but the charge against them, was a mere trifle – merely violating some rights of their wage-slaves. These two factors combined made the odds all in favor of an acquittal. And that, in spite of the tremendous resources of the government, and in spite of the fact that the government, from all reports, prepared the case well and conducted it with skill. That five of the jurors held out for a conviction is proof certain that the evidence against the defendants was overwhelming, and the case clear as daylight.
* * *
One can get an idea of the difficulty involved in obtaining a conviction against the coal barons by imagining a trial, in the same court, against workers attempting to organize the miners. (One really does not have to imagine such a thing; it has actually happened about six years ago.) Instead of the sleek-looking, well-dressed, important people coming from their homes or clubs (since they were out on bail) there would probably appear unshaven, ill-fed, badly-clothed workers guarded by deputies. The judge and prosecutor would look with contempt and hatred upon the defendants and not with the respect that successful business men and fellow club members deserve.
 
Easy to Convict Workers
The jury composed of average mortals, subjected to all the propaganda supporting the social system, would be tremendously affected by the attitude of the prosecutor and the judge, and this would be worth a thousand times more than the nature of the evidence and the pleas of attorneys.
It isn’t any particular form of judicial procedure that makes it easy to get a conviction against workers and well-nigh impossible to convict employers. The capitalist courts are integral parts of the social system and the prevailing relationships and attitudes are transferred to the courts, concealed by the hypocritical cloak of impartiality and “equality before the law.”
The capitalist judicial system cannot readily be perverted, so that capitalists are convicted for insisting on their inalienable right to exploit labor. The function of capitalist courts is altogether different. It must protect private property and in that is included the prosecution of workers for violating the rights of employers.
* * *
Naive people reading the laws and not observing their actual application come to the conclusion that there is no discrimination between classes and individuals. But it should not be difficult to see that even where there is a formal conviction of capitalists, their actual punishment is nothing in comparison to the punishment meted out to workers who are convicted.
 
Penalties Compared
In a recent anti-monopoly case prosecuted by the Federal government in Madison, Wis., the judge found the defendants, oil corporations and their officers, guilty of violating the anti-trust act. Fines of five to ten thousand dollars were imposed.
Not far from Madison, in Waukegan, Illinois, workers who were on strike were sentenced to as high as six months in jail and were fined up to a thousand dollars for violating an injunction against picketing.
How easy for the oil companies and their officers to pay the small fines. For the average worker a $500.00 fine means a jail sentence for the simple reason that it is impossible for him to raise such a sum of money.
We shall assume (a violent assumption, I admit) that in both the case in Wisconsin and the case in Waukegan the judges were scrupulously honest and followed the law. But what a difference in the actual punishment of the two sets of defendants!
* * *
For a worker to recognize that the courts are not intended to aid him in his struggle for better conditions is part of wisdom. Does that mean that the courts should never be used by workers against capitalists or against racketeers in the union? Not at all. There is no principle involved in using or not using the capitalist courts. But if, under exceptional circumstances, it is found necessary for workers, in their struggle against the bosses, to use the capitalist courts, their limitations should be clearly recognized and at all times should be considered as auxiliary to the chief method of struggle, which must always be the unity and militancy of the workers.
 



Dear Comrades:
Our leaving one Trotskyist group, the Socialist Workers Party, and joining another Trotskyist group, the Workers Party, requires an explanation for the advanced workers of this country and all other countries.
Ours is a group composed largely of comrades with ten to fifteen years of service in the Trotskyist movement. We left the Socialist Workers Party because it rejected our proposal for unity of the two Trotskyist groups. We joined the Workers Party because it accepted our proposal for unity.
We left the SWP because in rejecting unity, and in using the most dishonest methods to do so, the leaders of that party clearly indicated that what they want to build is not a revolutionary Marxist party, a Bolshevik party, but a monolithic party.
We joined the Workers Party because the leaders and members of that party want to build the kind of a party we are interested in building – a living, thinking revolutionary socialist party.
*
The Minority (in the SWP) had a sharp political difference with the Majority at the party convention of 1944. The Majority, basing itself on the proposition that we are living in an epoch of imperialist wars and proletarian revolutions, denied the importance of democratic demands for the European countries. The Minority, accepting the same basic premise, insisted on the great importance of democratic demands as a means of mobilizing the European masses against the capitalists, Stalinists and Social-Democrats.
But it never entered the mind of any comrade in the Minority to leave the party because of that difference.
We had sharp differences with the Majority on minor organizational questions. They were important only because the position of the Majority on those minor organizational questions indicated the existence of a Stalinist trend on the part of the Majority with reference to the nature of the party.
An article which was clearly a build-up of Cannon was permitted in the Fourth International; a letter by comrade Goldman mildly criticizing the tendency to leader-worship evidenced in that article, and insisting that leader-worship is hostile to the tradition of Bolshevism, was refused publication.
A letter written by James T. Farrell criticizing articles that appeared in the Fourth International was refused publication. The Minority protested vigorously.
Four comrades were censured by the Majority for organizing a discussion with members of the Workers Party on the Russian question. The Minority objected, declaring that to prevent members from discussing with opponents was a characteristic of Stalinism and was completely alien to Trotskyism.
Although the Minority fought against the Stalinist attitude of the Majority on these questions it never occurred to anyone of the Minority to leave the party because of these differences. It was our view that we could combat the growing monolithism in the party through pressing for free discussion of political and organizational problems.
It was the dishonest attitude of the Majority on the unity question, an attitude which clearly revealed the Majority’s monolithic conception of the party, that is the fundamental cause of our decision to leave the party. A subsidiary cause was the refusal of the Majority to permit the Minority to fraternize politically with the WP.
 
The Minority’s Argument for Unity of WP and SWP
The Minority raised the question of unity after the SWP recognized that the defense of the Soviet Union was no longer an important question, and that the defense of the European Revolution against Stalin was far more important. True, we always accepted the position that differences on the nature of the Soviet Union or the defense of the Soviet Union do not justify a split. But it was only natural that the end of the war, which brought the necessity of defending the European Revolution against the Stalinist army, should have turned our attention to the question of unity. On the question of the defense of the European Revolution against Stalin the two parties had an identical position.
The position of the Minority on the question of unity was simple indeed. The two parties had the same fundamental program for the overthrow of capitalism; they carried on approximately the same agitation on the important immediate questions. Why not unite? Why continue a split that weakens the Trotskyist movement? Why have two parties with two weekly agitational organs, with two monthly theoretical magazines, with enormous duplication of effort and with resulting confusion created in the ranks of the advanced workers?
There are of course differences, but a Bolshevik party without differences is inconceivable. The Minority had no hesitation in saying that the differences were compatible with membership in one party.
The Minority did not propose immediate unity. It proposed that the two parties go on record in favor of unity and proceed to joint work in the trade unions, to joint election campaigns, to joint anti-fascist campaigns – all for the purpose of preparing the parties for unity. It was necessary to eliminate the personal animosities resulting from the sharp factional struggle of 1940. Common work in the interest of the working class would show whether unity was possible without the danger of a factional struggle immediately following the unification.
Without the slightest hesitation the leaders of the majority rejected the proposal for unity. Cannon, when confronted with the resolution, stuck to his line previously enunciated: “We must deepen the split.” He had encouraged the SWP members to consider the WP members as “renegades,” and unity with “renegades” was out of the question. His first and honest reaction to the proposal of unity was a definite “no.”
 
WP Declares Itself Clearly for Unity
The WP, on the other hand, accepted the proposal of unity. The leader of the Majority claimed that the acceptance was only a maneuver, that in reality the WP wanted to enter to prepare another split. On the face of it the claim is absurd. The WP comrades were willing to give up their organization and their public press; they were willing to submit to the discipline of the Majority. To do that in order to unite with a small party in the hope of making a bigger split would not enter the minds of the most inexperienced people. And the WP is led by experienced revolutionists.
The Minority was absolutely convinced of the sincerity of the WP comrades in accepting the proposal for unity for there is only one test: readiness to accept unity. And the WP so committed itself.
Because the WP accepted the proposal, Cannon could not continue with an open opposition to unity. He shifted his ground from open and honest opposition to a shifty, dishonest one. Whereas at first he took the position that there was nothing to discuss, that the press of the WP gave us all the information we needed, he began a farce of insisting on a “thorough discussion and probing of the differences.”
As a decisive objection to unity, the Majority leaders cited the fact that the WP insisted on publishing its own internal party bulletin after unity, something that every group has a right to do in a Bolshevik party. To remove that pretext the Minority requested the WP to promise not to publish its own organ provided the Majority recognized the right of a minority to publish an internal bulletin if it so desires. The WP consented, but the Majority in no way changed its mind.
The Minority became convinced that the real motive of the Cannon clique in opposing unity was the fear of having in the ranks of a united party a large number of revolutionists who would not blindly follow the leader, that Cannon and his clique want to build a monolithic party.
It was this conviction that led the Minority to state: either unity or we belong with the WP. It was this conviction that led the Minority to launch upon a course of political fraternization with the WP in disregard of the policy of the Majority which considered the WP comrades to be “renegades.”
 
Minority Rejects SWP Ban on Fraternization
To the charge that we were violating the principle of democratic centralism we answered: that principle is a means to build a revolutionary party; when it is used to prevent unity of revolutionists it is used in a criminal manner. Under the circumstances, the Minority refused to abide by the policy of the Majority against political fraternization with the WP.
The Minority was confronted with the question whether to leave the party immediately or remain in the party and continue fraternizing with the WP. For a time we followed the latter course since that enabled us to exhaust all possibilities for achieving unity and it was unity that we wanted above everything else.
We chose a most difficult course, and followed it until it became absolutely certain that we could not have unity. The fakery of a discussion with the WP was continued when the Political Committee of the SWP issued a list of questions for “discussion.” The list included all the possible differences – major and minor, past and present – for the obvious purpose of confronting an inexperienced membership with the statement that there are too many differences for unity to be practicable.
The fact that the fundamental anti-capitalist program of the two parties is the same; the fact that in day to day agitation of the parties there is a great similarity if not identity; the fact that the WP expressed its willingness to abide by the decision of the Majority on those questions where there were differences – all that was completely ignored.
After the death of Trotsky, Cannon is bold enough to introduce completely dishonest methods as a substitute for political arguments!
 
Responsibility for Split Rests on Cannon Clique
When, at the last meeting of the National Committee, a warning was given the Minority to give up its course of political fraternization with the WP with the threat of expulsion if the Minority refused, it became evident that it was useless to remain in the party.
Characteristically enough, Cannon accused the Minority of “disloyalty.” What was essentially a political question he, in the manner of a policeman, transformed into a question of disloyalty. There can be no criticism of a majority expelling a minority that refuses to abide by the decision of the majority; but honest and understanding Trotskyists do not pursue the method of Stalinism and then raise accusations of disloyalty.
Upon the shoulders of the Cannon clique rests the responsibility of the continuation of a tragic division of forces in the American Trotskyist movement It is responsible for perpetuating the split in the American Trotskyist movement.
The comrades of the SWP Minority, in joining the WP, do not give up the platform of unity. Together with the other comrades of the WP they are ready to unite the Trotskyist forces. It is entirely up to the Cannonite clique.
To the question as to why we chose to leave the SWP instead of continuing the struggle we answer: Since there is another Trotskyist party in existence led by comrades who have our point of view on the nature of a revolutionary party, it is far more fruitful for us to join that party and help build it than to waste our efforts in constant factional struggle with opponents who are not interested in honest discussion but in mere distortion and name-calling.
Until unity is achieved we shall be in the WP helping to build a revolutionary party without a trace of Stalinism. In the WP we shall work to effect the two Trotskyist organizations. And we call upon our comrades who have remained in the SWP to continue their fight for unity.
We appeal to all unaffiliated revolutionists to join the party of unity, the Workers Party. Join the Workers Party with us! Join us in building the kind of party that led the Russian masses to victory in 1917!



 


Albert Goldman,
for the SWP Minority



 



Ciliga’s purpose in writing the last chapter of his book, The Russian Enigma (published as an article in the August issue of Politics) was to prove that it was Lenin who laid the foundation for the betrayal of the Russian Revolution by Stalin. To prove his thesis he relies on certain specific policies adopted by Lenin. To answer Ciliga fully it would be necessary to take up in detail the specific policies he cites and to arrive at a conclusion as to their correctness or incorrectness on the basis of a thorough analysis of all the factors that prevailed at the time they were adopted. Such an analysis can be made best by a Marxist who is familiar with the Russian language and can go to the original sources. This task should be left to such a person.
It is, however, justifiable without waiting for such an analysis to reject Ciliga’s central thesis because of his method and approach to the problem of workers’ democracy. He approaches the problem in far too general a manner to be convincing. He does not tell us what specifically should have been done by Lenin; he relies simply on general principles. It is all very well to contend that the liberation of the workers should be accomplished by the workers themselves. Such a principle can be readily accepted but it does not inform us what exactly should be done at a particular time under specific conditions.
With Ciliga’s proposition that we should discuss Lenin’s policies in a critical manner there can be no quarrel whatever. Lenin could be and was wrong on many occasions. It is necessary to examine every policy and determine its correctness or incorrectness. It may well be that a certain policy followed by Lenin prepared the road for Stalin’s betrayal but this is far from sufficient to accuse Lenin of betrayal.
That the critical, independent spirit which should be taken for granted in the attitude of every revolutionary socialist was almost completely lacking in the early days of the Communist movement is shown by Ciliga’s own attitude. His emotional reactions, upon “discovering” that Lenin “betrayed the Revolution” indicates that he had more of a religious attitude to Lenin than a revolutionary-socialist one. This was true of practically all the followers of Lenin in the early days of the Communist movement.
The religious attitude prevails now among the Stalinists, although they have nothing to do with Lenin’s policies. It also prevails to a large extent among “official” Trotskyists. It is disheartening to recognize that we must repeat over and over again that the religious attitude has no place whatever in the revolutionary socialist movement. Every idea and every act of the outstanding teachers and leaders of socialism should be subjected to a critical examination. Being a revolutionary socialist implies the acceptance of the critical approach of the great socialists.
 
One-Party Dictatorship
Three questions are raised by Ciliga as constituting the problems of workers’ democracy. I shall deal with them separately though they are obviously very closely connected.
There was a time when even in the Trotskyist movement the idea was generally accepted that during the period of the dictatorship of the proletariat there can be only one party – the party under the leadership of which the workers take power. It was not until Trotsky showed that the one-party regime in the early days of the Soviet Union was the result of peculiar conditions and was not the result of a principle enunciated by the Bolshevik leaders that the Trotskyists began to assert their belief that after the conquest of power by the workers the normal and desirable situation is the existence of competing parties presenting their programs to the masses.
Between the Trotskyists and Ciliga there can be no quarrel on the necessity of recognizing the principle that a one-party dictatorship is dangerous to the revolution. Here one must indicate that the actual practices of the “official” Trotskyists of the Socialist Workers Party can justifiably lead to the conclusion that the leaders of that party give lip-service only to the idea that there should be more than one party during the regime of the proletarian dictatorship. In reality we are safe in concluding that they would not tolerate any opposition to their rule – should the exceedingly improbable situation arise of the workers taking power under their leadership. One need only listen to arguments by major and minor leaders of the SWP to the effect that “we play for keeps” and that “we are monopolists in politics” to realize that there is at least a tendency to a one-party dictatorship.
Our opposition to a one-party dictatorship under the rule of the workers does not, unfortunately, guarantee that there will be no such dictatorship. For, whether or not such a situation exists, depends not only upon the party in power but the opposing parties. Opponents of the regime of Lenin and Trotsky place the whole blame upon them for the existence of the one-party Bolshevik dictatorship. An objective analysis of the role played by the opponents of Bolshevism during the period when Lenin and Trotsky led the Bolshevik party leads to the conclusion that the major part of, if not the entire, blame for the existence of the one-party regime lies upon the shoulders of the opponents of Bolshevism.
It is a matter of record that the Bolsheviks did not drive their opponents out of the Soviets when they gained a majority and the Soviets took the power; the opponents left the Soviets. The Bolsheviks worked amicably with those of their opponents – like the Left Socialist Revolutionaries – who remained in the Soviets and it was not until the Left SR’s tried to gain power through a coup d’etat that the regime became entirely a one-party one. Nor must it be forgotten that many of the opponents of Bolshevism in the ranks of the various groups of socialists took up arms against the Soviet régime. Trotsky’s thesis that the activities of the Bolshevik opponents brought the one-party regime of the Bolsheviks into existence is proved by the historic record.
If Ciliga is correct in saying that Lenin in 1920 made a principle of the one-party dictatorship we should not hesitate to say that Lenin was wrong and by his act aided greatly in disorientating the Communist movement on that question.
In the light of subsequent events it is clear that Lenin and Trotsky erred greatly in prohibiting factions at the Bolshevik congress of March 1921. Stalin took ample advantage of that prohibition. The Civil War was over and, if anything, it was necessary to relax the previous prohibitions. Surely those who fought shoulder to shoulder with the Bolsheviks in the Civil War gained the right to an independent existence as a group and to criticize the reigning party. When one considers how Stalinism was aided by Lenin’s action in prohibiting factions it is clear that any danger arising as a result of factional criticism could not possibly compare with the danger of aiding the development of a monolithic party through the prohibition of factions. Not even the terrible conditions prevailing in the country at the time of the Congress justified the prohibition against factions.
 
Existence of Bourgeois Parties
Should bourgeois parties be suppressed by a government ruling under the dictatorship of the proletariat? It must be remembered that the Bolsheviks did not begin with suppressing any party – not even the most reactionary bourgeois party. A socialist party placed in power by the masses should not suppress any bourgeois party unless it attempts to overthrow the government by violence or to demoralize the masses by spreading falsehoods and thus prevent the smooth functioning of the economy and the government.
There is no general rule which can be formulated that will succeed in solving all of the problems connected with the suppression of parties during the period immediately following the taking of power by the workers. The only general rule to be followed is that the regime of the workers must be protected and at the same time the greatest possible democracy must be assured to the masses. Special circumstances may require certain limitations of democracy but the leadership of the party representing the workers must understand how dangerous any limitation of democracy is and should be anxious to remove it at the earliest opportunity. To limit democracy after the necessity for any limitation is over is to increase the danger of degeneration.
 
Democratic vs. Bureaucratic Management of Industry
No socialist will argue against Ciliga when he asserts that democratic management of nationalized industry by the workers is absolutely essential. The real problem is how to apply that principle correctly in the period immediately following the taking of power by the workers; and in the solution of that problem Ciliga is of no great help to us. Does accepting the above principle mean that we must grant the right of the workers of every factory to determine all of the conditions of labor and all of the questions connected with production in their particular factory independently of the factories in the same industry or in other industries? Does it mean that the trade unions rather than the party should have control of industry?
There certainly can be no advantage whatever in permitting trade-union bureaucrats to run the industries rather than party bureaucrats. The problem of the democratic management of industry by the workers would still remain and the danger of excluding the workers from the management would be just as great.
We must start from the premise that it is essential to enlist the greatest possible participation of the workers in the running of industry. It is essential from the fundamental point of view of the efficient operation of industry. A bureaucratic régime in industry means inefficiency. Stalinist Russia is proving, if it has not already proved conclusively, that a bureaucratic control of industry cannot increase the productivity of labor as against a developed capitalism. It is altogether probable that nationalized industry under bureaucratic control offers, from the point of view of developing the productive forces of society, no improvement whatever over developed capitalism.
But workers’ democracy in industry does not mean that the workers of a particular factory or plant are to have final say in determining conditions of production and labor. It will not be difficult to have the workers of every factory understand that the factory in which they work is intimately connected with all other factories and that planning for all of industry excludes the possibility of permitting the workers of a particular factory to determine their conditions.
An over-all planning authority with plans to be fulfilled by the workers of a particular factory is essential. The management of a factory by the workers comes in when they examine and criticize the plans proposed by the planning authority. The workers of a factory know far better than the planners outside what their factory is capable of producing. From what Ciliga says it can be deduced that he is more of an anarcho-syndicalist than of a Marxist on the question of workers’ democratic control of industry. His vague philosophy about the immediate post-revolutionary period is revealed in his assertion that “modern revolutions must achieve socialism or inevitably become anti-socialist, anti-proletarian, counter-revolutions.”
When taken on an historical plane there can be no objection to the above statement. From Ciliga’s assertion, however, one can conclude that modern revolutions must immediately achieve socialism or degenerate. It is taken for granted by Marxists that a transitional period must necessarily follow the taking of power by the workers and that during that period many of the standards existing under capitalism will still prevail. He is a Utopian who thinks that socialism and all that socialism means to society and to the individual can be ushered in immediately after capitalism is destroyed.
Democratic control of industry by the workers is possible and absolutely essential even before socialism comes into existence but it should be understood that it is a control primarily through the democratic workers’ state which owns the industries and which is in a position to plan for all of the industries. The workers in a particular factory must subordinate themselves to the needs of the workers as a whole. Neither the trade-union bureaucrats nor the party bureaucrats should control industry but the workers state, that is, the Soviets, democratically controlled by the masses.
Nor must it be forgotten (and Ciliga does not mention it) that the basic premise for the existence of democratic control of industry, in the long run, is the existence of a developed industry which can satisfy the needs of the masses. We can confidently expect that the democratic traditions of the American workers will make it more difficult for bureaucrats to usurp authority. But what is decisive is the existence of a sufficiently high productive capacity to eliminate the need for a struggle for a decent livelihood. No rules and no determination to adhere to democratic forms will prevail against a long period of scarcity.
Lenin thought that the development of a bureaucracy could be prevented by decreeing that the payment of an official should be no higher than the payment of a worker and that the workers should have the right to recall their representatives any time they wanted to. But these measures turned out to be ineffective in the face of universal need. This does not mean that workers’ democracy is ineffective; it simply means that it can not prevent degeneration when the economic conditions favorable to degeneration exist for a long period.
 
Control of the Government by the Working Class
Actually, if the workers succeed in controlling the government all of the problems of workers’ democracy are thereby solved. If the workers have complete democracy in the Soviets or workers’ councils then through their control of the government they can determine the policies of the government.
Control of the government implies the right to vote the governing party out of power. Democratic control of the government by the workers exists if they have the right to recall the old and elect new representatives whenever they wish and if the main policies of the party in power are presented to the workers for their approval or disapproval through the means of elections at definite intervals where criticism is completely free and opponents of the party in power have an opportunity to present their criticism and their program. As a corollary to this proposition it follows that a minority is in duty bound to submit to the government until there is an opportunity to reverse its policies by an appeal to the workers in a general election.
That a revolutionary party in power may, under certain circumstances, deem it necessary to go against the will of the majority of the workers can be taken for granted by those who understand that we are not living in a world where a correct solution to all problems can be reached through pure democracy. Those who have been active in the labor movement know that it happens frequently that in the course of a long and bitter strike the overwhelming majority of the strikers become tired and demoralized. Inevitably a group of backward workers takes the lead in a movement to go back to work. If given an opportunity the majority of the workers would undoubtedly vote to end the strike. A conscious and militant leadership will not yield to the mood of the majority it” it is convinced that in a short period there is a chance for a favorable conclusion of the strike.
A revolutionary party can permit itself the liberty of disregarding the will of the majority provided it realizes that to do so for a long period means inevitably the use of deceit and force against the majority and to do that for any length of time means to institute a dictatorship of the minority which must inevitably result in degeneration.
It is not at all sufficient, as Ciliga seems to think it is, to proclaim the principle that the emancipation of the workers must be accomplished by the workers themselves. All revolutionary socialists who have taken the lesson of Stalinism to heart realize how necessary it is to abide by that principle enunciated by Marx. But it cannot solve the problems that will confront a party in power. To follow that principle rigorously means to oppose the formation of a party. To see the necessity of applying that principle does not mean to idealize the workers who have been subjected to the demoralizing influence of capitalism.
Upon a revolutionary party lies the responsibility of educating the workers to think critically and independently and thus to enable them to guard against the would-be usurpers. Next to a favorable economic situation the best guarantee against degeneration is a revolutionary party composed of educated, critical revolutionary workers. Such a party will not for long act against the will of the workers; it will either win the majority to its point of view or yield to the majority.
When evaluating the role of Lenin and Trotsky during the extremely trying period of the Civil War and the period immediately following it one must not forget that they had no experience by which to be guided in their actions. It is obvious that of the two great principles – the necessity to guard the conquests of the workers and the necessity to guard the democratic rights of the workers, they placed the emphasis upon the first. We who have the lessons of Stalinism as a terrible warning can realize more clearly than any of the leaders of the Russian Revolution how important it is to stress the democratic rights of the workers.
Unfortunately history decreed that the first socialist revolution occur in a backward country. From our vantage point we can see that degeneration was inevitable if the revolution was not extended to more advanced countries. But giving precedence to the factor of backwardness we must nevertheless realize that an important contributing factor was the crushing of the democratic rights of the Russian workers by the Stalinist bureaucracy. This was part of the degeneration and at the same time hastened the degeneration. If together with Ciliga we realize the importance of the problem of workers’ democracy it does not mean that we agree with his thesis that Lenin and Trotsky were partly responsible for the degeneration in Russia. We reject his thesis because it is not true but more than ever do we recognize the necessity of emphasizing the need of workers’ democracy as a means to guard against degeneration.
 



CHICAGO, May 15 – Albert Goldman, attorney for Leon Trotsky and his widow, Natalia Trotsky, today sent to Sir Geoffrey Lawrence, Chief Justice of the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg. Germany, the following letter requesting the right to examine the Nazi defendants, especially Hess, in connection with the infamous Moscow frame-up trials.
The full text of the letter follows:
Esteemed Chief Justice:
You have by this time undoubtedly received two letters requesting you to ask the Nazi defendants, especially Hess, certain questions calculated to elicit information as to whether or not any of the defendants ever entered into any agreement with the late Leon Trotsky, who was murdered in August 1940 by one of Stalin’s hired assassins.
 
Prominent Signators
One of the letters is signed by prominent American citizens, among whom is Norman Thomas, James T. Farrell, Matthew Woll, and Dorothy Thompson. The other letter is signed by prominent English citizens, among whom is H.G. Wells.
In both of the letters you were informed that the indictments upon which the infamous Moscow trials of 1936–38 were based charged that Leon Trotsky and his son Sedov had entered into an agreement with the defendant Hess, acting as agent for the Nazi government, for the purpose of waging war against the Soviet Union and dismembering that country.
One of the chief defendants (or better, victims) of the Moscow trials, Pyatakov, testified in support of the above allegation of the indictment.
That particular charge of the indictment (as well as all other charges), together with Pyatakov’s testimony, was proved to be false and the Commission of Inquiry, headed by John Dewey, the famous philosopher and educator, after an exhaustive examination of all available evidence, found Trotsky and his son not guilty and designated the charges as frame-ups.
The alleged accomplices of the alleged conspiracy are now on trial. They can be examined. The Nazi archives are in the possession of the governments now occupying Germany. The persons who signed the letters mentioned above have requested in the interests of historic truth, that you and all others who are helping conduct the trial examine the defendants and ask all those who have charge of the Nazi archives to produce any documents dealing with the alleged agreement between the Nazis and Trotsky.
I was the attorney for the late Leon Trotsky when he appeared before the Dewey Commission; I am now attorney-in-fact of his widow, Natalia Trotsky.
Both Mrs. Trotsky and I take the position that the findings of the Dewey Commission are conclusive. Nevertheless, for the purpose of convincing those who are not yet convinced that the Moscow trials were frame-ups, we are perfectly willing to have the Nazi defendants, especially Hess, examined and to ask the governments now in control of Germany to search the Nazi archives for any documents dealing with the alleged conspiracy.
But we know the methods of the Russian prosecution: we realize that the NKVD, commonly known as the GPU (the Russian Secret police), includes experts in the art of frame-up. We know that the NKVD can easily forge documents which they deem necessary for their purposes.
While we support the request for an examination of the defendants and of any documents produced by the Russian prosecutors, we insist that we be given the right to cross-examine any witness who testifies on this question and to examine any documents that might be produced by the Russians in support of their frame-up. Mrs. Trotsky has authorized me to represent her at the trials and to examine and cross-examine any witness.
I realize that the overwhelming probability is that the Stalinist prosecutors and judges will object strenuously to any proposed examination of the witnesses on the subject of their alleged relationship with Leon Trotsky. Once more would the Moscow trials be shown to be frame-ups.
I submit, however, that it is your duty to go ahead with such an examination in spite of the objections of the Russians.
Should you decide to proceed with the examination, please let me know and I shall leave for Nuremberg immediately.
 






At the meeting of the full National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party, the Control Commission brought in a report finding Goldman, Morrow and other comrades of the Minority guilty of “disloyal acts.” Readers of Labor Action know that the Minority has been leading a fight for unity between the Socialist Workers Party and the Workers Party. The Majority of the SWP has opposed unity.
The statement below is one that was handed in as an answer to the charges of “disloyalty” made by the Control Commission.



*
Statement to the Plenum on the Report
of the Control Commission
The report of the National Control Commission on the “disloyalty” of Goldman, Morrow and other members of the Minority proves not the disloyalty of the Minority but the existence of a police psychology in the leaders of the Majority. What is essentially a political problem they treat as a problem of disloyalty.
It should be mentioned, although it is of secondary importance, that neither Goldman nor Morrow were presented with any formal charges and asked for any statements. The only comrade against whom formal charges were made and who was called upon for a statement is comrade L. Bennett. If a control commission “investigates” it should at least ask those who are being investigated for a statement.
We have never concealed the fact, indeed we are proud to admit it, that before we introduced the resolution on unity we discussed the question with comrade Shachtman and other comrades of the Workers Party, in order to convince them to favor unity. In a normal, healthy atmosphere such discussions would naturally be reported to the Political Committee but it should be remembered that the factional atmosphere had reached a point where friendly discussion of any problem was impossible.
 
Fraternization and Unity
One fact we want to make clear. We did not know what the reaction of the WP would be to the question of unity before we presented our resolution. We were in favor of unity regardless of the attitude of the Majority or of the WP. The difference is that we could discuss the question in a friendly manner with the WP comrades and we could not do that with the leading Majority comrades.
The bill of particulars listing the various acts of the Minority which are designated as “disloyal” is approximately correct. We have never concealed or tried to conceal that we were fraternizing with the WP comrades. We never concealed that the Chicago Minority held socials to which were invited the comrades of the Majority as well as the WP comrades. The same applies to classes held by the Minority.
We have previously explained our course of conduct and we repeat the explanation. After we were convinced that the WP comrades were sincerely in favor of unity and after the leaders of the Majority began their dishonest maneuvers against unity, the Minority decided on a course of political fraternization with the WP. Step by step this fraternization developed.
 
Considered WP Revolutionary
We considered the WP comrades as devoted revolutionists; after they indicated their desire to unite with our party we considered them a tendency in the Fourth International. Under all the prevailing circumstances political fraternization with the WP became a revolutionary duty for us and obedience to a policy of the Majority based on the idea that the comrades of the WP were renegades, would in dur opinion have constituted a crime against the revolution.
Our policy of independent action with the WP did not have as its purpose the provoking of expulsions. It is true that it was a policy which lent itself to such an interpretation; it is true that Goldman said to those comrades who wanted to leave immediately: wait, you will be expelled. The basis of the policy, however, was not the desire to provoke expulsions; it was openly to show that revolutionists must fraternize with other revolutionists, under the circumstances that existed, regardless of a majority motivated by dishonest factional considerations.
To the charge of disloyalty we answer: we have been loyal to the revolution and therefore disloyal to dishonest factionalists, opposed to unity for the most despicable of reasons.
Sincere and understanding Trotskyists, even though disagreeing with us, will not stoop to the degrading methods of prosecutors. They will either permit the Minority to fraternize politically with the WP or expel the Minority without any charges of disloyalty. We can expect the introduction of police methods to solve a political difference from Stalinists and other reactionaries but not from Trotskyists.



 


Signed
Albert Goldman
Lydia Bennett



 






We print below a letter which Albert Goldman, who served as attorney for Leon Trotsky, has written to Sir Geoffrey Lawrence, the British prosecuting attorney at the Nuremberg trials. Goldman’s letter comes after a statement signed by a group of prominent Americans which urged that the Nuremberg trial interrogate the Nazi prisoners in order to see if any evidence could be produced in connection with the infamous charges made at the Moscow trials against the great revolutionary leader, Leon Trotsky.



*
Sir Geoffrey Lawrence
Chief Justice,
International Military Tribunal Nuremberg,
Germany
Esteemed Chief Justice:
You have by this time undoubtedly received two letters requesting you to ask the Nazi defendants, especially Hess, certain questions calculated to elicit information as to whether or not any of the defendants ever entered into any agreement with the late Leon Trotsky, who was murdered in August 1940 by one of Stalin’s hired assassins.
One of the letters is signed by prominent American citizens, among whom is Norman Thomas, James T. Farrell, Matthew Woll, and Dorothy Thompson. The other letter is signed by prominent English citizens, among whom is H.G. Wells.
In both of the letters you were informed that the indictments upon which the infamous Moscow trials of 1936-38 were based charged that Leon Trotsky and his son Sedov had entered into an agreement with the defendant Hess, acting as agent for the Nazi government, for the purpose of waging war against the Soviet Union and dismembering that country.
One of the chief defendants (or better, victims) of the Moscow trials, Pyatakov, testified in support of the above allegation of the indictment.
 
Charges Proved False
That particular charge of the indictment (as well as all other charges), together with Pyatakov’s testimony, was proved to be false and the Commission of Inquiry, headed by John Dewey, the famous philosopher and educator, after an exhaustive examination of all the available evidence, found Trotsky and his son not guilty and designated the charges as frame-ups.
The alleged accomplices of the alleged conspiracy are now on trial. They can be examined. The Nazi archives are in the possession of the governments now occupying Germany. The persons who signed the letters mentioned above have requested, in the interests of historic truth, that you and all others who are helping conduct the trial examine the defendants and ask all those who have charge of the Nazi archives to produce any documents dealing with the alleged agreement between the Nazis and Trotsky.
I was the attorney for the late Leon Trotsky when he appeared before the Dewey Commission; I am now the attorney-in-fact of his widow, Natalia Trotsky.
Both Mrs. Trotsky and I take the position that the findings of the Dewey Commission are conclusive. Nevertheless, for the purpose of convincing those who are not yet convinced that the Moscow trials were frame-ups, we are perfectly willing to have the Nazi defendants, especially Hess, examined and to ask the governments now in control of Germany to search the Nazi archives for any documents dealing with the alleged conspiracy.
 
Right to Cross-Examine
But we know the methods of the Russian prosecution; we realize that the NKVD, commonly known as the GPU (the Russian secret police), includes experts in the art of frame-up. We know that the NKVD can easily forge documents which they deem necessary for their purposes.
While we support the request for an examination of the defendants and of any documents produced by the Russian prosecutors, we insist that we be given the right to cross-examine any witness who testifies on this question and to examine any documents that might be produced by the Russians in support of their frame-up. Mrs. Trotsky has authorized me to represent her at the trials and to examine and cross-examine any witness.
I realize that the overwhelming probability is that the Stalinist prosecutors and judges will object strenuously to any proposed examination of the witnesses on the subject of their alleged relationship with Leon Trotsky. Once more would the Moscow trials be shown to be frame-ups.
I submit, however, that it is your duty to go ahead with such an examination in spite of the objections of the Russians.
Should you decide to proceed with the examination, please let me know and I shall leave for Nuremberg immediately.



 
 
ag:lj


Very truly yours,
Albert Goldman
 



 



The greatest number of SWP members has been recruited since Trotsky’s death. They have been educated on Cannon’s concepts of organization and on Trotsky’s polemical exaggerations against the Minority of 1940. Very few of the members know of The New Course, where Trotsky presents a picture of what a real Bolshevik organization should be. The members are devoted revolutionists but one could also say that of the “third-period” Stalinists (between 1929 and 1934). They are militant, aggressive, self-sacrificing. But they do not have the critical attitude that should prevail in a revolutionary Marxist party.
 
Building a Revolutionary Party
The task that confronts us at present is the same that faced the revolutionary Marxists in the last quarter of a century – the building of a revolutionary party. We start from the basic premise that for a successful struggle for socialism the working class must have its own party composed of the most conscious, the most militant elements of the proletariat. To look for a victorious struggle on the part of the working class in spite of its subjection to the degrading influence of capitalism, without the leadership of a party that is composed of those elements who have to a certain extent freed themselves from those influences, is utopian.
The party that we want to build must base itself firmly on the fundamentals of Marx, Lenin and Trotsky. But it must be a party where the statements of the great teachers of socialism are not to be considered as sacred dogmas. Our party must be one where one can feel perfectly free to introduce new ideas and challenge old ones; where new ideas will be met on the plane of argument and not of name-calling. We want a party which will consider the facts of life much more important than any theory. In the party that we want to build controversies will not be settled by quotations but by an analysis of all the existing factors.
In the party we want to build discussion will not be considered as “kibitzing” but as a vital necessity for the solution of problems and for the education of the membership. Discussion should not be counterposed to activity; it is part of the activity of a party. It cannot monopolize the life of the party but without it there can be no purposeful activity.
The backbone of a revolutionary party must consist of militant proletarians. But we must reject the concept that their task is only to follow the leaders. We must consciously aim to educate the workers who join the party to have a critical spirit. We understand very well the difficulties which confront every worker in his attempt to educate himself in the principles of Marxism. He works too hard under capitalism to be able to devote many hours to reading and study. But from the very moment he enters the party a worker must be made to feel that while he is educating himself he must listen to arguments carefully and make up his mind to the best of his ability on the basis of the arguments. A critical attitude on the part of the rank and file is essential to a revolutionary party.
Our party must be a disciplined party but its discipline is not based on rules and regulations. It is the discipline of comrades devoted to a great cause and conscious of the fact that without discipline in action they can achieve nothing. It is a discipline based primarily on the correctness of the leadership and not on the ability of the leaders to order people. A living, thinking party is not an undisciplined party; it has a higher form of discipline than the monolithic party.
Particular ideas and practices which now prevail in the SWP and which may be termed “Bolshevism-à-la-Cannon” must be rejected as alien to a revolutionary party. There must be no build-up of leaders. An opponent party must not be considered an “enemy party” when it is close to us in program and activities; comrades who for some reason split from us are not to be considered “renegades,” when they are loyal to the revolutionary movement, and our members must not be filled with hate toward such comrades.
Distortion of an opponent’s position must not be tolerated; the position and arguments of an opponent must be presented with the greatest honesty.
The Cannonite practice of discussing all important political and organizational questions in a secret bulletin must be rejected. All good discussion articles on all important questions should be included in the public theoretical organ; and the discussion bulletin should be available to all those who are interested. A revolutionary party is part of the working class and has no secrets from the workers.
Our very existence is based on our confidence that the kind of a party we want to build can be built and will be built. Our confidence stems not only from the fact that such a party is necessary but also from the historical fact that such a party was actually created and succeeded in leading the Russian workers to a successful revolution. I am firmly of the opinion that the Bolshevik party under Lenin and Trotsky was the kind of a party that we want to create.
This does not mean that we defend every act of the Bolshevik party. There is room in our party for those who think that in such and such a particular case the Bolsheviks were wrong. To me Bolshevism means the theoretical, strategical and tactical ideas by which the Russian masses were mobilized for a successful assault on the Russian capitalists and landlords. Ninety times out of a hundred they who sincerely attack Bolshevism on some organizational or theoretical question confuse Bolshevism with Stalinism. Cannonism has furnished another weapon to those who do not understand but wish to attack Bolshevism.
One idea that we must put forth and which the Bolsheviks never thought of mentioning is the necessity to guard against a bureaucratic degeneration, such as the Stalinist degeneration. Trotsky once stated that it is not the aim of a revolutionary party to guard against degeneration but to make the revolution. I cannot accept that idea.
One of Trotsky’s great contributions to Marxism is his explanation for the Stalinist degeneration. He showed that it was due to the backwardness of Russia and the failure of the world revolution. The terrible lack of goods with which to satisfy the needs of the masses created the conditions necessary for the usurpation of power by the bureaucracy of the workers’ state. It now appears most likely that the taking of power by the working class will be followed by a period of scarcity or, under the best of circumstances, a period of difficult readjustment. The danger of a bureaucratization of a section of the party is very great. It is too risky to depend solely on favorable economic conditions to prevent degeneration. We must depend also upon a party of alert and independent revolutionists who will offer the greatest resistance to any attempt by any section of the bureaucracy to usurp the power of the workers.
Our party must educate its members to be aware of the close connection between the great aims of socialism and the means used to build the party and achieve those aims. The revolutionary socialist who constantly keeps the ultimate aims of socialism in view will inevitably reject clique politics, petty maneuvering and distortion of an opponent’s position as methods hostile to the achievement of our aims, as methods laying the basis for a future degeneration. The methods of Cannon are methods of people who see in the organization an end in itself and who forget the great aims of our party.
 
The Workers Party
A few days after we left the SWP and joined the WP, the latter party had a national convention. The delegates showed an independence that is impossible to conceive of in the SWP. The constant shifting of delegates, depending upon the issues and the arguments showed an open-mindedness and independence that are practically inconceivable in the SWP. In speaking to the delegates one did not feel as if he were arguing with a stone wall, a feeling that comes over one when speaking to a gathering of members of the SWP.
It is true that the SWP at present has greater connections with the trade unions and has more members and more proletarian members. But the Stalinists have still more members and more industrial workers who are members. We have supreme confidence that in the end a living, thinking membership will attract to itself the best elements among the workers, and by virtue of a correct political line which can come only as a result of tackling problems on a Marxist basis, will succeed in winning the masses.
We have received a severe blow because the SWP leaders have rejected unity. We do not give up our hopes for ultimate unity. But if there is no unity then we shall continue to build our party, firmly convinced that the principles upon which it is built and an independent revolutionary membership will contribute enormously tp the victory of socialism, which to us is impossible without democracy and freedom.
(THE END)
 



A most natural question that I am frequently asked is: why did not the Minority remain in the SWP to fight for its ideas? Under normal circumstances a minority is not justified in leaving a revolutionary party because its ideas are not accepted. It was possible for us to remain and by patient, persistent work attempt to win a majority to our ideas. As a matter of fact our struggle against the Cannon clique was not without some success. No more of the leader-worship articles by Hansen appeared in the SWP press. After our fight against the idea that members of the SWP should not even talk with members of the WP the claim was made that by censuring four comrades for discussing the Russian question with WP members it was not meant that party members should not talk with WP comrades. The term “renegade” ceased to be thrown about so freely when referring to the leaders of the WP. Cannon stopped referring to discussions as “kibitzing.”
Our decision to leave the SWP and join the WP was based on the fundamental premise that if there is no unity we can do far more fruitful work for the cause of revolutionary socialism in the WP. Were there not in existence a party composed of comrades with the same ideas of a revolutionary party as ours, there would be no alternative for us but to accept the discipline of the Cannonite majority. But with such a party in existence it seems much more effective to unite the forces that are opposed to a monolithic conception of a party than to keep them divided. To unite them means to strengthen these forces.
A prolonged and severe factional struggle represents a tremendous waste of energy under the best conditions. A factional struggle under a regime of people who see in maneuvering the solution to all political problems means wasting ninety per cent of one’s efforts on the most petty issues. For instance, the whole question of unity was transformed into a question of loyalty and disloyalty. The question of democratic demands was shifted to an argument as to whether the United States would or would not send food to Europe – the leading Cannonites stoutly maintaining that this country would not send any food to the European countries.
Another reason for leaving was the fact that had we remained we would have been expelled for fraternizing politically with the comrades of the WP.
Before we proposed unity and before the WP accepted our proposal we regarded the comrades of the WP as devoted revolutionists. After the WP accepted our proposal we regarded them as a tendency in the Fourth International, as Trotskyists. It is significant that the widow of Trotsky who understands Trotsky’s method and approach to problems better than any one living, speaks of the two Trotskyist parties in the United States.
It was inevitable that the Minority should fraternize politically with the WP. What did this fraternization consist of? Mainly in discussing the problem of unity and all other political problems and in getting together in socials and classes. The fact of the matter is that for most of the Minority comrades it was impossible to discuss with the leading Cannonites and it was easy and profitable to discuss with the WP comrades.
The idea of treating devoted revolutionists as renegades is repulsive. Even if I recognize the necessity of splitting and remaining apart for a period I must treat those who are with me in the great struggle for a socialist society as revolutionists. I can fight them on the point upon which we disagree but act in the friendliest manner and join with them in all actions on those tasks upon which there is no disagreement. Cannon's attitude of trying to create a stone wall between the members of the two parties was hateful to me. Nothing infuriated and alarmed me so much as the inculcation of hate among the members of the SWP to the members of the WP.
Under the circumstances, the Minority decided to continue political fraternization with the WP regardless of the policy of the Majority. I do not say that the question of fraternization was a principle with us, although the policy against fraternization with revolutionists seemed monstrous to us. Were the SWP a mass party we would have accepted the policy of the Majority in order to remain in the mass party. But since the SWP, although larger than the WP, is still a very small group it seemed to us to be contrary to the interests of the revolutionary movement to abide by the policy of the majority.
To the hue and cry raised against us on the ground that we were violating the principle of democratic centralism we answered that this principle should be observed by revolutionists only when its observance means the building of a revolutionary party and not when it is used to cover up a crime against the revolutionary movement. We understand very well that in the last analysis this means that every revolutionist must judge for himself whether a certain act is so detrimental to the revolutionary movement that he must disregard the principle of democratic centralism. The rejection of unity was a criminal act against the revolutionary movement and democratic centralism played a secondary role with us.
Comrade Felix Morrow and other comrades who were with the Minority have decided to remain in the SWP. While I am of the opinion that their efforts there will not be one-tenth so fruitful as working in the WP I wish them all the success in the world. Their success is our success for it will mean eventual unity of the two parties and a tremendous union officialdom of a capitalist state, they tried to confound strengthening of the Trotskyist movement.
Many comrades want an explanation for the situation that has developed in the SWP. The “theoreticians” of that party constantly demanded of us to show the “social roots” of the Cannon clique. Starting from the premise that Stalinist tendencies must come from a bureaucracy which has social roots either in a degenerated workers' state or in the trade us by asking for proof that the clique is part of the degenerated workers’ state or the trade union bureaucracy. We simply laughed at this formalistic thinking driven to a nonsensical extreme.
It is undeniable that when Trotsky was living he did all of the theoretical thinking for the Trotskyist groups the world over. We all recognized his great genius and for the most part accepted his ideas without critical analysis. It was a tremendous asset to have a Trotsky at the head of our movement, guiding its intellectual life, but it. was also a disadvantage in that it prevented the development of Independent thought on the part of Trotsky’s followers. The struggle in the party in 1940 showed that to many of the Trotskyists independent thinking was a subject of scorn. The hardened Cannonites not only disagreed with the Minority of that period but they laughed at the idea of arriving at conclusions independent of and opposed to Trotsky.
So long as Trotsky was living, Cannon did not openly express any of his “independent” ideas about organizational questions. To a few who knew him he confided that he was “not a Trotskyist but a Leninist” on the organizational question. On theoretical strategical find tactical questions he was more than willing to follow Trotsky's lead.
Lacking confidence (and justifiably so) in his own ability to deal with theoretical ideas and not having sufficient confidence in any one else, it was only natural for Cannon, after Trotsky’s death, to proclaim that Trotsky had furnished us with sufficient ideas and that all we need is to follow them. Anyone who presented any new idea or even a modification of an old one was looked upon as a disturber of the peace, a “kibitzer,” to use Cannon’s expression for those who wanted to discuss problems. In a movement founded by one who had nothing of the conservative in him it was declared highly desirable and commendable to be conservative!
The greatest importance was placed on organizational questions and by that is meant the creation of a machine which responds automatically to the will of the controllers of the machine. The machine was to be kept in good order through a system of education based on questions and answers derived from Cannon’s handbook Socialism On Trial. That constitutes the catechism.
The concept of a party as a living organism with intellectual controversy and participation in the class struggle as the two vital necessities of its life is completely alien to Cannon. As I indicated above he is the product of the Zinovievist period of the Communist International. He once wrote an article declaring that the weakness of the Communist Party was due to the fact that it was not sufficiently monolithic.
As part of the explanation of the success of Cannon one must not overlook the role which a machine plays even in a small organization. Many who otherwise would be working for a capitalist under adverse conditions find themselves doing easy and pleasant work, find themselves in a position where they appear as leaders – on a small scale it is true, but still leaders with some prestige. They could not possibly play that role outside of the machine.
(To be continued)
 



There are people who, when confronted by a serious political problem, the answer to which they do not know or are uncertain about, dodge the question by writing a multiplicity of words containing many noble sentiments but no answer to the problem. At times they say nothing at all, hoping that the situation will pass and that the problem will not longer confront them.
When the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party were presented with the problem of taking a position on the question of the democratic republics in Italy and Belgium, at the time when the Italian and Belgian workers were struggling to overthrow the monarchies, they solved the problem by saying nothing – at least in the open. They assured everybody, of course, that they were for the socialist revolution, but they would not openly take a position on the question of the democratic republic. In reality they were opposed to the slogan of “democratic republic”, but were unwilling to say so.
For a long time there was no statement whatever in the SWP press (The Militant and the Fourth International) on the question of Palestine and the struggle of the Jews for entry into that country. But since time has not solved the problem, the SWP leaders felt compelled to break their silence. In the September 7th issue of The Militant, the editors published a statement on this burning question. Many noble and true sentiments find expression there, but the specific problem around which the struggle in Palestine is being waged, is left unanswered; better, perhaps, is left with an exceedingly ambiguous answer.
 
What the Jews Want
As everybody knows, including the editors of The Militant, there are hundreds of thousands of Jews clamoring to get out of European countries where they believe anti-Semitism will make it impossible for them to live. So desperately anxious are some of the Jews to get into Palestine that they are willing to go through the greatest hardships and run terrible risks to achieve their purpose.
The question confronting everybody is very simple: should the Jews who want to enter Palestine be permitted to do so or not? A yes-or-no answer is called for.
We are compelled to agree with the editors of The Militant, who assure us that socialism alone will solve the Jewish problem; we also agree with them when they assert that Arabs and Jews should unite in a joint struggle against the British imperialists.
But what about entry to the Jews who insist on going to Palestine? Will not the editors please tell us in so many words whether they are for or against the right of Jews to get into Palestine?
It is a credit to the editors when they demand that the United States should open its doors to the Jews. But why should not the British open the doors of Palestine to the Jews? Anyone is at liberty to advise the Jews not to go there, but has anyone the right to oppose entry or even to be indifferent about it? Yes he has that right, but then he is dragging socialism (if he claims to be a socialist) into the dust.
Opposition to Jewish immigration into Palestine was perhaps justified at a time when such immigration was organized by Zionist leaders for the purpose of creating a Jewish state which would help guard British imperialist interests. But right now, when tens of thousands of Jewish people are trying to get into Palestine as a protection against anti-Semitism, it is the duty of every revolutionary socialist to defend the right of persecuted Jews to migrate to Palestine. The Jews may be completely wrong in thinking that Palestine offers a solution to anti-Semitism but as revolutionary socialists, as the most consistent democrats, we must support their right to go there.
 
On Addressing Demands
No revolutionary socialist, especially a Jewish one in Palestine, can possibly stop with the demand of the right of Jews to get into Palestine. Because of the peculiar situation existing in that country, a socialist has the duty of emphasizing the need of an orientation of the Jewish masses to the Arab masses. A patient and persistent attempt is necessary to organize Jews and Arabs for a united struggle for an independent Palestine. It is only by such a policy that the Jews can get the support of the Arab people. I admit that this is not an immediate, a complete or a final solution, but it is the only solution possible under the circumstances.
The failure of the Zionist leaders to orientate toward the Arabs constitutes their great crime. If the editors of The Militant had attacked the Zionist leaders for that, there could be no possible objection. But, according to these editors, the greatest crime of the Zionists consists of “addressing to the British government the demand that Palestine be thrown open to Jewish immigration” because they thereby “continue to recognize and endorse British imperialist rule over the country.”
This leaves us quite flabbergasted. Since the British have the actual power in Palestine, since British troops under the control of the British government can determine who is and who is not to enter Palestine, it would seem that the British imperialists are the ones to whom a demand should be made.
To whom do the SWP leaders address their demand that the Jews be admitted to the United States, if not to the government of the United States? Of course they thereby recognize but they do not endorse the policies of that government.
That the Zionists have their own purposes in demanding that immigration be allowed does not mean that we should not support the right of the Jews to enter Palestine. It is only necessary to make clear that we are opposed to the Zionists and that we have our own program, which is not a Zionist program.
The learned editors of The Militant advise the Jews to look to the Arabs just as in this country the Negro people and the national minorities must look to the working class. Very good advice, but do The Militant editors stop fighting against discriminatory laws because the American working class has not as yet emancipated the Negroes? Just as we are for an orientation on the part of the Negroes toward the working class and at the same time we continue to struggle for the right of the Negro to live in any neighborhood he pleases, so are we for an orientation of the Jews toward the Arabs and at the same time for the right of the Jews to enter Palestine.
 
Against Duplicity
On the same page of The Militant where the editors published their statement on Palestine they also published an item showing that the Stalinists are playing a double game on the question of Palestine. The Arabian Stalinists are opposed to the entry of Jews, whereas the Jewish Stalinists are in favor of it.
Cannot the statement of The Militant editors also be interpreted as a double-faced one? One can find a sentence which indicates opposition, and also a sentence which indicates a favorable attitude, to the right of the Jews to enter Palestine. It is a vagueness which borders on duplicity.
For revolutionary socialists, the program for Palestine and the Jews is not difficult to formulate. We are for an independent Palestine with the right of any minority to use its own language and develop its own culture. We are for the unrestricted right of all people persecuted for religious, racial or political reasons to emigrate into any country they please. That means we are for the right of Jews to go to Palestine. We are for a joint struggle of Jew and Arab to liberate Palestine and all of the Near East from the yoke of British imperialism. This, we believe, is stating the position unambiguously.
 



Stalinist Germs in the SWP
The dishonest opposition to unity, though the most important, was not the only thing that convinced the Minority that the leadership of the SWP was turning away from a Leninist-Trotskyist conception of a revolutionary party and toward a Zinovievist conception. It was Zinoviev who introduced the idea of a monolithic party. Stalin developed that idea. In the days when Cannon was a member of the Communist Party, Cannon was an ardent defender of the monolithic party. He is far more careful now; he docs not say that he wants a monolithic party as he did in his early days, but actually he is working to create just such a party. Some of his followers substitute the word “homogeneous” for that of “monolithic.”
Cannon was fond of saying privately that he is not a Trotskyist but a Leninist on the organization question. It was after Trotsky’s death that he said it openly. It is, of course, perfectly true that Trotsky had a disagreement with Lenin on the organizational question but that disagreement disappeared completely after Trotsky’s group united with the Bolsheviks. For Cannon to say that he is a Leninist and not a Trotskyist on the organization question means in effect to say that he rejects the whole struggle of Trotsky against Zinoviev and Stalin on that question.
A few incidents that occurred in the last two years indicate the trend toward a monolithic party. When in The Fourth International there appeared an article by Joseph Hansen, in which Cannon was portrayed as the Lenin of America, there was vociferous objection from some of the party members. Even some of the leaders of the Cannon faction objected to the article, but only in private; publicly they defended it. Cannon wrote a letter from Sandstone in which he stated that those who criticize Hansen’s article do not understand the art of leadership.
Dwight Macdonald, writing for his Politics, utilized Hansen’s article in an attempt to prove that leader-worship is part of the Bolshevik concept of organization. I replied to Macdonald and in the reply mildly criticized Hansen. The reply was refused publication in the F.I.
James T. Farrell sent a letter to the F.I. in which he criticized Hansen’s article and a scurrilous review of Shachtman’s introduction to The New Course. The letter was refused publication and my request on that score was in vain. Cannon advised Farrell to stick to literature and let experienced people take care of politics, the same answer that Browder gave Farrell when he protested against the Moscow Trials.
Four members of the SWP were censured for organizing a discussion on the Russian question with some members of the WP. This was done at the initiative of the Political Committee at a time when tremendous political problems confronted the revolutionary movement. The censure was intended to prevent the SWP members from discussing political questions and even from talking with WP members. To justify this nonsense Cannon wrote that the party has a right to control not only the political but the personal lives of the members.
One of the most disgusting spectacles staged by the SWP leaders was to instruct the Control Commission to investigate the “disloyalty” of the Minority. The Minority openly declared its intention to fraternize politically with the WP. It organized socials and classes, inviting the members of the WP to participate. I spoke at meetings of the WP members. These were political acts on our part. The Cannonites transformed a political question into one of “disloyalty.”
All these incidents can be aptly described as Stalinist germs. They indicate an attitude which is common only among the Stalinists and is completely alien to Bolshevism. Were these isolated incidents to be explained on the basis of habits acquired through participation in the Stalinist movement or did they indicate a trend in the direction of building a monolithic party? For us unity was the test. The rejection of unity together with the dishonest discussion connected with that rejection convinced us that the leadership of the SWP was consciously on the road of building a monolithic party. The formal adherence to democratic centralism was meaningless in view of the actual policies followed on all of the organizational questions that became controversial issues.
It is not only in the organizational field that signs of degeneration are visible in the SWP; on the intellectual arena the level of the party has taken a sharp descent since the death of Trotsky. The sole consideration of the leaders of the party is to see to it that not one iota of the program left by Trotsky is changed. The fiercest resistance meets any attempt to introduce a new idea.
 
Intellectual Degeneration
We have a “finished program,” wrote one of the theoreticians, E.R. Frank, not meaning thereby a fully rounded program, as Trotsky meant when he spoke of Lenin’s finished program, but something that is final and unchangeable. We have an “unchanging program” warned J.P. Cannon.
Two instances illustrate the point. At the October 1943 plenary meeting of the National Committee the official resolution was a compilation of generalities about the coming proletarian revolution in Europe. Not one word was written about the necessity of democratic demands as a means to set the masses in the struggle against the existing regimes and the Socialist and Stalinist parties. Comrade Felix Morrow introduced some amendments dealing with the necessity of such demands. That was labeled a petty-bourgeois deviation. Cannon intervened and offered as his contribution a verbatim section of the Transitional program.
When Walter Reuther during the strike against General Motors raised the slogan of a wage raise without a price rise, the leading theoretician of the SWP, Warde, objected because it was not included in the Transitional program.
At the last meeting of the National Committee which I attended, I said that we must indeed be grateful to Stalin that he did not murder Trotsky before 1940. For had he killed Trotsky in 1937, the Cannonites would have had no transitional program to swear by and they would still be opposing a Labor Party. Had Stalin assassinated Trotsky in 1930 anyone who dared raise the idea that a new party and a new international should be created would have been designated by the Cannonites as a petty-bourgeois oppositionist. Every idea introduced by Trotsky, if offered by someone else, would have been held up to scorn as petty-bourgeois revisionism.
Trotsky’s ideas are considered as sacred revelation, dogmas to be repeated at every occasion. He who most of all insisted that Marxism is not a dogma but a guide to action, who showed over and over again that he was not bound by any formula and considered the study of reality, of actual events, far more important than a quotation from the masters, has been succeeded by people who “prove” everything by quotations.
I must relate an incident which shows how little respect the SWP leaders have for ideas and how, for them, organizational maneuvers take precedence over ideas. The resolution adopted by the International Conference states that it is the duty of the various sections of the International to “tolerate the presence of the Red Army only to the extent that it is a friendly proletarian armed force having as its objective to guarantee the fulfillment of agrarian reform and the state-ization of the means of production against imperialism and against hational reactionary elements, without hindering in any way whatsoever the free development of the working class movement.”
We shall not discuss the idea presented, which can be a product only of political idiocy or of complete aloofness from reality. It seems that a majority of Cannon’s caucus was opposed to this nonsense, but all of them voted for the resolution, the heart of which is this idea about tolerating the Stalinist army. I say “the heart of the resolution” because everything else was practically a repetition of previous resolutions.
The members of the National Committee who were opposed to that section of the resolution voted for the resolution without objecting to the section because they were told that to raise the question would give the Minority some advantage. When Felix Morrow made that charge no objection was voiced, and this was tantamount to admission that he was correct.
Can such people be called Bolsheviks interested in a correct political line? No, they are Cannonite cliquists to whom prestige is more important than political ideas.
(To be continued)
 



What is the explanation of Stalin’s aggressive and truculent foreign policy?
Only they who are blind or prisoners of an outworn formula continue to assert that the capitalist-imperialist nations are plotting to attack Russia in order to destroy nationalized property and that the danger of war corries from these plots. It is from this premise that the writer who, in The Militant, described the incident of the shooting down of an American plane by Tito’s airmen, concluded that Tito permitted himself “to be provoked” by American imperialism. We get a picture of a peaceful Tito who, outraged at the violation of sovereignty by imperialist forces, lost control of himself and ordered his forces to shoot.
The fact is that everything said or done by the official representatives of American and British imperialism during and, for a certain period, after the war indicated that the ruling groups of those imperialisms were perfectly reconciled to arrive at an agreement with the Stalinist bureaucracy on the basis of doing business with nationalized property. Especially was this the case since they recognized that only with Stalin’s help could they hope to prevent a revolutionary uprising in Europe.
Even now, after relations between Stalinist Russia and American-British imperialism have become very strained, Donald Nelson writes a letter to Stalin suggesting that a commission of American business men go to Moscow and arrange for a lucrative commerce between the two countries.
 
Aggression and Imperialism
There can be no doubt that the representatives of American and British imperialism are anxious to have nationalized property remain within the confines of Russia. But their opposition to the Stalinist bureaucracy at present is not a result of the existence of nationalized property in Russia but of the evident desire of the Stalinist bureaucracy to extend its influence outside of Russia and thus interfere with their imperialist interests. American and British imperialists had no objection to Hitler’s fascism when it limited itself to destroying the rights of the masses and even some rights of the capitalists; they had strenuous objections when Hitler became aggressive outside of Germany and threatened their imperialist interests.
Should there be a war between Russia and the American-British combination, the victory of the latter would undoubtedly lead to the destruction of the Stalinist foreign trade monopoly; it might eventually lead even to the denationalization of some industries. But this does not mean that the cause of the war would be the desire of the capitalist imperialists to destroy nationalized property in Russia. It would be the aggressiveness of Stalinist imperialism and the unwillingness of American-British imperialism to yield to that aggressiveness.
Even they who would defend nationalized property under any conditions should recognize facts that stare them in the face. Alas, the vision of even sensible people has frequently been blinded by a formula.
It may not be superfluous to say that the tactics of our party in case of a war would not be determined by the accidental fact that one imperialism was the aggressor as against another. We did not determine our attitude to the last war because Hitler was obviously the aggressor. We determined our attitude by the fundamental fact that we considered it an imperialist war.
*
Why Stalin Is Confident
That Stalin is pursuing an imperialist policy is clear to everyone except to the followers and apologists of Stalin and to “official” Trotskyists who are bewitched by words and by formulas. The basis of that policy has already been described by Comrade Logan in his article, The Eruption of Bureaucratic Imperialism, in the March 1946 issue of The New International.







This picture of two generals In Stalin’s army says more than a dozen articles could say on the character of that army.
They are not generals of a workers’, a socialist army, but of an army that represents a new ruling class, a new imperialist power.
When the Russian Revolution took place, the Red army was truly a people’s army not only because of its aim, the struggle for socialism, but because consonant with its aim, the army rejected the standards and laws characteristic of imperialist armies. It was an army of free men, of revolutionaries. Stalin’s army is an army of a new exploiting class, an army of Imperialist conquerors. The decorations and rewards given the generals of this army befits its new class character.






What needs explanation now is the aggressiveness of that policy. As meek and humble as Stalin was toward Hitler, so proud and haughty is he to those who conquered Hitler.
In the first place must be mentioned the fact that neither American nor British imperialism has the forces in Europe that Hitler had. Stalin’s armies in Europe are much more powerful than the combined forces of England and the United States. The factor that counts for most, however, is that Stalin knows that neither Great Britain nor this country is prepared to wage a war immediately. The fact that the United States has demobilized most of its armed forces is an assurance to Stalin that he can go far without running the risk of war.
Stalin also knows the undoubted fact that the American and British masses are opposed to any war and it would take something like a Pearl Harbor before their governments could mobilize them for another war. He has the great advantage of being master in a totalitarian country and does riot have to take “public opinion" into consideration even to the extent that the governments of democratic capitalist countries must do. Whereas the Stalinist bureaucracy can make any decision it desires’ and can carry it out without any fear of objection on the part of the masses, that is not the case in the United States or Great Britain.
 
Dissatisfaction in Russia
This does not mean that Stalin pays no attention to the Russian masses. Like every autocrat, he attempts to get the support of the masses and through the controlled press tries to get them to think in a certain manner. The ruling clique has been trying to convince the masses of Russia that the capitalist countries are about to launch an attack on their country, hoping that the masses would be induced by that belief into accepting their miserable lot without questioning.
We can very well assume the existence of tremendous dissatisfaction among the Russian masses. We have just been permitted a peek behind the iron curtain and we find that in parts of Russia workers have not been paid for several months and that labor arid living conditions are intolerable. It was found necessary by the bureaucrats to publicize the fact that trade union officials are indifferent to the conditions under which the workers slave. Many officials speculate in industrial materials; there is falsification of reports. More than half of the leading bureaucrats in the Ukraine have been replaced in the course of the last year and a half.
The lifting of the veil ever so slightly justifies the conclusion that things are not going so well in Stalinist Russia. The top bureaucrats may make their grandiose plans, but under conditions of slavery and misery that actually prevail there can be no real planning. The little that is revealed creates the impression that instead of planning there is chaos in the economic life of Stalinist Russia. The dissatisfaction existing among the Russian people is probably a factor inducing Stalin to pursue an aggressive foreign policy.
There is also great plausibility in the hypothesis that he wants to keep a large army of occupation outside of Russian borders because he can feed the soldiers at the expense of the occupied countries. There is not enough food for them in Russia and Stalin would be adding to his troubles if his armies were sent home.
*
But in spite of the Stalinist aggressive foreign policy, there is slight possibility of a war breaking out soon. Fundamentally, because Stalin knows that a war means his certain defeat. It will take many years before Russia recovers from the destruction wrought by Hitler’s armies. And it is altogether probable that he is not sure of the support of the masses in case of another war. That hundreds of thousands of Russian workers and peasants did not support the war even against Hitler is now certain. That many millions will not support another war with capitalist democracies can be taken for granted.
Should Stalin continue his aggressive policy up to the point of war, then it will simply mean that he sees no way out except through the tremendous gamble of war. In effect, war will mean that he is ready to risk suicide and the Russian masses should and undoubtedly will help him attain his objective.
 



Part I

Part II

Part III

Part IV

Part V

Part VI

Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 2 April 2020







Albert Goldman was the leader of the Minority Group in the Socialist Workers Party, a large section of which joined the Workers Party. This article on Antoinette Konikow is the first contribution by Comrade Goldman to Labor Action. He will be a regular contributor to the new eight-page LA. In appraising the deceased Antoinette, Goldman writes of a comrade with whom he was in close association. – Editor



*
Antoinette Konikow’s contributions to the revolutionary movement were considerable. But even if that were not the case, the fact that she was active until she reached the age of seventy-seven, when she died, would by itself be a great achievement. Rarely do we find a comrade remaining active in a revolutionary party until ripe old age. Especially is this true at the present time when many who were devoted to the socialist idea have faded out of activity because of the dreadful defeats which the revolutionary movement has suffered at the hands of the Stalinists.
Not very many of those who left the movement embraced bourgeois democracy, as Max Eastman did. They simply became disheartened and discouraged and ceased being active. But not Antoinette Konikow. She remained in the struggle practically to her last days’ with an unswerving faith in the ultimate victory of the socialist revolution.
The fact that she was a professional person and did not have to toil in a factory in order to make a living made it somewhat easier to remain active in her old age. But if it is easier for a professional person to remain active, the regrettable fact remains that very few professional persons do remain active in the revolutionary movement during old age. Antoinette, however, to the very end remained devoted, and actively devoted, to the ideals of her youth.
Her last year of life was not a happy one – primarily because of the factional struggle in the Socialist Workers Party. I cannot, I must admit, produce documents to prove my statements. I can only say that she poured out her heart to me in several conversations. If I am challenged by the Cannonites then there will be no alternative for those who read the controversy except to believe either one or the other.
 
Her Attitude to SWP Majority
Politically she was with the majority. This means that she was opposed to the raising of democratic demands in Europe. She was opposed to the slogan of the democratic republic because, as she told me, the workers of Europe did not want and did not need a bourgeois republic. On this question she was an honest ultra-leftist together with the vast majority of the rank and file of the SWP. The leaders of that Party refused to say openly that they were for or against the slogan, but left the rank and file the impression that they were against it.
The question of unity was raised in the later stages of the factional struggle and in the one short conversation I had with Antoinette on that question she told me that she was definitely opposed to it, mainly on the ground that she did not like some of the comrades in the WP.
It was because of the struggle on the organizational questions that she was very depressed. Several times she apologized profusely to me. She felt that she should have participated in that struggle. Her heart was failing her, she said, and she could not become involved in the struggle – especially since that might mean making her situation at home somewhat difficult. She was very sad because customs and attitudes strange to her freedom-loving, socialist spirit were visible in the SWP.
The cheap build-up of the “leader,” the sneering attitude towards those who wanted to discuss and the name-calling that served as a substitute for argument were all obnoxious to her.
 
An Independent Socialist Spirit
Antoinette knew that there was something wrong with the training that the youth received in the SWP. What she wanted was a freer atmosphere. She wanted a party with a critical and independent membership and not with people who were blind fanatics. She promised that she would join the struggle for such a party if and when she would recover her health.
At bottom the difference between an Antoinette Konikow and the old functionaries of the party (and among functionaries one should include also those who are not actually on the payroll but are members of the clique) is that for Antoinette socialism was not only a theory to be accepted perfunctorily but a great ideal in the struggle for which petty maneuvers and distortions can never find a place.
Women of noble character like Krupskaya and Zetkin died without raising a voice – at least openly – against the Stalinist degeneration. I can attribute it mainly to fear that by raising their voices they might harm the Party which they helped to build. They did not realize that if by raising their voices in the interests of truth they would harm the party, then the Party is not worth while saving. It is useless to speculate whether Antoinette Konikow would have broken openly with Cannonism had she lived another five years. I can only say that her independence and understanding of what a Bolshevik party really is justifies my strong feeling that she would not have remained silent for long.

Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 July 2019




A Discussion to Prevent Unity
Several questions present themselves in connection with the list of subjects for discussion. Do not the leaders of the SWP know the position of the WP on the various questions enumerated by them for discussion? If not what kind of revolutionaries are these who pretend to lead a revolutionary political party? If they know the position of the WP on the various subjects do they expect to hold a real discussion, in the sense of trying to persuade the WP comrades that they are wrong? And suppose they do not succeed in that task? Are they not able, as political leaders to state beforehand, on, the basis of their knowledge of the WP program, whether or not the differences permit membership in one party?
And if the “discussion” is for the purpose of acquainting the SWP members with the program of the WP, how does it happen, as asked by Max Shachtman, that the members were and are all opposed to unity? Are they opposed to it because they are ignorant of the WP program?
If one considers the list of questions it becomes clear even to an inexperienced person that the “discussion” is to be held not for the purpose of arriving at an honest decision as to whether unity is possible or desirable but solely for the purpose of giving a political cover to an unpolitical rejection of unity.
I quote from a statement by the Minority, dealing with the list of questions to be discussed. “The questions listed by the PC for discussion include all subjects upon which there is or may possibly be some differences with the WP. From the point of view of a discussion on unity they are absurd; but from the point of view of confusing an inexperienced membership and killing the possibility of unity the questions listed for “discussion” were formulated by “clever” people who see in “clever” maneuvering a solution for the problem of preventing unity without giving their real reasons for opposition to unity ...
“Undoubtedly the dialecticians of the PC will prove that unity is impossible by citing the law of quantity changing into quality. One or two differences, we shall be told, may not be a bar to unity, but fifteen differences create a qualitative change.
“What other purpose than the one mentioned above can a list of questions have that would fight the battle of 1940 all over again; that asks for a discussion on the methods, principles and philosophy of Marxism; that raises such a silly subject for discussion as the attitude of the WP to the Young Peoples Socialist League; that wants to discuss subjects that are part of history (India and China during the war); that wants to revive a discussion on Russia ...?
“Honest and serious revolutionists confronted with the question of unity with another organization would take the trouble, once the question was raised, to find out the basic program of the opponent party with which unity was proposed; would follow the agitational press of that party to see what its position is on the basic questions of the day; to decide whether the differences that exist are or are not compatible with membership in one party; they would find out whether the membership of the opponent party are willing to abide by the decisions of the majority; honest and serious revolutionists would propose a period of cooperation to decide whether unity will be followed by harmony in action ...
“From the point of view of unity the attitude of the Workers Party to the war waged by the United States is of infinitely greater importance than its attitude to China. But the former question is not raised in the list of questions. From the point of view of unity the position of the Workers Party on the no-strike pledge is a thousand times more important than its attitude to the YPSL but that is not mentioned in the list of questions.”
If the coming convention of the SWP is not asked to decide that unity at present is not feasible because there are too many differences, it will be only because we have succeeded in exposing Cannon’s petty maneuver. It is difficult, however, to find what else he can do – except to state that the Minority and the WP leaders were not honest in proposing unity and accuse those of us who are sincerely for unity of using the question of unity as a maneuver for a split.
Conscious of the dishonesty which accompanied every one of their steps connected with their maneuvers against unity, the leaders of the Majority decided to smear the leaders of the Minority and of the WP as dishonest. They discovered that Max Shachtman had written some letters to me. One would imagine from the stir created that they found the letters in my coat pocket and not in the Bulletin of the Workers Party, a magazine for discussion of party problems available to non-party members as well as to party members. In the SWP there is published an internal party bulletin which is marked in bold letters INTERNAL, and in smaller letters “for party members only.” The leaders of the WP on the other hand, very properly consider that a revolutionary party as part of the working class can have no political secrets from the working class.
In these letters, Shachtman discussed with me the policy which he thought should be followed by the Minority of the SWP. On the basis of the absolutely correct premise that Cannon would never permit unity at the present relative strength of the two parties, he urged that we leave the party because it would be far more gainful to the revolutionary movement. The letters clearly indicate that Shachtman and the other comrades of the WP were seriously and sincerely for unity but that they realized that unity was not to be achieved because of the opposition of Cannon.
With great glee Cannon and his dutiful hand-raisers pounced upon the letters; they printed them in their secret bulletin. For the first time since the split Shachtman had something published in the SWP press. The leaders of the SWP launched an attack on Goldman and Morrow as initiators of unity proposals for the purpose of creating a split. Of course Cannon could easily frustrate such a purpose by accepting unity, but that did not occur to him.
We challenge anyone to read Shachtman’s letters and find a single sentence which would prove the absolutely unfounded charge that the proposal for unity was the result of a conspiracy between the Minority and WP leaders to create a split in the SWP.
Study the record made by the various groups on the question of unity and you cannot help but conclude that the Minority and the WP sincerely accepted unity whereas the Cannonite clique, in a thoroughly dishonest manner, sabotaged unity. The record of the Cannonites is a record of petty maneuverers who fear to meet in intellectual conflict a large group of independent revolutionists. In the statement from which I already quoted we said:
“It is tragic enough to see that leaders of a revolutionary party insist on continuing a split which necessarily is detrimental to the movement.
“But what is doubly tragic is that in a movement founded by a genius who is the very incarnation of intellectual integrity, a leadership relies not on an honest presentation of a position but on petty, dishonest maneuvers calculated only to fool the membership.
“It is clear that a desire to build a monolithic party goes hand in hand with political dishonesty.”
(To be continued)
 






The readers of Labor Action are familiar with the struggle for unity between the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party which was initiated by the former Minority Group of the SWP under the leadership of Albert Goldman and Felix Morrow, and the Workers Party. The development of that struggle was recorded in LA by articles, documents and exchanges which took place around this issue. The struggle for unity met up against the bureaucratic concept of a revolutionary socialist party held by the Cannon leadership of the SWP. Thus, one stage of the unity fight ended with the entrance of the major part of the Minority Group under Goldman info the ranks of the Workers Party. A pamphlet on the struggle for unity is now in preparation. This installment is one of several which will appear in the columns of Labor Action. – Editor



*
Attitude to the WP
There was a sharp difference of attitude between the Minority and the Majority of the SWP towards the WP, even before the question of unity arose. The difference was between honest revolutionists interested only in the welfare of the revolutionary movement and cliquists interested primarily in the strengthening of their clique.
We of the Minority proposed joint action on all questions where we had no differences with the WP. We proposed a bloc in the trade unions; we proposed joint anti-fascist activities; we proposed to avoid the obscene spectacle of having two small revolutionary groups run competing candidates in the New York elections. All this we did simply on the proposition that a difference on one issue even though it leads to a split, does not do away with the necessity of common action on issues upon which we agree. The leaders of the Majority stubbornly refused all of our proposals. The leading comrades of the WP, on the other hand, agreed with us completely and were willing to unite in any action where there was no disagreement.
The attitude of the leaders of the SWP to the WP is revealed by Cannon’s expression: “We must deepen the split.” What can that statement possibly mean? It can mean only a conscious attempt to widen the gulf between the parties regardless of the fact that they base themselves on the same fundamental principles and have almost the same immediate demands. To deepen the split under these circumstances must mean falsification; it must mean and it did mean distorting the position of the WP on the various questions – all for the purpose of deceiving and prejudicing the membership of the SWP, composed of comrades who for the most part do not read the WP press.
The comrades of the Minority read the WP press and told the truth about the contents. We had no difficulty in recognizing the obvious: that the comrades of the WP are devoted revolutionists. The leaders of the Cannon clique either read the press of the WP and distorted the contents or did not read the press. In both cases they shouted that the comrades of the WP are “renegades.” Our attitude was based on the truth; the attitude of the Cannonites is based on falsehood.
 
The Record on Unity
I must admit that when the Minority decided to introduce a resolution in favor of unity, the situation was not a favorable one. The SWP leaders had refused any and every kind of joint action with the WP. They were teaching the members that the WP comrades were renegades and that they should avoid fraternizing with them. On the other hand, the WP comrades were afraid of unity because they felt that unity with the Cannon clique would not be a pleasant experience. We knew that the SWP leaders would start by rejecting unity; we did not know how the WP leaders would react to our proposal for unity.
But in our opinion unity was correct and necessary and we decided to go ahead with our resolution. The violent reaction of Cannon to the resolution was a clear indication that our task would be extremely difficult if not hopeless. Never has he been so violent as when he shouted that the intention of those who introduced the resolution was to split the party. Later on he took that back but the violence of his attitude gave him away. For it disclosed that under no circumstances would he permit unity and he knew that such an attitude must necessarily lead to a split.
The Minority did not ask for immediate unity with the WP. We asked that the leading committee of the SWP go on record in favor of unity and proceed to investigate the possibilities of unity. That means a discussion with the leading comrades of the WP for the purpose of finding out whether unity is feasible. We understood that there were difficulties and that it was necessary to begin frank and honest discussions and to determine whether unity would work out in practice.
From the very beginning of our unity proposal we of the former Minority insisted that unity is not desirable if it means another violent factional struggle with another split to follow. We were not and are not afraid of any discussions but we do not want bitter factional strife.
Throughout the whole controversy we stood for the principle of joint action of the two parties on all issues upon which there was substantial agreement, for the purpose of testing out whether or not the comrades of the SWP and of the WP could live in one party even though divided by differences on various questions. We said that close collaboration would prepare the membership of both parties for unity and would eliminate the personal antagonisms remaining from the factional strife of 1940. There is nothing like joint work in a common cause to make people forget animosities.
But shouting that the WP leaders were renegades and that the split must be deepened, Cannon reacted violently against the proposal for unity. To him it means the coming into the party of several hundred revolutionists who would be persuaded only by argument, who would not listen to his banalities with awe and proclaim his anecdotes as the writings of an inspired historian. Unity would mean more independent revolutionists in the party and he had enough of us as it was.
 
A Change of Line
To our request to start a discussion with the leaders of the WP to determine whether unity was feasible, Cannon answered that no discussion was necessary because the press of the WP gave us all the information that was necessary to know that its program and activities made unity undesirable. The Minority of course did not want a discussion on program; we knew the program of the WP and that is why we were for unity; what we wanted was a discussion to see whether unity was practical.
Suddenly there was a change of line on the part of the SWP leadership. Instead of flat and open opposition to unity the formula was brought out; “We are neither for nor against – wait and see.” Instead of rejecting any kind of discussion because the press of the WP gave us all the information necessary, the formula was adopted: “a thorough discussion and probing of all differences.”
Officially the change of line was explained by the fact that the WP had sent a communication to the SWP, taking cognizance of the Minority’s proposal for unity and indicating its favorable attitude to unity and willingness to discuss the question. As serious revolutionaries the WP leaders had not waited for an official invitation. They knew that the Minority had made a proposal and immediately took a position in favor of unity.
Since Cannon had previously stated that the program of the WP made unity an unrealistic proposition and since he stated that the press of the WP gave us all the information necessary, it would seem that a communication from the WP should make no difference. But it was evident that unity was a powerful issue in the ranks of the international and open opposition to it would not be a good tactic. Comrade Natalia Trotsky had already expressed herself in favor of unity. It appeared desirable to Cannon to sabotage unity rather than oppose it openly. This explains the change of line. Unfortunately the members of the SWP shifted their position in the same manner that the members of the Stalinist parties shift theirs – whenever the leaders decide that a change is necessary.
When the line was shifted from open opposition to unity to a “not for, not against, but wait and see” attitude, a committee was designated to meet with a committee of the WP. At one of the meetings the WP comrades indicated their desire to publish a tendency organ after unity, for internal party circulation. This was immediately taken up by the SWP leaders and the party members were told that the real obstacle to unity was this demand for an independent tendency organ. Since the SWP leaders are “smart” people they did not put this down in writing but spread it throughout the party.
Thereupon the Minority addressed a communication to the WP asking the WP comrades to be satisfied with an internal party bulletin provided the right of a group to publish its own bulletin for internal party circulation be recognized by the SWP leaders. This proposition was accepted by the WP comrades but then the SWP leaders simply stated that the question of the tendency bulletin was not at all important and was not the one to prevent unity. The programmatic differences were important and these had to be discussed.
More than six months after the adoption of a resolution providing for a “thorough discussion” with the WP covering all of the differences between the parties, the Political Committee of the SWP presented the WP with a list of about fifteen questions and requested the latter to state its position on all of the enumerated questions. This apparently is to be the beginning of the “thorough discussion,” although the list of questions was accompanied by a resolution which stated that on the basis of the answers to the questions the coming convention would definitely decide on the question of unification.
(To be continued)

Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 July 2019




Like all great thinkers who participated actively in the struggle for human progress, Trotsky left a body of ideas which, in reality, cannot be understood without grasping the method and the spirit of the man. To accept Trotsky’s ideas as dogmas, to repeat them mechanically without comprehending that they must be understood in the light of conditions that prevailed at the time Trotsky first advanced them, is to do exactly what he fought against throughout his whole mature life.
It is contrary to Trotsky’s method to solve a theoretical problem primarily by a system of reference and quotation. It is contrary to Trotsky’s method to assume that he or anybody else was always correct and to argue and act on that basis.
 
Important to Understand Method
Six years after the assassination of Trotsky by an agent of Stalin it has become clear that Trotsky is not immune to the fate that has befallen all great thinkers after their death. Those who, day in day out, proclaim that they and they alone are the “official disciples” and insist that the world listen only to them show that they do not comprehend or do not want to comprehend the essential method of the “master.” One need only consider the ideas presented and the tactics followed by the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party in the last few years to realize that the formal acceptance of Trotsky’s ideas without an understanding of his method can easily lead to a course that is the exact opposite of what Trotsky would have followed were he alive.
It is, of course, impossible to be certain as to what policies Trotsky would have proposed as a solution to all of the problems confronting us at the present moment. It happens frequently that those who base themselves on the same general method differ sharply on particular theoretical or practical problems. There is and there can be no general method in the science of revolutionary politics which guarantees that those who accept it will agree on all questions. There is only one condition where one can be reasonably certain of no differences – where fascism or Stalinism prevail.
*
If it is impossible to be certain as to what policies Trotsky would have followed with reference to all of our problems, we can, however, be certain that Trotsky’s method excludes some of the policies followed by the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party. The latter, following Trotsky, hold that we are living in the epoch of proletarian revolution. From this general proposition they conclude that in Europe democratic, slogans are not to be raised or are of secondary importance. It is impossible to conceive that Trotsky would have reached such a conclusion, because he determined his attitude on such a question not alone from the general proposition of the nature of the epoch but from a close analysis of the particular factors which determined the consciousness of the masses at a particular moment.
There can be legitimate differences on the nature of the slogans that are to be used if these differences are based on a different estimate of the consciousness of the masses or as to whether a particular slogan is or is not what the masses want to struggle for. But one does not follow the Trotskyist method if he deduces slogans from a general characterization of the epoch we live in.
 
His Approach to Current Issues
Nor is it possible to imagine that Trotsky would have opposed (as do the leaders of the SWP) the slogan of “wage increase without price increase” on the basis that it was not included in the program of transitional demands formulated in 1938 or because of a certain formula contained in that program. If the masses, disturbed by a very rapid increase of the cost of living, can be set into motion by the slogan of freezing of prices, no formula would have prevented Trotsky from adopting such a slogan.
With the greatest of confidence, we can rule out the idea that Trotsky would have opposed unity between the SWP and the WP. Were he alive we can take it for granted that by this time there would be unity. For Trotsky would have recognized the obvious fact that the WP is a revolutionary party and that it would be of great benefit to the revolutionary movement if two revolutionary parties were to unite. The fact that there was a split in 1940 is something to be regretted by those who consider it to have been a mistake, but it is not a cause for opposition to unity.
Trotsky could not possibly have raised the present differences between the parties as a barrier to unity because, in the first place, he had confidence in his ability to defend his position and, in the second place, he was completely opposed to any policy which favored the building of a monolithic party.
Of one thing we can be absolutely certain. Under no circumstances would he have tolerated the devious and dishonest methods pursued by the SWP leaders in order to prevent unity. It is above all in pursuing such methods that they have betrayed the spirit of Trotsky.
*
It can be taken for granted that the question which would have occupied most of his attention is the defense of Russia. What can be said as to his probable attitude? Here we are on more debatable ground. Would he have clung to the formula: nationalized property – therefore defense? It is a subject of interesting speculation.
 
Stalinism and Defense of Russia
We can be certain only that he would not have been bound by the fact that previously he had formulated a certain proposition with reference to the nature of the Soviet Union and the necessity of defending it. For Trotsky was not one to be bound by a formula. Living reality was far more important to him.
If one takes living reality into consideration one is compelled to recognize the fact that the victory of the Stalinist army has led only to the crushing of the socialist revolution. Trotsky contended that the defense of Russia must be subordinated to the interests of the world revolution. The defense of Russia means working for the victory of the Stalinist army but it is that very victory which constitutes as great a danger to the world revolution as the victory of the armies of any fascist country. Would Trotsky not have seen that the advantages of nationalized property are far outweighed by the harm to the proletarian revolution which the victory of the Stalinist army is sure to bring?
One can readily see the justification for following a policy of defense under a condition that prevailed in 1940, when one could still expect that the war and a victory of the Stalinist army might lead to a revolution in Europe which would destroy Stalinism. But history has proved that the victory of the Stalinist army has been a very important factor in preventing the European revolution. It seems safe to conclude that Trotsky would have started with that conclusion and not simply repeated his formula about nationalized property. The very first principle of every revolutionary Marxist is not to cling to a formula of yesterday.
In the light of the real method of Trotsky one finds it difficult not to throw up his hands in despair when one sees in a resolution adopted by an international conference of Trotskyist parties the idea, with reference to the occupying Stalinist armies in Europe, that the sections should “tolerate the presence of the Red army only to the extent that it is a friendly proletarian armed force having as its objective to guarantee the fulfillment of agrarian reform and the state-ization of the means of production against imperialism and against national reactionary elements, without hindering in any way whatsoever the free development of the working-class movement.” Such nonsense could be written only by people who are slaves to a formula. Alas we must admit that a genius is unable to prevent followers from bringing shame upon his ideas.
They who, like the leaders of the SWP, claim that Trotsky’s program is a “finished program” or an “unchanging program,” have in reality very little in common with Trotsky. They may publish Trotsky’s writings; they may celebrate his anniversaries and proclaim undying devotion to him; they may shout that they are the only real Trotskyists and all others are only “counterfeits.” But this does not make of them Trotskyists in spirit and method. We must remind everybody that the Stalinists publish Lenin’s works with full commentaries and celebrate his anniversaries. But this does not make Leninists out of them.
Far closer to the spirit of Trotsky are they who disagreed with him and still disagree with him on many subjects but who understand that it is above all necessary to follow his method which means to base oneself on the general principles of Marxism and to analyze living events for the purpose of finding the best possible policies in the struggle for the victory of socialism.

Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 July 2019







The readers of Labor Action are familiar with the struggle for unity between the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party which was initiated by the former Minority Group of the SWP, under the leadership of Albert Goldman and Felix Morrow, and the Workers Party. The development of that struggle was recorded in LA by articles, documents and exchanges which took place around this issue. The struggle for unity met up against the bureaucratic concept of a revolutionary socialist party held by the Cannon leadership of the SWP. Thus, one stage of the unity fight ended with the entrance of the major part of the Minority Group under Goldman into the ranks of the Workers Party. A pamphlet on the struggle for unity is now in preparation. This installment is one of several which will appear in the columns of Labor Action. – Editor



*
On the surface it appears as if those of us who left the Socialist Workers Party and joined the Workers Party did so because the SWP refused to accept the proposal which the former Minority of the SWP made for unity of the two parties. If that were really the case, then what we did would be inexplicable. For within our ranks are comrades who have spent many years in the revolutionary movement and experienced revolutionary socialists do not leave a party because of a disagreement on a question that is apparently not so very important.
There can easily be an honest difference of opinion as to whether unity with a certain party or group,is or is not advisable and necessary. In such a case the minority advocating unity accepts the decision of the majority and continues its efforts to win the majority to its point of view. But it was dear to us that the rejection of unity by the leaders of the SWP was not the result of an honest conviction that unity is incorrect but rather of a fear of having too many independent revolutionists within the party. The rejection of unity was to us final proof that concepts and methods of organization completely alien to Bolshevism had been introduced by Cannon and his followers and that what they want to build is a monolithic instead of a revolutionary party.
It was of course possible for us to remain in the SWP and struggle against these concepts and methods but there were too few of us and too much of our time would have been wasted in controversies with a clique that almost invariably succeeded in dragging every intellectual conflict down to its lowest level.
We joined the Workers Party because we are of the opinion that a union of all the forces striving to build a revolutionary Marxist party – as against a monolithic party – will, in the long run, bring the best results.
Our hopes for unity are not completely destroyed and our struggle for unity is not over. If there is unity it will mean that the process of degeneration that has begun in the SWP will have been stopped. If there is no unity then there is nothing else to do except to proceed on our path of building a revolutionary Marxist party.
In 1940 a bitter factional struggle centering around the issues of the defense of the Soviet Union and the nature of the regime, led to a split. In my opinion, the comrades who split and formed the WP made a grave mistake; in their opinion they were correct. But the split is now part of history and what is necessary is to unite and not to fight over an incident of the past.
The very nature of the issues upon which the split was based should have led intelligent and experienced Marxists to expect re-unification. When informed about the split Trotsky wrote that the then Minority was determined to pass through the experience of an independent party. Such an expression indicated that he considered the split a temporary one, because he considered the issues leading to the split as issues that would be settled in a short time.
They who see in the revolutionary movement a process in which sharp intellectual conflict is inevitable and even necessary do not consider a split a crime for which one suffers eternal damnation. It is a very costly part of the life of the revolutionary movement and all efforts must be made to avoid it. But if a split does occur, revolutionists who are interested in the revolution and not in their cliques make every effort to unite the divided forces.
Personal animosities are aroused in the course of bitter factional strife. But what kind of revolutionists are they who persist in retaining these animosities regardless of the passing of time and the elimination of the issues that gave rise to the struggle? Lenin was by no means a gentle person in a factional struggle! Lenin and Trotsky fought each other fiercely. But they found no trouble in uniting when the question of the Russian Revolution, upon which they saw eye to eye, demanded unity.
Alas that so many petty people have found it easy to imitate Lenin in hurling terms of opprobrium, but have found Lenin’s politics too difficult to grasp. And Lenin’s politics included unifications as well as splits. And the same is true of Trotsky.
 
Political Basis for Unity
The mere fact that unity of the SWP and the WP would do away with tremendous duplication of effort would justify making all efforts for unity. There are now two weekly agitational organs – The Militant with a circulation, let us say of 35,000, and Labor Action with one of 20,000. Would not one paper sold to 50,000 workers be much more effective? And the two papers are so similar in content that the average worker cannot possibly distinguish between them. There are two theoretical monthly magazines. There is confusing duplication of effort on all fronts. Such a situation should be tolerated only if there are profound programmatic differences.
There are of course differences but they are easily compatible with membership in one party, provided there is a willingness on the part of the minority to abide by discipline in action. The most serious difference is on the question of the defense of the Soviet Union but in 1940 we of the majority of the SWP, following Trotsky, contended that there was no justification of a split because of differences on that question, if that was true in 1940, it is a thousand times more true in 1946 when the most important question before us is not the defense of the Soviet Union but the defense of the European Revolution against Stalinism.
Other differences that developed during the period of separation are minor in comparison with the question of the defense of the Soviet Union. Under no circumstances could any one of them or all of them put together justify a split or the continuation of a split.
On the basic anti-capitalist program there are no differences; on the program of transitional demands there are practically no differences. Readers of the weekly papers of the two parties could easily see that during the war, both refused to support the war on the ground that they considered it, on the part of the United States, imperialist in character; both fought against the no-strike pledge; both supported all the strikes. At present the two parties support the struggle for higher wages; they advocate the formation of a Labor party; they demand the withdrawal of the American troops from all occupied countries; they defend the European Revolution against the Stalinists and the democratic imperialists.
On the question of the nature of a party both parties accept the principle of democratic centralism. It is true that the rejection of unity by the leaders of the Socialist Workers Party together with other indications point to a Stalinist trend on the part of the SWP leaders but they deny that; they insist that they have the true Bolshevik concept of party organization; so do the leaders of the WP. There may even be legitimate differences of opinion on the application of the principle of democratic centralism but such differences should not prevent unity.
Serious revolutionists must above ail recognize that the time within which we can build a powerful revolutionary party to lead the masses to socialism is limited. The invention of the atom bomb gives us, in all probability, another post-war period and no more. The serious tasks confronting the revolutionary Marxist movement both in this country and abroad demand the strengthening of that movement through unification of the two parties that represent it.
If the political situation demands unity why is there no unity? Upon whom is the responsibility for the failure to achieve unity and what significance can be attached to the motives of those who have rejected unity?
(To be continued)

Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 July 2019




A combination of New Dealers (“liberals” under various degrees of Stalinist influence and some anti-Stalinists), labor bureaucrats and outright Stalinists met at a conference in Chicago on September 28–29 to consider and discuss their not too hopeful situation. Very rapidly the New Dealers are being deprived of their position and influence in the Democratic party. With the elimination of Wallace from the cabinet there is not a single prominent figure left in the Truman administration who is an authentic New Dealer. The Southern reactionaries and the corrupt political machines of the large cities have decided that they can get along without sharing offices with figures like Wallace, Ickes and their Stalinist supporters.
Since the conference was sponsored by the CIO Political Action Committee, the National Citizens Political Action Committee and the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions the Stalinist influence was predominant. Nevertheless the Stalinists had to give the lead to the non-Stalinist big-shot Democratic and labor bureaucrats. Ickes, Senator Pepper and Philip Murray could not be dragooned into following a complete Stalinist line and the Stalinists therefore had to adapt their line to the Democratic bigshot politicians and labor leaders.
Although the Stalinists have been pressing for a third party, the line at the conference was adapted to meet with the approval of men like Wallace and Pepper who are definitely opposed to a third party. A third party is too much of a risk for the politicians who still expect to hold office as representatives of the Democratic Party. The conference unanimously decided to concentrate on the election of “progressives,” both Democrats and Republicans.
Due mainly to Stalinist influence the door for the formation of a third party was left open. A continuation committee was appointed to meet after the election and to call another conference of “progressives” in January. Should the Stalinists decide to go ahead with the formation of a third party they will undoubtedly lose men like Pepper if not men like Wallace. The Senator from Florida may follow the Stalinist line when it does not conflict with his political career but he knows that to be a successful politician for the time being, he must be a Democrat and an advocate of white supremacy.
*
Domestic Program
For its domestic program the conference presented a document which roundly condemned the 79th Congress for “letting the people down.” The program is for price and for rent control, for subsidies for housing (completely inadequate), for the Wagner-Murray-Dingell health bill and for all other measures that have been introduced by Truman, under the general title of Roosevelt’s Economic Bill of Rights, but either rejected or pigeon-holed by Congress.
It is significant that the Truman administration was omitted from the section that criticized the 79th Congress. Neither the Democratic politicians nor the CIO non-Stalinist bureaucrats are ready to break with the Administration.
The program for the domestic scene bases itself on the acceptance of the principle of free enterprise. In that, Wallace, Ickes and Morgenthau set the tone. The monopolies were condemned; small business was promised relief as well as the worker and farmer but the capitalist system as such was not mentioned. Not one word about nationalization of any industry appears in the platform. It is a program of middle-class progressives who have come under Stalinist influence.
 
Two Foreign Policies
The resolution on foreign policy is a compromise between those who, like Ickes, defend the interests of American imperialism against Stalinist encroachment and the Stalinists who are now supporting Wallace in his policy of appeasement. Due to the open break between Russia and American imperialism some of the liberals are balking at accepting Stalinist leadership. The liberals and the labor bureaucrats who generally keep quiet when criticism of the Stalinists is in order, have recently gotten up courage to criticize. We can predict with confidence that the more serious the tension between American and Stalinist imperialism becomes the more scared will the liberals become of Stalinist influence. The anti-Stalinist groupings that have appeared in the CIO are largely due to the deterioration in the relationship between American and Stalinist imperialism.
Ickes and Murray openly attacked the Stalinists. Murray limited himself to an extemporaneous remark to the effect that the attempt of the Communists to mix in labor politics is not welcome. The attack of Ickes was prepared and much more elaborate – mainly on the foreign policy of the Kremlin. As a result the foreign policy platform, in addition to calling for unity of the Big Three and for the cessation of military aid to any faction in China, also condemned imperialism by all nations. We can rest assured that this was difficult for the Stalinists to swallow but they accepted it since they are in a position to claim that there is no such thing as Russian imperialism.
On the question of the atomic bomb the conference supported Wallace as against Baruch. Ickes was not present at the time the resolution was accepted but he has since come out with an attack on those responsible for the drawing of the resolution. It is becoming clear that Ickes is drawing further away from the Stalinists as the tension between Moscow and Washington grows.
 
The Real Failure
There is no doubt that the conference had representation from those sections of the American people that must unite in the struggle against the monopolies that rule this country. Walter White of the National Association for the Advancement of the Colored People was there; also James Patton of the Farmers Union. The backbone of the conference was the PAC of the CIO.
If progressive labor were to take the lead and unite around it the poor farmers, the Negroes and the lower middle class, a conference would go far indeed if labor were determined to launch a party of its own, to assume the leadership of such a party and not permit ambitious middle class politicians to determine the policies of the party. Such a conference would go far indeed if instead of clinging to the program of Roosevelt it would clearly see the necessity for a program leading to the taking of power by labor with the purpose of nationalising the most important industries under workers’ control.
But the conference that was held had the fatal weakness of being dominated by the Stalinists who are interested only in defending the Kremlin tyrants. And in addition there were the middle-class politicians who cling to their free enterprise and, in the last analysis, to American imperialism. From such a conference nothing good for the labor movement can emanate.
 






The following article by Albert Goldman, leader of the former
Minority Group of the Socialist Workers Party (a great section of
which under his leadership, joined the Workers Party), is a
presentation of his views on a question on which The New
International and the WP have a fully developed different
position. But in line with our practice we are publishing his
views as a discussion article. We believe this to be in the best
tradition of revolutionary Marxism. More important than that,
however, Comrade Goldman’s article is a contribution on a
subject which continues to remain one of the most important before
the international revolutionary socialist movement. The
publication of this article is not the opening of a discussion on
the Russian question which we have carried on several previous
occasions. Its publication is for the purpose of acquainting our
readers with the views of the writer.
Readers of The New International are, of course,
familiar with its views, namely, that Russia is a bureaucratic
collectivist society; a new exploitive social order; the most
powerful counter-revolutionary force in the world today, pursuing
an imperialist policy of its own and, from the point of view of
the masses, no different from the imperialism of monopoly
capitalism. Under bureaucratic collectivism, Russian society is a
“slave” society for the mass of workers and peasants, having
not the slightest resemblance to socialism.
We do not agree with Comrade Goldman’s comments on our
theoretical analysis of the character of the Russian state. That
there are difficulties involved in the theory, goes without
saying, but they are as nothing when compared to those involved in
the theory of “a degenerated workers’ state,” or that of
Russia as a capitalist-fascist state. With the aid of the theory
of bureaucratic collectivism we have been able to develop a valid
estimate of Russia’s role and to orient our movement correctly
in world events as against all others during the past almost seven
years. The same cannot be said for those who adhered to the
“degenerated workers’ state” concept. Further, it is our
opinion that the views of Comrade Goldman represent a moving away
from that untenable theory held by the official organizations of
the Fourth International, toward the views of the Workers Party
and thus represent a particularly interesting contribution to the
discussion. – Editor




From the point of view of those struggling for the socialist
revolution the outstanding fact of World War II is that the
revolution did not emerge from the war to destroy the Stalinist
bureaucracy as we hoped and expected, but that the Stalinist
bureaucracy was the greatest single factor in preventing a successful
socialist revolution in Europe.
One can point to certain beginnings of a socialist revolutionary
movement at the time when the Hitler military machine was cracking
up; one can point to certain sections of Europe where undoubtedly the
masses were ready to take power. But all this does not and cannot
alter the fact that there has been no revolution in Europe for the
fundamental reason that the Stalinist bureaucracy prevented the
socialist revolution from developing.
In Eastern Europe the Stalinist armies crushed every attempt on
the part of the masses to take power and at the present moment the
masses of those countries are practically slaves of the Stalinist
bureaucracy. In the important countries of Western Europe the
Stalinist parties have gained command over the decisive sections of
the working class and have, by their policies prevented any attempt
at revolution. In France and Italy the workers have flocked to the
Stalinist banner because they want a socialist revolution. Without
the Stalinist parties only the bayonets of the American and English
imperialist armies could have crushed any revolutionary uprising. It
can be said with the greatest of certainty that the Stalinist
bureaucracy is the most powerful counter-revolutionary factor on the.
European scene.
The contention is put forward that our mistake in believing that
the revolution would arise as a result of the war and destroy
Stalinism is one involving tempo. (We also thought that if the
revolution did not arise and destroy the Stalinist bureaucracy, the
forces of capitalism would do away with it. But that is immaterial
for the argument in this article.) We can grant the proposition that
our mistake is one of tempo but this does not in the least modify the
proposition that the victory of the Stalinist armies is the greatest
danger to the socialist revolution. This has been proved beyond the
shadow of a doubt and every serious revolutionist who up to now has
advocated the “defense of the Soviet Union” should take that
factor into consideration in determining his attitude to that slogan.
Trotsky was careful to explain that our defense of Russia means
primarily an explanation to the masses of what we defend and how we
defend it. He was exceedingly anxious to have everyone clearly
understand that we are not for one moment defending any of the
policies of the Stalinist bureaucracy. But this did not do away with
the fact that in any war between Russia and a capitalist country
those who were for the defense of the Soviet Union were for the
victory of the “Red” army and were obliged to do their best to
help achieve that victory.
But at present, knowing what the consequences of a victory of the
Stalinist army must be to the socialist revolution, is it still
possible to advocate the defense of Russia, that is, the victory of
the Stalinist armies? The answer is that a revolutionist who is not
bound by a formula will not do so. The answer is that a revolutionary
Marxist who sees and accepts the obvious fact that to defend
Stalinist Russia means to hope and, if possible, work for the victory
of an army that is certain to crush any socialist revolutionary
uprising, will give up the slogan of “defense of the Soviet Union.”
We have always accepted the idea that the defense of Russia must
be subordinated to the interests of the world revolution. We know now
what we did not know in 1940 – that the victory of the Stalinist
army is detrimental to the world revolution just as the victory of
any capitalist country would be.
 
“Nationalized Property – Therefore Defense”
Must the conclusion be drawn from the above that we who advocated
“defending the Soviet Union” in 1940 were wrong?’Only in the
sense that the formula upon which we fundamentally based our defense
of Russia was an incorrect one. That formula was “nationalized
property – therefore defense.” It was the fact that nationalized
property was something still left of the 1917 Revolution that made it
necessary for some of us to call Russia a “workers’ state” even
though degenerated. And it was this nationalized property that we
said made it necessary for us to defend Russia. That bare formula
must now be rejected completely. For it leads to the dangerous
conclusion that we defend an army the victory of which can lead only
to counter-revolutionary consequences.
Far more correct would it have been had we said that nationalized
property under the conditions prevailing in 1940 justified our
position of defense. We certainly did not know what the results of
the war would be; in fact we expected the proletarian revolution or
capitalism to destroy Stalinism. Itwas correct for us to test to the
end the theory that the war may bring the proletarian revolution and
it, in ’its tum, smash the Stalinist bureaucracy. One of the most
important of the conditions prevailing in 1940 was the expectation
that either the revolution or capitalism would destroy the Kremlin
bureaucracy. One can make out a fair case for the proposition that
Trotsky actually thought that defense was necessary in 1940 partly
because he expected the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy in the
not too far-distant future.
“We might place ourselves in a ludicrous position,”
he said, “if we affixed to the Bonapartist oligarchy the
nomenclature of a new class just a few years or even a few months
prior to its inglorious downfall.”
Trotsky always felt it necessary to operate on that theory, which
looked forward to a favorable outcome for the proletarian revolution,
until events proved conclusively that it could not be held any
longer. Until the very last minute he worked on the theory that the
Nazis could be prevented from taking power. There were those who,
after the Nazis took power, pointed out that Trotsky was wrong in
this theory, forgetting that it was only such a theory that could
constitute the basis of a continuation of the struggle against the
Nazis and that a revolutionist had no right to say beforehand that
the struggle against the Nazis was in vain.
A somewhat similar situation existed with reference to the
question of defending Russia. So long as it was possible to expect
that the war and a victory of the Russian armies might lead to a
proletarian revolution and the regeneration of Russia, so long was it
justifiable to retain the position of its defense.
But if it was justifiable to defend Stalinist Russia in 1940, when
history had not as yet showed us what exactly the victory of the
Stalinist army would mean, it is criminal to do so now when we know
what a victory of the Stalinist army must inevitably lead to.
 
Defense and the Consciousness of the Masses
The threat which a victory of the Stalinist army presents to the
socialist revolution is by itself sufficient to warrant a change from
defending Stalinist Russia to non-defense. There are, however,
additional factors which should be taken into consideration by those
who still cling to the old formula. The plundering of the occupied
countries and the enslavement of millions of German and Japanese
workers whose only crime was to be drafted into the armies of their
oppressors make a change mandatory on the question of defense. How
can we ask the workers of Germany and Japan who have experienced the
frightful terror of slave labor in Stalin’s Russia to defend that
country? How can we ask the semi-enslaved workers of the Eastern
European countries to defend Stalin’s Russia?
Terrible were the crimes of Stalin in executing hundreds of
thousands of people who were loyal to the revolution on the pretext
that they were enemies of the working class. Dreadful are the
conditions of the masses in Russia. But it remains a fact that the
masses outside of Russia were never deeply stirred by the crimes of
Stalin against the people of that country. Either they were unaware
of those crimes or they considered the struggle between Stalin and
his opponents as of no concern to them. But now millions of people
have become aware of the terrible cruelty of that monster and it is
impossible to ask them to help his army to victory and thus help
forge their own chains.
It can be said that we always made a distinction between the
“Soviet Union” and the Stalinist regime and we never assumed the
slightest responsibility for the crimes of Stalin. It was under the
best of circumstances a difficult task to make that distinction. At
present, however, it is an impossible task. Tell the tortured slaves
in the slave labor camps of Russia, tell the semi-slaves of the
Eastern European countries that they should only defend the
nationalized property and their answer, with venom and hatred will
be: but in order to defend this nationalized property I must work for
the victory of an army that will bring torture and slavery to me. You
who are defenders may be willing to help build your own funeral pyre
but not we.
 
What About the Nature of the Russian state?
Does it follow that we must reject the concept of a degenerated
workers’ state for Stalinist Russia because we reject its defense?
For the present that is not at all necessary.
We can call a junked automobile an automobile although it cannot
be used for anything but junk. We call Stalinist Russia a degenerated
workers’ state because Russia was once a workers’ state and at
present we do not know what actually is developing out of it. In
truth it is necessary, for the present, to cling to the concept of
degenerated workers’ state because no one has succeeded in
presenting us with a theory as to its nature which has less
difficulties than those involved in the theory of degenerated
workers’ state. What was once a workers’ state and subsequently a
degenerated workers’ state has not developed to a point where we
can be certain of its nature.
One can easily admit the difficulties connected with the theory of
degenerated workers’ state but then the difficulties involved in
the theory of bureaucratic collectivism are much greater. On the
basis of that theory one must hold that it is possible 1: that a
class (bureaucratic collectivist) can arise which does not play a
progressive role in comparison with the class (capitalist) it
displaces; 2: that a new class can arise, the existence of which can
be limited to one country. In a world made interdependent by
capitalist imperialism this is indeed a difficult concept – almost
as difficult as the theory of socialism in one country.
Marx postulated the theory of the rule of the working class and
the development of socialism as a result of the contradictions of
capitalism. There is a very strong implication in the theory of
bureaucratic collectivism of a social order following capitalism
which is not socialism but bureaucratic collectivism. There is, of
course, nothing sacred about any theory of Marx and if events compel
us to revise it we should do so. But one should not lightly change a
theory which is of tremendous aid in the struggle for socialism. The
theory of degenerated worker’s state is far more in consonance with
Marxism and since the difficulties connected with that theory are
less than the difficulties connected with the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism, it is to be preferred as against the latter theory.
The theory that state capitalism exists in Stalinist Russia has
the advantage of connecting the exploitation that is going on in
Russia with capitalist exploitation. But essentially it raises the
same problems and difficulties as the theory of bureaucratic collectivism.
To those who would argue that to call Stalinist Russia a
degenerated workers’ state means that it is necessary to defend it
against capitalist attack, we can say with the greatest conviction
that history has proved that a degenerated workers’ state under a
Stalinist regime can do far greater harm to the socialist revolution
than some capitalist states.
To defend Stalinist Russia because it is a degenerated workers’
state and to disregard the fact that to defend it means to work for
the victory of an army that is sure to crush the every attempt at
socialist revolution is to become a prisoner of formulas. No real
Marxist is a prisoner of formulas.
 

t Goldman: Would Revolution Let the Enemy Invade U.S.? (29 June 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Would Revolution Let the Enemy Invade U.S.?
(29 June 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 26, 29 June 1940, p. 8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

There is always one question sure to be thrown at me whenever and wherever I speak on the war question. Naturally during the main speech or lecture I explain that in a war between imperialist countries our party urges the workers to continue the class struggle even to the point of revolution regardless of the effect that the struggle of the workers might have on the military front. And I also explain that this policy applies as well in a war between the “democratic” imperialist countries and Hitler Germany.
“Wouldn’t you,” – so the question runs – “by this tactic, permit Hitler’s armies to conquer the democracies? While the workers would be struggling against the capitalists wouldn’t Hitler’s armies march in and take over everything?”
Invariably the questioner is troubled. He is perfectly willing to fight for the workers to take governmental power into their hands, but he is afraid that to do so in the midst of war would play into the hands of the fascists.
I must admit that my answer based on socialist fundamentals does not always or very frequently convince the questioner. My answer is generally as follows:
Revolutionary workers, as a matter of principle, cannot and must not support their own government in an imperialist war. If continuing the class struggle at home with the possible effect of a defeat at the front is an evil, then supporting an imperialist government with a victory at the front is a greater evil and we are compelled to choose the lesser of the two evils.
Then I proceed to explain that a successful attack on the enemy at home is so all-important that the workers must take the risk of having the foreign enemy take advantage of the confusion and weakening of the military front which must inevitably come as a result of a revolutionary struggle. If the revolution should be successful then the workers, after a short period of disorganization, can better defend themselves against a foreign army.
Another argument that I advance is that even if “our democratic” imperialist government should defeat the fascist countries, fascism would result if the workers failed to take power into their own hands.
 
France’s Fate Underlines Our Answer!
The surrender of the French army furnishes revolutionary Marxists with a very telling practical argument. Here was an army touted by every expert as the finest army in the world. “The Germans could easily defeat the Polish army but wait until Hitler comes up against the French army.” So the experts expressed their wishful thinking.
But the French army did no better than the Polish or Norwegian army against the mechanized forces of Hitler.
Neither the French nor the Polish bourgeois governments could furnish adequate leadership for the defense of France and Poland.
This does not mean that the Hitler government is unbeatable by any other capitalist government. Given a sufficient period of preparation the United States with an industry more powerful than Germany’s could in all probability be victorious over Hitler.
But it could do so only if it adopts the same fascist regime that Germany has. It could do so only by suppressing every right the workers enjoy at present.
On the other hand a working-class regime has forces at its disposal that no capitalist government can possibly muster.
It would muster the burning enthusiasm of the masses who, conscious that they are fighting for their own interests, would be capable of devotion and sacrifice that they would not possibly exert when in the army of a capitalist government.
And what is of the greatest importance, a workers’ government could appeal with tremendous effect to the soldiers and workers of the enemy army.
It is very significant that the English and French imperialist governments very soon after the war gave up the idea of appealing to the German people over the head of the Hitler government. They soon adopted the line of blaming the German people as well as the German government.
No wonder! Why should the German workers listen to the French and British imperialists? What can the German workers expect from the British imperialists?
An appeal from a French or British Soviet government, on the other hand, would inevitably have a tremendous effect upon the German masses. They would know that to defeat Hitler would not mean their enslavement by the French or British imperialists but a union with their French and British brothers.
The lesson of the conquest of France by Hitler is clear and should be taken to heart by every worker. The French armies were not defeated because the workers disorganized it by revolution. They were defeated because there was no revolution.
If there is any way to defeat Hitler and Hitlerism it is through a workers’ government fighting for a socialist world.
 

t Goldman: Workers Must Intervene in War – But How? (15 June 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Workers Must Intervene in War – But How?
(15 June 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 24, 15 June 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The American workers have a sacred obligation to intervene in the imperialist war now raging in Europe.
Does that sound like Roosevelt and all of his fellow war-mongers in and out of the labor movement? There is a difference of course in the use of the word ‘imperialist,’ a term which Roosevelt and his supporters do not use.
The question is : HOW to intervene.
The idea that the American workers are not at all interested in the imperialist war is absurd. It is true that they should not be interested in it the same way as those who are responsible for the war. But to say that the American workers or the workers of any other country should not be interested in a war that is destroying millions of human beings and untold wealth created by the working masses is complete nonsense.
To make a serious attempt to stop the war is the duty of the American workers, if for no other reason than that, if they do not stop the war, they will inevitably be dragged into it.
But again the question must be asked: HOW to intervene?
Certainly not the kind of intervention that Roosevelt proposes. He wants to intervene because a victory of Germany threatens the imperialist interests of the American ruling class. He is afraid that a victorious fascist Germany will be a successful competitor of American capitalism on the world market and especially in Latin America.
The American workers must do their utmost to prevent that kind of intervention. For such an intervention can mean nothing except a lower standard of living, destruction of all liberties, untold sacrifice and slaughter – all to preserve and protect the interests of the American capitalist class.
The intervention of the American workers must be of an altogether different form and for an altogether different purpose. They must intervene by destroying in this country the social system which brought on the war in Europe and which will sooner or later involve us in the same kind of a war.
How will the destruction of the capitalist system in this country constitute intervention in the war in Europe? The answer is: should the American workers take over power and establish a socialist United States it would be impossible for the imperialists of the European countries to keep their workers in subjection and to keep them slaughtering one another.
The European workers would be electrified by a victory of the American workers; they would in short order turn their guns against those who sent them to the slaughter. The capitalist rulers of the European countries, including Hitler and Mussolini could not last very long after the capitalists of the United States would fall from power.
There are many who are crying: keep America out of the war. They consist of demagogues and sincere but blind pacifists who do not see that it is impossible to keep this country out of war so long as it is ruled by the capitalist class.
The advanced workers will also fight to keep America out of the war, that is, to keep imperialist America from intervening in an imperialist war. The longer this country stays out of the war, the more time will the advanced workers have to educate and organize the American masses for the kind of intervention that will really benefit the workers of this country as well as the workers throughout the world.
To fight for and establish a Socialist United States is the only effective and worthwhile intervention on the part of the American people.
 

t Goldman: How Are Workers to Fight Against Hitlerism? (22 June 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
How Are Workers to Fight Against Hitlerism?
(22 June 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 25, 22 June 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

All the war-mongers from Roosevelt down to the small-fry Social Democrats play upon this fear of fascism to inculcate into the minds of the workers the idea that to support England, France or the United States in a war against Germany is a sacred duty.
To make the idea of supporting France, England, or the United States in the war with Germany more palatable to the workers, all the various types of democrats have recourse to the argument that the war is one between capitalist democracy and fascism.
No one would be foolish enough to deny the claim that capitalist democracy is better for the workers than fascism. To say that they are equally bad for the majority of workers would be to say something that is an obvious untruth.
If the present war were one for capitalist democracy against fascism it would be the duty of every class-conscious worker to give material (not political) support to the democratic regimes.
That is what the revolutionary Marxists did during the civil war in Spain. In the struggle between Franco and the Loyalist government, the advanced workers fought against Franco and thus gave military support to the Loyalist government representing capitalist democracy. It is true that the revolutionary Marxists, understanding that fascism could be defeated only by a workers’ government, urged the workers to establish a Soviet Spain. But since a majority of the Spanish workers did not follow the revolutionary Marxists the latter chose to fight with the Loyalist government against the fascists.
Conditions, however, are different in a struggle between imperialist countries, such as England, France, the United States or Germany. In the present war what is involved is not capitalist democracy against fascism but colonies, markets, sources of raw material. And since that is the motive force of the war the workers must determine their attitude by that factor and not by secondary factors.
“But,” say some workers, “We grant that this war is an imperialist war and that if the United States should intervene it would do so for its imperialist purposes. But the fact remains that the English and American variety of imperialism is better than the Hitler variety and as practical people we must fight for the better kind of imperialism. Imagine what would happen if Hitler should win.”
Let workers who ask this question not forget that the German workers can ask the question: “Suppose the Allies win?” They already received a taste of an Allied victory in 1918. Their experience then was not of a nature as to make them contemplate another victory with great enthusiasm. The miserable Social-Democrats may be anxious for a victory of the Allied imperialists in the hope that they would once more be placed at the head of Germany to serve the Allies. But the workers of Germany understand that an Allied victory means complete subjection of their country to the Allies.
A victory for the Allies does not appear to be any better for the German workers than a victory of Hitler for the English and French workers.
And why should the African or Indian worker and peasant exploited by British imperialism worry about a defeat of British imperialism? Nor, in America, can the Negro worker and sharecropper of the South be much impressed with the idea that his lot would be worse under Hitler.
The trouble is that if the workers are presented with a choice of Allied or German imperialism the solution to the problem of defeating fascism is insoluble.
A solution is possible if one delves more deeply into the problem and looks upon the capitalist world as a whole and not upon the relative merits of each national section of that world. Looking upon that world as a whole reveals the incontestable fact that its economic system has reached a stage of decay making its destruction absolutely imperative.
If the capitalist world should continue to exist, whether the victory goes to the Allies or to Hitler, the workers can look forward to more frightful wars, more misery, more death. The workers can have no interest in saving any part of such a system. Their interest is in destroying it root and branch.
Once we see the problem as one which involves the destruction of the capitalist world and not the victory of one set of imperialists over another, then the task of the American workers or the workers of any other country becomes clear. They must begin the struggle against their own capitalism. And if they should win that struggle it would constitute a blow to fascism all over the world.
 

 Goldman: Sovietization of the Baltic Step Forward (27 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Sovietization of the Baltic Step Forward
(27 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 30, 27 July 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

When the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R., at its next meeting, will grant the petitions of the Parliaments of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia to be incorporated into the Soviet Union (and no doubt exists but that it will), it will once more be evidence of the fact that the foundations of the October Revolution are still operative in spite of Stalin. The basic achievement of the October Revolution, the nationalization of private property in the means of production, is extended to other territories and no class-conscious worker can raise any objection to that.
The Sovietization of the Baltic states reminds us of the controversy that raged in our party before the minority, unwilling to remain a minority and cocksure of the correctness of its fantastic theories, decided to set up a little shop of its own.
When Stalin first sent the Red Army into the Baltic states and limited himself to stationing soldiers at important bases, the minority gleefully pointed out that Stalin was leaving capitalist relations in those states intact. Which would prove, according to the leaders of the minority, that Stalin was not interested in destroying capitalism, a position which we never contradicted.
What the leaders of the minority failed to see was that once Stalin for any reason whatever acquires control over territory where capitalist property relations exist, the tendency must be for him to incorporate such territory into the Soviet Union and, upon incorporation, capitalist property relations must be destroyed and displaced by nationalized property.
Stalin is not interested in extending the social revolution. He is interested primarily in the rule of the bureaucracy which he represents. But since Stalin heads a state based on nationalized property any territory acquired by that state cannot be left under capitalist property relations.
The ruling clique in the Soviet Union cannot afford to divide its power with an alien ruling class.
Should Stalin permit capitalism to function in any territory that had become part of the Soviet Union it would mean that he was actually determined to bring capitalism back to the Soviet Union.
* * *
‘Theory’ of ‘Soviet Imperialism’
How grotesque and senseless the “theory” of Soviet imperialism must appear to any one who thinks in Marxist terms. Every piece of territory into which Stalin sent his armed forces and which has been incorporated into the Soviet Union has been wrested from imperialism, the only kind of imperialism that Marxists know of as existing at the present time, the expansionist policy of finance capitalism.
The resources of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania are no longer open to imperialist exploitation unless they are taken away from the Soviet Union.
* * *
And superficial wiseacres will still contend that there is no difference between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany! But these people have never yet explained why it is that Hitler has never called the Reichstag to proclaim the nationalization of land, banking and industry in any conquered territory.
Individual capitalists, especially Jewish capitalists, run away from Hitler’s rule. The capitalist class as such is expropriated under Stalin’s rule.
* * *
We do not like bureaucratic socialization of industry. We would much rather prefer socialization of industry coming as a result of a social revolution than as a result of the conquest of territory by the Red Army under Stalin. And it is obvious that Stalin’s bureaucratic method can only conquer small countries.
But as against capitalism even bureaucratic socialization is a step forward and we shall support it as against all people who for any pretext whatever will defend capitalism.
* * *
Baltic Masses None Too Pleased
That the working masses of the Baltic countries are as enthusiastic about their incorporation into the Soviet Union as the Stalinist press would want us to believe can be seriously doubted. They live too close to the Soviet Union and they therefore know too much about real conditions there to be enthusiastic about the happy life promised them under the leadership of the Kremlin despot.
But the lot of the workers and peasants of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia under capitalism has been a miserable one at best. Probably hundreds of thousands of them cannot picture anything worse than what they have experienced.
The class-conscious workers of the Baltic countries, however, understand that capitalism throughout the world must be destroyed, that it offers nothing but fascism and war. These workers will support the nationalization of industry. And together with their class brothers in the Soviet Union they will continue the struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
The corruption of Stalinism must be destroyed in order to make the Soviet Union the powerfully attractive force that it should be for the masses throughout the world.
 

 Goldman; Big Business Openly Backs GOP Candidate (6 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Big Business Openly Backs
GOP Candidate
Foreign Policy Same as Roosevelt’s; Offers Big Stick
(6 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 27, 6 July 1940, pp. 1 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

With Wendell Willkie, labor-hating utilities czar, Big Business and the Republican party offer an open challenge to American Labor.
Roosevelt has been used for eight years to wheedle, to bamboozle, to deceive, to outflank and cut off the marching legions of American workers.
Now, unless American entry into war makes retention of the Roosevelt method advisable for a time, the reform-weary bosses and their middle-class satellites are going to try to put in a man wild won’t “coddle” labor and whose sole interest as president will be to assure the profits of the bosses.
For the working class, the nomination of Willkie is not something that can possibly be regarded as something to support as against Roosevelt. It has to be looked upon as the maneuver of an enemy. Don’t forget that Roosevelt and Willkie both are part and parcel of the boss system.
For reasons that can best be explained by a psychiatrist, John L. Lewis appeared before the platform committee of the Republican Party, creating the impression that disgusted with Roosevelt he was turning to the Republican party as a possible champion of labor.
It is safe to say that not even Lewis will resurrect his old Republicanism and support the Republican party. If he should be insane enough to do so his followers in the world of labor will be few indeed. For if there is one thing recognized by the great mass of organized workers it is that the Republican party represents the most reactionary section of the capitalist class.
 
Convention Issues
The two problems concerning which there was a serious difference of opinion in the Republican convention were the question of the policy of the party to the European war and of the person to carry its banner as presidential candidate.
Reactionary intellectual figures like Walter Lippmann were seriously disturbed at the attitude ,of the majority of the delegates toward the problem of foreign affairs. It is evident that the majority of delegates represented the “isolationist” tendency – using that term to designate those modest imperialists satisfied with control over the Western Hemisphere.
It is clear that most of the delegates, anxious to get votes rather than to formulate correct policies, were of the opinion that they could garner a lot of votes if they would only come out of the convention parading as a “peace” party. They knew that the masses did not want to go to war and were willing to give the masses a chance to vote the Republicans into power in the expectation that the Republican party would keep the country out of war.
 
Willkie a God-send
The dramatic phase of the convention consisted of the nomination of a presidential candidate. The mediocre character of the available candidates among the old-line politicians was obvious and gave serious concern to the capitalists who really run the party. The responsible people behind the party were in a real dilemma. They are all for Roosevelt’s pro-war policy and could not. trust a second-rate politician in the presidential chair at a time when momentous decisions will have to be made daily.
On the other hand their hostility to Roosevelt for his social reformism is still smoldering. They were in a panic lest the nomination of a Dewey or a Taft would compel them to support Roosevelt for a third term.
 

 Goldman: Yes, the French Popular Front Was Responsible (27 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Yes, the French Popular Front Was Responsible
(27 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 30, 27 July 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

In attempting to explain the miserable debacle of the French army the reactionary press in America points to the People’s Front regime under Blum as the factor mainly responsible. Over and over again the editorials of that press attempt to show that the decrease of production during the period of the Blum regime placed France at a tremendous disadvantage in comparison with Germany as far as the production of armaments is concerned.
The increase in wages and the reduction in the number of hours of work under the Peoples Front, are, according to the capitalist press, the main factors that led to the defeat of the French army.
Naturally the capitalists and their apologists have a definite purpose in mind in their insistence that responsibility for the defeat of France be placed at the door of the Peoples Front regime. If the social gains acquired by the French workers during that regime are responsible for the defeat, then it follows that the American workers should be willing in this moment of danger to American capitalism to surrender whatever social gains they have made recently.
The Wagner Act, the Wages and Hours Law, the Walsh-Healy act must be wiped off the statute books or at least modified to an extent that they will not interfere with national defense. Higher wages and shorter hours will lead the working class right into the clutches of Hitler. So runs the refrain of those who begrudge the slightest gain made by the working class.
Quite in keeping with the patriotism of the employing class there has, as yet, not appeared any demand for capital to sacrifice or even to limit its profits. On the contrary the writing, into one of the acts of Congress, of a provision for the limitation of profits to a bare eight percent was the signal for strenuous objections on the ground that such a limitation would injure the cause of national defense. How? Because it would take away the incentive for the owners of industry to produce the maximum possible.
But why should a reduction in wages not take away the incentive of the workers to produce? That’s different. The workers’ incentive must be patriotism and if that is not sufficient, hunger is also an incentive and a little (or a lot) of force can be exerted as an additional incentive. One standard for the capitalists and another for the working class is perfectly logical for a government representing the interests of the capitalist class.
* * *
The Real Crime of The People’s Front
It is quite true that the Popular Front of the Socialists, Communists and Radical Socialists (just plain libels, representing the big capitalists) is responsible for the plight of the French workers at the present moment. Not because it made concessions to the workers by raising wages and shortening hours; but because it acted as a brake upon the movement of the masses towards taking over complete power in France.
When in 1936 the French workers seized the factories it was as clear as daylight that the social revolution was on the order of the day. The workers were ready, willing and anxious to go ahead and complete the job of doing away with the rule of the 200 families. With any kind of leadership an almost bloodless revolution could have been consummated.
This was not to be however. The Socialist party tied as it was to the capitalist order, was unwilling and unable to lead. The Communist party tied to the foreign policy of Stalin (who at that time looked to the democratic imperialists for salvation against Hitler), could not possibly furnish the necessary leadership. And ’both of these parties were united with the Radical Socialists openly devoted to the interests of the capitalist class. That party was led by Daladier who later took the initiative in smashing the Communist party.
The capitalists at that time were more than willing to sign the Matignon agreement granting the 40 hour week and a raise in wages. They were more than willing to lose a little in order to consolidate their forces for the inevitable counter attack.
Knaves and fools pointed to the “victory” of the workers as evidence that the Popular Front could stop fascism.
But the counter attack was not long in coming. Under the leadership of Daladier, the darling of the Popular Frontists, the gains were all taken away. The reactionary forces became bolder and ever bolder. The war and the defeat enabled them to take complete control.
What a different story we would have if the French workers had not followed the leadership of the Popular Front. A workers’ revolution in France would have meant a workers’ revolution in Spain followed inevitably by a revolutionary movement of the German workers. The policies of the Popular Front enabled France to gain power in Spain and enabled Hitler to conquer France.
Both from the point of view of the capitalists and of the working class the Popular Front bears the main responsibility for the victory of Hitler. From the point of view of the capitalists it meant the necessity of operating under the disadvantage of a 40 hour week as compared with the sixty hour week of the German workers. Production undoubtedly was interfered with from the capitalist point of view.
The American capitalists are heeding that lesson. They want to fight Hitler with his methods.
The American workers must also learn the lesson of France. For us the Popular Front is to blame not because it gained concessions but because it used those concessions as a means to stop the further advance of the workers. The Popular Front was the first step in saving capitalism and the victory of fascism was the second step.
The lesson for the American workers is clear: Get all the concessions you can but do not stop there. Go on to complete victory by organizing a workers’ government.
 

 Goldman Will Stalin Try to Seize the Dardanelles? (13 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Will Stalin Try to Seize
the Dardanelles?
(13 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 28, 13 July 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Will Stalin try to seize the Dardanelles?
The answer is: “I do not know but I think it highly probable.”
This question, which is discussed by everyone and on every occasion, affords an opportunity to repeat in concise form the propositions which best explain Stalin’s foreign policy beginning with the Hitler-Stalin pact.

Stalin’s main object is to avoid getting involved in a major conflict.
 
His secondary objective is to take advantage of the imperialist war to bring as much territory as he possibly can under his influence in order to strengthen his defensive position and to increase the prestige, power and revenue of the bureaucracy of which he is the leading figure.

Every step that he has taken since he entered into a pact with Hitler and the pact itself can be best explained by taking the foregoing two basic propositions as a guide.
Does his war against Finland conflict with this theory? Not at all. When his demands on Finland were refused by the Finnish government, Stalin’s prestige was at stake. Thinking that the Red Army could settle with Finland in quick order, he took a chance on military action. The peace with Finland can be explained only by the fact that to continue the war would have risked being involved in a conflict with the Allied powers. In addition Hitler, anxious to make his coup in Norway, was impatient at the slowness of the Red Army which made possible Allied intervention, and probably exerted pressure on Stalin to make peace.
Against whom was Stalin, in the early stages of the war, preparing his defensive positions? Obviously against all possible enemies. He is not so foolish as to trust Hitler and he understood that the Allies would not feel very kindly towards him after he had double-crossed them.
 
Stalin Fears New Stage of War
But a new factor entered into the situation after Hitler made his spectacular drive westward and succeeded in laying low the Netherlands, Belgium and France.
That was as unexpected for Stalin as it was for everybody else and far more uncomfortable. For there looms before him a Hitler completely dominating Europe and having a common frontier with the Soviet Union.
Stalin’s calculations when he signed the pact with Hitler were not fulfilled one hundred percent. The pact saved him from war but enabled Hitler to gain complete hegemony over Europe. Whereas Stalin, expected either that England and France would not go to war over Poland or if they did it would he a prolonged and exhausting war.
From now oh fear of an attack by Hitler will be another basic factor added to the above-mentioned two that will dictate Stalin’s policies. When he sent additional troops into Latvia, Esthonia, and Lithuania, he was not afraid of the Allies. There was nothing to be afraid of as far as they were concerned. That move can be explained only as motivated by fear of Hitler.
It is true that from the very beginning of the war Stalin had his eye on Bessarabia. Having once belonged to the Soviet Union and seized by Rumania it was most natural that it should be taken back whenever there was an opportunity. Stalin’s seizure of northern Bukovina, however, clearly indicates a desire on his part to strengthen his defensive position against Hitler.
 
Stalinophobes Invent Fantastic Theories
The theory advanced by some people who see the class struggle only as a struggle against Stalin, to the effect that the march of the Red Army into Bessarabia was dictated by Hitler because the latter wants Stalin to guard the Rumanian oil wells for him, has absolutely no sense whatever. Against whom must the oil wells be guarded by Stalin? Against France which has already capitulated? Against England, after Rumania has switched to Hitler and after Turkey has moved away from England?
Why should Hitler ask Stalin to guard the oil wells now when they need no guarding?
And should Stalin attempt to seize the Dardanelles, that seizure also will be explained by the two propositions first mentioned and the additional one of fear of Hitler.
While the question whether Stalin’s present moves are made with the knowledge and consent of Hitler is an interesting one, it is absolutely irrelevant as far as explaining his motives in making those moves. That would be relevant only if Hitler today were in a position to stop Stalin and failed to do so.
It is important here to emphasize the point that we have stressed since Stalin began, sending the Red Army outside of the Soviet Union. We defend the Soviet Union not because we think we have the correct explanation for Stalin’s moves (although we do think so), but because nationalized property still exists in the Soviet Union and so long as it will exist we shall defend it regardless of Stalin’s policies.
 

 Goldman: Rumania Move May Herald Stalin’s Policy Switch (6 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Rumania Move May Herald
Stalin’s Policy Switch
(6 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 27, 6 July 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Taking advantage of Hitler and Mussolini’s preoccupation with their task of dealing a knockout blow to the British Empire, Stalin demanded and obtained the return of Bessarabia, the province which Rumania had seized from the Soviet Union in 1918. The fact that together with Bessarabia Stalin obtained the northern part of Bukovina is almost conclusive evidence that his demands were motivated by a desire to prepare defensive positions against the attack which everyone expects Hitler to launch against the Soviet Union as soon as he is through with or as soon as he makes peace with England.
If it is true that Stalin is also demanding control of the mouth of the Danube it would only strengthen the theory that he is trying to seize as many defensive positions as he possibly can while the seizing is good. To gain control of the Danubian estuary would be bearding Hitler in his den.
Did Hitler know of and acquiesce in Stalin’s actions? Speculation is rife as to whether there was an agreement between the two permitting Stalin to take Bessarabia and Bukovina, or whether the latter took what he wanted without asking his “friend” Hitler.
The statement issued by the German Legation in Bucharest to the effect that the occupation of Bessarabia was instigated by Cripps, the British ambassador to Moscow, and was nothing but a British trick to involve the Balkans in the war, conflicts with the attitude of the Berlin officials, which is, that’ the whole matter is one entirely between the Soviet Union and Rumania. The inference of this difference between Bucharest and Berlin is that Stalin acted without as much as notifying Hitler. This inference is strengthened by the haste with which the Germans in the occupied territories made their exit.
But the answer to the question as to what extent the move into Rumania was made by Stalin with the knowledge and consent of Hitler does not affect its defensive character, that is, that primarily it constitutes a further preparation of Stalin to defend himself against Hitler. The sudden despatch of tens of thousands of troops into Latvia, Lithuania and Es-thonia a few weeks ago was clear evidence that Hitler’s phenomenal success has Stalin considerably worried.
* * *
It is the defensive aspect of the move by Stalin, as against Hitler, that will keep the petty-bourgeois democrats of all varieties from going into hysterics and demanding either that the “democracies” take strong action against the Soviet Union or else that the Bessarabian workers take up arms against the Red Army.
When Stalin sent the Red Army into Finland it constituted an invasion of a “small democratic nation” and the petty-bourgeois democrats reacted so violently that they were willing to take up arms to help defeat the Red Army. Some also claimed an intention to use their arms against the Finnish army, but all were for the defeat of the Red Army.
But the petty-bourgeois democrats cannot get all heated up about Rumania as they did about Finland. Although a small country it can hardly be classed as a democracy. We can therefore expect that the “democrats” of all types, while ceremoniously referring to their theory of Stalinist imperialism and of the partnership between Hitler and Stalin to divide the British Empire if not the whole world will, however not raise much of a howl – all of which indicates the democratic roots of their opposition to the Soviet Union.
As for us we shall continue to state that a workers’ state has a right and a duty to take advantage of the conflicts and difficulties of the imperialist world in order to extend its base and strengthen its defensive positions. And we shall continue to attack the bureaucratic methods of the bureaucracy of the degenerated workers’ state when these methods alienate the sympathies of the working masses and thus nullify the gains made by virtue of the acquisition of territory and defensive outposts. To the Bessarabian workers and peasants we say: Join your brothers in the Soviet Union in the struggle against imperialism and against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
* * *
And it becomes clearer with the passing of every day that all of the defensive positions acquired by Stalin cannot possibly compensate for his crime in entering into the pact with Hitler. He thereby not only lost the support of millions of workers who considered the Soviet Union as the champion of the struggle against fascism but he also enabled Hitler to gain complete control over Europe, making certain of an attack by him on the Soviet Union without the slightest fear of any interference by France.
The factor of contending imperialist states on the European scene, a factor of tremendous importance to the safety of the Soviet Union, has been wiped out by the pact and. by the consequent victory of Hitler.
* * *
That Stalin realizes the danger of his situation is evidenced not only by his movement of troops but by a more or less clearly-indicated change of line on the part of the Stalinist parties, a change of line that has a meaning only if Stalin is cautiously preparing a shift towards the “democracies.” For the past two months or so the Stalinists have been attacking German imperialism as well as Allied imperialism and now they have launched a campaign against the Munich men in the English cabinet and for a people’s government to continue the struggle against Hitler.
It may not be long before the Stalinists will discover that there has been such a change in the constitution of the English government that to support the “democracies” against Hitler will become the sacred duty of the working masses.
 

 Goldman: Willkie Belongs to Inner Circle of Wall Street (13 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Willkie Belongs to Inner Circle
of Wall Street
(13 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 28, 13 July 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

The mutilation (fortunate or unfortunate) in the printshop of my article dealing with the Republican party convention, which appeared in the last issue of the Appeal furnishes me with an excuse to touch on certain aspects of the convention that were not mentioned in last week’s article.
One of the most striking features of the nomination of Willkie is the fact that he is not an agent of Wail Street in the same sense that Taft or Dewey or Vandenberg are agents of Wall Street. In Willkie we have one of the Wall Street boys himself. If he doesn’t come from the innermost circle he is certainly close to it.
As director of one of the biggest utility holding companies in the country and one of the biggest banks in New York he mingles with the select few who hire and give orders to politicians but rarely participate openly in politics.
Of course he went through the motion of resigning his post in the companies in which he holds office, but only the most gullible will pay any attention to this kind of mumbo-jumbo. Willkie the candidate for President of the United States remains Willkie the head of one of the biggest utility companies. Some smart fellow may find that he forgot to resign from some company or other and try to make a point out of it. To us it makes no difference whatever that he resigns or fails to resign. He is the same Willkie.
 
An Open Challenge to Labor
It is in the sense that Willkie is not a mere agent but one of the principals that he constitutes an open challenge to the working class. Instead of nominating some one who can try to pose as a “friend of Labor,” the Republican party proceeds to throw the gauntlet into the face of Labor by nominating one who has become the champion spokesman against the New Deal and all social reforms.
Not that such reforms as the New Deal brought will remain even if Roosevelt is elected. The war situation and the defense program will result in the loss of a good many if not all of the social gains achieved by Labor during the hey-day of the New Deal. Roosevelt, however, will try to convince the worker-voters that these social gains will remain intact. Not so Willkie. Himself one of the big business men, he knows exactly what they want and will try to get it with the least amount of hooey.
 
Why They Named Willkie
How is it that the Republican party dared nominate a man so openly a member of the ruling class? The first and most important reason, it seems to me, is that the Republican party cannot and does not hope to obtain the support of Labor. The time has gone by when even Republicans could pose as friends of the workingman. The men behind the Republican party rightly felt that under the circumstances the labor vote was lost to them anyway. No matter whom ‘they nominated the labor vote could not be depended upon.
Moreover Willkie was obviously the best man for the Republicans in so far as getting the vote of the middle class is concerned. There can be ho denying the fact that Willkie is a far mare colorful and able person than Taft or Dewey or Hoover. Granting that the newspapers were consciously determined to give him a buildup it must nevertheless be recognized that the man has enough in him to furnish the basis of such a build-up.
It must be recognized that the press has succeeded in creating quite a following for Willkie from middle-class layers of the population. Willkie’s rise from a middle-class environment to the head of a huge utility company and his nomination for the presidency still has an appeal to a great many amongst the middle-class elements.
That his nomination was supported not only by his own fellow-capitalists but also by the lower ranks of the middle-class Republican voters was made clear to the old wheelhorses of the Republican party who looked askance upon a newcomer and wanted one of their own number to get the nomination. It is this overwhelming support which made the old-line politicians capitulate.
Big Business is fortunate in having him as a candidate for other reasons, too. What is most important is that Willkie’s attitude on questions of foreign policy coincides with that of Roosevelt. With his nomination, the “isolationist” plank in the Republican platform becomes meaningless. The aggressive foreign policy of Roosevelt, a policy which the captains of banking and industry support whole-heartedly, will be carried on by Willkie should he be elected.
In fact if Roosevelt should decide to refrain from, running for a third term we shall be safe in attributing his decision partly to the nomination of Willkie. For now he can rest assured that his foreign policy will be in safe hands, even if the Republicans win the election.
For the class-conscious workers the danger is not so much from the Republicans with Willkie as from the Democrats with Roosevelt or some other demagogue. The working masses will readily recognize what Willkie means for them: longer hours, lower wages, no relief, loss of every gain they have, made in the last seven years. But it will be difficult for the conscious workers to convince the masses that essentially the Democratic party with Roosevelt will mean the same as the Republican party with Willkie.
 

 Goldman: Workers Cannot Be Isolationist with Regard to War (20 July 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Workers Cannot Be Isolationist
with Regard to War
(20 July 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 29, 20 July 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Too many class-conscious workers accept and spread the idea that since the war now raging in Europe is an imperialist war, therefore it is not a war in which the American workers should be interested. All that the American workers should do is to struggle for better conditions in this country and forget about what is going on across the Atlantic.
Such an attitude towards the war might be termed working-class isolationism. As sincere as this attitude is, it is far from being correct.
It is obviously true that the war is a bankers’ war, a war in which rival imperialist forces have hurled millions of human beings into terrible misery and cruel slaughter for nothing more than their own profits. It is obviously true that the working masses will gain nothing out of their sacrifices by the victory of either side.
But it is not true that the American workers should not be interested in the war. It is not at all correct to say to the American workers: Let them fight and die over in Europe; we here are interested only in the struggle against the boss.
That is a form of isolationism to which the American workers dare not fall victim. If they do they are doomed to be sucked into the very imperialist war which they fear so much and which they think they can avoid by simply concentrating their efforts on the struggle at home.
If there is one simple truth that should sink into the mind of every worker it is that capitalism has developed to a point where not a single capitalist nation in the world can erect a wall around itself and thus succeed in leading its own existence without taking into consideration what is going on in the rest of the world. Before Hitler came to power he shouted loudly about autarchy, about making Germany a self-sufficient nation, but now he demands more and more living room by which is meant more and more countries to exploit. Imperialism has bound the whole capitalist world together economically and he who does not see that is blind to reality.
 
Three Kinds of “Isolationism”
Three types of isolationism exist in this country. The only type that is really entitled to the name is the one represented by the sincere person who thinks that the United States proper is perfectly able to shut itself off from the rest of the world and to create a self-sufficient economy with democracy prevailing in every loophole. According to these people, who have eyes that do not see, a beautiful paradise can be created in our country keeping fascism and social revolution beyond the frontiers.
If you talk to them about capitalism with its surplus products, its unemployment, markets, the necessity for investment of capital and such other regrettable but real things, they can only shrug their shoulders and point to the riches of this country as evidence; that it needs no contact with the rest of the world. These people are completely oblivious to the real forces dominating the capitalist system.
The other types of isolationism are in reality forma of American imperialism. Most modest of all “isolationists” is the one who is satisfied with the Western Hemisphere. He would leave Asia, Europe and Australia strictly alone.
The third type of “isolationist” insists on adding the Far East as a section of the world designated by God and nature as specially reserved for American imperialism.
The world is, however, too small to permit the American “isolationists” peacefully to retain control over the Western Hemisphere and the Far East. There are other imperialist countries to reckon with. The far-seeing capitalists and their intellectual henchmen understand that any kind of isolationism is impossible and that the interests of American capitalism extend throughout the world. As against any of the isolationists” Roosevelt, whose policies are clearly based on the supposition that the United States must play a dominating role in the whole world, is one thousand per cent correct.
Workers understanding and accepting the international character of the capitalist system will of course not accept Roosevelt’s policies even though they reject the idea that isolation is possible for American capitalism. Understanding the true nature of capitalism, advanced workers will not counsel the masses to interest themselves only in their struggles for better conditions and to pay no attention to the war in Europe.
 
War Inevitable If Capitalism Remains
For it is as certain as anything can possibly be that if the workers permit the capitalist system to exist in this country, the war which is now confined to Europe will engulf them. If it will not be the present war it will be a continuation of it – in the form of a third imperialist war.
It is therefore necessary for every worker to think seriously of the problem of how to stop the war in Europe. This can not be done by an attitude of indifference; by simply saying that we must stay out of it and concentrate our attention on the struggle for better conditions in this country.
We must of course fight for better conditions. It goes without saying that we must exert effort to prevent the capitalist government from dragging us into the war. Yes, we must do our utmost to prevent any social gains from being destroyed under any pretext.
But to confine ourselves to that struggle is not sufficient. Should the workers accept the idea that it is simply their task to fight the boss here and not pay any attention to the war they will end up where the French and British workers finished. They will have the war whether they like it or not and they will lose all their gains in addition.
The American workers must face the bitter truth. They must intervene in the war in Europe. They must try to transform that war into a real war against fascism. And that can be done only by destroying capitalism in the United States.
Yes, this is a bankers’ war. But it is a war killing millions of workers; it is a war which is bound to reach us. It is a war which we must stop. And we can stop it only by overthrowing the capitalist system which is responsive for it.
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - III (24 February 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(24 February 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 8, 24 February 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

III.
It would indeed be fortunate if, once having arrived at the conclusion that to defend the Soviet Union is the duty of every worker, we could simply proceed to say to the Russian, the Finnish and the workers of all other countries: do your utmost to see to it that the Red Army is victorious and to make Finland part of the territory of the Soviet Union.
As simple as all that would be our task if Lenin and Trotsky were still at the helm in the Soviet Union. The problem, at present, alas, is not so simple. The mere fact that we have to discuss the question of whether or not to defend the Soviet Union is indicative of the tremendous change that has taken place since the days of Lenin and Trotsky.
The degeneration of the workers’ state under the Stalinist regime makes the task of defending the Soviet Union far more complicated. At the same time that we are engaged in defending it against the capitalist army, in order to defend it more effectively in the struggle against imperialism it is necessary to struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
They who look for a simple solution can find it either in defending bourgeois Finland or in being indifferent to the victory of either side. The Stalinists also have a simple solution: defend the Soviet Union by defending everything that Stalin does. Revolutionary Marxists, however, must carefully analyze all the factors involved and decide what they are defending and how they should defend it.
 
Why We Irreconcilably Struggle Against Stalin
Our struggle against Stalin has been motivated fundamentally on the ground that his ideas and policies weaken the Soviet Union and consequently the world revolution. The proposition can likewise be put the other way around. Stalin’s ideas and policies weaken the world revolution and consequently the Soviet Union. The two are inextricably bound together.
We fought against his destruction of the democratic rights of the Soviet workers, his policy of forced collectivization, his foreign policy based on alliances with capitalist powers; we fought against his theory of socialism in one country and against his theory of destroying fascism by fighting for bourgeois democracy; we fought against all of these because they weakened the Soviet Union. These Stalinist policies disoriented and confused the workers within and without the Soviet Union, thus weakening the workers’ state.
If there was anything further needed to convince us that Stalinism must be overthrown in order to increase the strength of the Soviet Union so that it could be more adequately defended, Stalin’s adventure in Finland would have done it. The Soviet Union must be defended not only against the imperialists but also against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
The Russian workers have two enemies, the imperialists without, the bureaucracy within. Both endanger the existence of the state which the Russian workers created by superhuman sacrifice. The question arises: does the defense of the Soviet Union require that during a war against imperialism the struggle against the bureaucracy should cease? And the answer is a decisive “No!” If the Russian workers see a chance to overthrow the Stalinist regime they should do so even when the Soviet Union is involved in a war. The Soviet Union will thereby be strengthened tremendously.
 
The Main Enemy Is World Imperialism!
But it must be clearly understood at all times that the struggle against the bureaucracy should be subordinated to the struggle against the imperialist enemy. The main enemy is imperialism and during a war between the Soviet Union and imperialism it is absolutely imperative for the workers to prevent a victory of imperialism. It would he a tremendous victory for the workers if they should succeed in overthrowing the Stalinist bureaucracy but it would constitute a disastrous defeat if the imperialists should destroy the bureaucracy, because the destruction of the bureaucracy by the imperialists would result in the destruction of the Soviet Union.
During the Civil War in Spain the Fourth International followed a tactic with reference to the Loyalist forces that the Russian workers should follow with reference to Stalinism. The advanced Spanish workers had the double task of fighting against Franco and, at the same time, trying to mobilize the workers for the overthrow of the Loyalist government. We stated that unless the Spanish workers succeeded in kicking out the Stalinist-backed Negrin, the fascists would be victorious. We proved correct, but at the time of struggle against the fascists it would have been criminal for us to urge the workers not to fight the fascists because it was also necessary to overthrow the Loyalist government. At that particular time the main task was to destroy fascism.
Revolutionary workers in a union controlled by reactionaries understand very well that during a strike the reactionary leadership does not and cannot conduct the most effective struggle against the bosses and they would not hesitate to oust the reactionary leadership even during a strike. But they also understand that during a strike the main enemy is the boss and they concentrate their efforts to win the strike against the boss. In other words, they subordinate the struggle against the reactionary leadership to the struggle against the boss.
Revolutionary workers in an imperialist country at war consider that the main enemy is at home and carry on the struggle against the ruling class regardless of the effect on the front. Not so in the case of the Soviet Union, a workers’ state, based on nationalized property. There they must at all costs prevent a victory of the imperialist armies.
 
A Revolutionary Policy for the Finnish Workers
Revolutionary internationalists have always insisted that in any war against the Soviet Union the primary task of the workers outside of the Soviet Union is: the proletarian revolution, the best method of defending the Soviet Union. And the Finnish workers have that task now as they had before the invasion by the Red Army.
To that extent the task of the Finnish workers does not differ in any way from the task confronting the Polish workers in 1920 when the Red Army under Lenin and Trotsky invaded Poland. But only to that extent. In 1920 the Polish workers did not have to fear the Soviet regime; it was their regime as well as that of the Russian workers; they could fight not only for the revolution in Poland but also for the joining of Poland to the Soviet Union. They did not have to make a distinction between the Soviet Union and the Lenin-Trotsky regime.
But in 1940, when it is Stalin’s Red Army that is invading Finland and not the army of Lenin and Trotsky, the advanced workers of Finland find their task far more complicated and difficult than that of the Polish workers in 1920. They are confronted by the possibility of being swallowed up by the Stalinist regime and can hardly look forward with enthusiasm to that possibility. It is only a lesser evil in comparison with the evil of permitting the imperialists, through the Finnish army, to defeat the Red Army and thus prepare for the destruction of the Soviet Union.
The revolutionary workers in Finland should be agitating for that best of all possible solutions: a Soviet Finland independent of the Stalinist regime. In a struggle between the army of a Soviet Finland and the army of Stalin we would do our utmost to – help defeat Stalin’s army.
 
The Red Army’s Victory Is a Lesser Evil!
But while the politically advanced workers of Finland should constantly keep the goal of an independent Soviet Finland before the eyes of the Finnish workers, they dare not be indifferent to the actual struggle that is going on between the Red Army and the Finnish capitalist army representing the interests of world imperialism. Understanding what is at stake, the class-conscious Finnish workers must unhesitatingly choose the lesser evil of a victory of the Red Army and continue the struggle for an independent Soviet Finland against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
Those who have been thrown off their balance by the crime of Stalin in invading Finland will exclaim: what, you want the Finnish workers to accept slavery under the Stalinist regime? No, we do not want that. If all the Finnish workers would act as we would like them to, they would immediately establish a Soviet Finland and struggle for its independence against the Stalinist bureaucracy, calling upon the Russian workers to join them. But at present it is a question what the advanced workers should do before they get a majority and while the struggle is actually going on. Understanding the historic importance of defending what is left of the October Revolution, of defending nationalized property, they will do their utmost to prevent a defeat of the Red Army at the hands of the Finnish capitalist army.
(Continued next week)
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - I (10 February 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(February/March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 6, 10 February 1940, p. 3, Vol. IV No. 7, 17 February 1940, p. 3, Vol. IV No. 8, 24 February 1940, p. 3, Vol. IV No. 8, 2 March 1940, p. 3, Vol. IV No. 10, 9 March 1940, p. 3 & Vol. IV No. 11, 16 March 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Part I

Part II

Part III

Part IV

Part V

Part VI
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - I (10 February 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(10 February 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 6, 10 February 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

What attitude should a class-conscious worker adopt towards the Soviet-Finnish war?
The problem is in reality not so difficult as some people would have us believe. The worker who does not permit himself to be confused by the propaganda of the capitalist press, by the winnings of all the varieties of middle- class intellectuals, including those who call themselves “socialists” and those who use Marxist phraseology; the worker who bases himself on the fundamentals of revolutionary Marxism and who approaches the whole problem from the standpoint of the historic interests of the working class, will readily agree that the policy adopted by the Socialist Workers Party is not only clear and simple to understand, but is the only policy that is in harmony with the principles of revolutionary socialism and therefore one hundred per cent correct.
 
Revolutionary Roots of the Soviet Union
The revolutionary worker, in trying to arrive at a correct conclusion as to what attitude he should take towards the struggle between the Soviet Union and Finland, cannot possibly forget the different roots of these two states. The Soviet Union was born as the result of the greatest revolutionary upheaval in the history of mankind. Under the leadership of Lenin the Russian masses destroyed the capitalist army, police force, jails, legislative, executive and judicial organs, in a word, the capitalist state that protected the interests of the Russian capitalists and landlords. Under the leadership of Lenin the Russian masses created a new type of state, the Soviet state, based on the idea that the workers should control their own destinies both politically and economically. The workers’ state proceeded to nationalize all industry. The capitalists fled the country.
There are some people, pretending to be the super-Marxists of the century, who claim that there never was a proletarian revolution in Russia. We shall let these people argue with the former Russian capitalists who are now living in France, England and the United States and vociferously proclaiming the need to defend democratic Finland. To the worker who is not misled by phrases any revolution in which the masses take the industries away from the capitalists is a proletarian revolution.
It is true that the terrible conditions under which the revolution was consummated did not permit the workers’ state to put into practice the degree of democracy that Lenin dreamed of, but in spite of everything the Russian workers had greater freedom and greater rights under the early Soviet regime than any group of workers ever had in the history of mankind. Their victorious struggle against the armies of the Russian, French, English and American capitalists testifies to that fact.
 
Reactionary Roots of Bourgeois Finland
Now let us take a look at the origin of Finland. The story is simple. Under the leadership of Mannerheim and supported, first by the German imperialists and then by the English imperialists, the Finnish white guards succeeded in defeating the Finnish workers, exterminating tens of thousands of them physically and establishing on their blood and bones a country which was to serve as one of the buffer states against the Soviet Union. In the course of some years a veneer of capitalist democracy was smeared over but hardly succeeded in concealing the capitalist exploitation which exists there. Essentially it is the same Finland that was created by virtue of the defeat of the Finnish workers and the same Mannerheim is still at the head of this country.
Thus in the struggle between the Soviet Union and Finland we have one born under the leadership of Lenin in a victorious struggle against the capitalists and the other born under the leadership of Mannerheim in a victorious struggle against the workers.
He who ignores this fact is likely to go far astray and land in company which, to put it mildly, is far from interested in the welfare of the Finnish or any other workers.
 
Is Anything Left of the Russian Revolution?
Is there anything left of the revolution, of the work of the Russian masses guided by Lenin?
This is the second question that we must ask ourselves. For, obviously, if there is nothing left of the revolution we need not concern ourselves at all with the question whether or not to defend the Soviet Union. The revolutionary worker can make up his mind only on the basis of the answer to the question: Is there anything worth while saving in the Soviet Union?
The leaders of the revolution of November 1917 had as their fundamental aim the achievement of socialism, the establishment of a social system where the means of production would be owned by society as a whole, where every human being would have a very high standard of living, where there would be no classes and consequently where there would be no state, that is, no instruments of force for the purpose of keeping any section of society under control. The advanced workers, however, understood well enough that such a social system could not be achieved unless the proletarian revolution was extended to the most advanced capitalist countries.
The more immediate aim, therefore, of the advanced Russian workers was to overthrow their own capitalists, establish a workers’ state to prevent a possible restoration of capitalism, to organize production, and continue to work for the extension of the revolution. The rule of the workers expresses itself fundamentally in the fact that they have abolished private property in the means of production and have established nationalized property.
The rule of any class can assume different forms. Under capitalism we have absolute or limited monarchies, democratic or fascist governments. The rule of the working class can also assume different forms depending upon the particular conditions prevailing. But the aim of the advanced workers has always been and should always be to achieve the greatest possible degree of democracy in a workers’ state. That was the aim of Lenin and of the Russian workers.
 
Democratic Soviets to Bureaucracy
But circumstances prevented the achievement of the ideal of a democratic Soviet state. The extreme backwardness of Russia, the imperialist war, the civil war and the throttling of the proletarian revolution in Germany by the Social Democratic leaders, made impossible the attainment of a really democratic state. The bureaucratic forces generated by these objective conditions finally gained control. The victory of Stalin over Trotsky expressed the victory of the bureaucratic over the democratic forces.
Step by step the bureaucracy under Stalin’s leadership consolidated its control. Soviet, party, trade union democracy were crushed. Initiative and freedom of thought were suppressed. The process of degeneration set in and the advanced Russian workers were unable to stem the tide of reaction. The bureaucracy gained complete control.
Some overly-hasty people who either do not know or have forgotten that for Marxists the basic criterion is an economic one, jumped to the conclusion that, since the Russian workers lost all their democratic rights, there was no longer any workers’ state. On the other hand Trotsky and those who accept his theories have been tireless in pointing out that so long as the basic achievement of the November revolution remains, so long as nationalized property has not been destroyed by the Stalinist bureaucracy, so long does the Soviet Union remain a workers’ state. It is true, no longer the kind of workers’ state that we would like to see; it is true, that it is now a workers’ state that has degenerated; but it is still a workers state and will remain such so long as nationalized property and the monopoly of foreign trade remain essentially as they were established by the revolution.
 
Political Revolution in the Soviet Union
Following and analyzing events in the Soviet Union, Trotsky has proposed certain changes in our attitude to the Stalinist bureaucracy. For a long time it appeared possible to change the nature of the regime by methods of reform, but when that possibility disappeared Trotsky did not hesitate to propose the idea, and the Fourth Internationalists did not hesitate to accept the proposal, that reform was no longer possible and that a political revolution was necessary to overthrew the Stalinist bureaucracy.
No one denies that Stalin has introduced some changes which affect nationalized property in the Soviet Union. No one denies the danger of a change in property relations by virtue of Stalin’s policies.
But a revolutionary worker has a different attitude to a company union than he has to an independent union, no matter how reactionary the leadership of the latter union may be. Once a revolutionary worker, by analyzing all the factors involved, comes to the conclusion that the Soviet Union is still a workers’ state, though degenerated; once a revolutionary worker clearly sees that nationalized property still exists and that therefore there is something worth while saving he can easily solve the problem of what his attitude should be in the war that is being waged between the Soviet Union and Finland.
(Continued next week)
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - II (17 February 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(17 February 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 7, 17 February 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

II
Since its birth our party has stood for the unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against the capitalist world. And for many years before the existence of the Socialist Workers’ Party, the Trotskyists considered that idea as absolutely essential to their program.
Our policy of unconditional defense is based on the fact that nationalized property constitutes the foundation of the Soviet state and for us nationalized property is a tremendous step forward in the development of mankind. Marxists considered the development of the productive forces as the basic criterion of
progress. That the destruction of capitalism in its period of decay and the substitution of nationalized industry permits the productive forces to develop at a remarkable rate has been proved by the great industrial growth that has taken place in the Soviet Union, and this in spite of the Stalinist leadership. The unconditional defense of the Soviet Union means the unconditional defense of nationalized property against the capitalist world.
 
Distinction Between Stalin and U.S.S.R.
Through all the years that we have been insisting on the necessity of defending the Soviet Union unconditionally against imperialism we have been the most consistent and implacable opponents of the Stalinist regime, from the revolutionary point of view. Every important policy pursued by Stalin we attacked; but we never swerved from our policy of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union. Some people thought we were inconsistent; but they failed to understand that we make a fundamental distinction between the Stalinist bureaucracy and the Soviet Union as a “complex of social institutions” based upon the October Revolution. Just as a revolutionary worker makes a distinction between his trade union and its reactionary leadership.
Unconditional defense has never meant and could not possibly have meant that we support the Red Army in every engagement into which Stalin sees fit to lead it. If that army were to be used against workers in the Soviet Union who were striking for better conditions or struggling to overthrow the bureaucracy, we would naturally do our utmost to demoralize and defeat the army.
If the Red Army were to be used against the Ukrainian workers attempting to establish an independent Soviet Ukraine, we would fight against that Red Army.
When part of that Red Army, the G.P.U., was used in Spain to suppress the Spanish revolutionists, we were in favor of exterminating that section of the Red Army.
It is only when the Red Army is fighting a capitalist enemy and thus protecting the Soviet Union from that enemy that we favor and work for the victory of the Red Army. Unconditional defense against imperialism means exactly what it says: whenever and wherever the Soviet Union is involved in any struggle against a capitalist enemy we are for the defense of the Soviet Union, regardless of the causes or circumstances that led to the war.
 
Bureaucracy and Nationalized Property
Is the Stalinist bureaucracy interested in defending nationalized property? It is a bureaucracy of the degenerated workers’ state based on nationalized property, and the interests of that bureaucracy are bound up with the nationalized property, which it must defend in order to preserve its existence. Green and Lewis are “labor lieutenants of capitalism” in the ranks of labor; but they are compelled to defend the trade unions against the bosses because their very existence depends on the existence and strength of the trade unions.
It is undoubtedly true that neither the Stalinist bureaucracy nor the bureaucracies led by Green or Lewis defend the interests of the workers and their institutions effectively. Their policies weaken those institutions. But that is a reason why the workers should get rid of them, and not an argument for refusing to defend the workers’ state or the trade unions.
A principle that our party has taught and shall continue to teach is that the workers must never turn over the task of removing the Stalinist bureaucracy to the capitalist enemy. They must reserve that privilege and duty for themselves because the destruction of the Stalinist bureaucracy by the capitalist enemy can lead to nothing but reactionary results.
* * *
It is only necessary to analyze the war between the Soviet Union and Finland in the light of the general principles mentioned above and in the first article of this series, in order to arrive at a correct conclusion as to the policy which a class-conscious worker should follow. In other words, it is necessary to ask if the slogan of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against the capitalist or imperialist world is applicable to the war in Finland.
 
Who Was “Aggressor” Doesn’t Decide Question
In the first instance it is essential to exclude the factor of who first attacked whom. The fact that in 1914 Germany began the actual hostilities by launching an attack on Belgium was a matter of indifference to Lenin in arriving at his conclusion that the war was an imperialist war and that it was necessary for the workers in both imperialist camps to follow the policy of revolutionary defeatism. The fact that Germany attacked Poland could not possibly lead any revolutionary Marxist to urge the workers to defend the reactionary Polish state. For Marxists the character of a war “is determined not by the initial episode taken by itself but by the main moving forces of the war, by its whole development and by the consequences to which it finally leads”. This is what the thesis of the Fourth International states and the statement cannot be challenged successfully. Not the violation of neutrality or threats or an invasion by any particular country but the underlying economic and social factors and the probable consequences of the war should determine our attitude to it.
This does not mean that we condone the invasion of Finland by Stalin. I shall deal with this crime later. But in determining our attitude while the struggle is actually going on that factor is not the determining factor.
 
Finland an Outpost of Imperialism
Once more we remind the reader that Finland was born as a result of a victory of the counter-revolution led by Mannerheim and supported first by the German and then by the Allied imperialists. It is this state which is at war with the Soviet Union. Simpletons of the Socialist Party and lackeys of the capitalists in the Social Democratic Federation will point to the fact that representatives of labor and the farmers are in the Finnish government. But Marxists understand that the real rulers of the country are the capitalists and landlords, and these are inextricably tied up with the imperialist world. Finland is a buffer state, an outpost of imperialism, and its struggle against the Soviet Union is, in the last analysis, a struggle of the imperialist world against the Soviet Union.
To convince oneself of that simple fact, it is only necessary to consider the reaction of the capitalist world to the invasion of Finland. It is certain that even in Germany the sympathy of the ruling class is entirely with Finland but this sympathy is muted for the present because Hitler needs Stalin’s support. In the whole capitalist world, outside of Germany, all the “democrats”, including the Pope, Franco and Mussolini, have not hesitated to show on whose side their sympathies lie and this fact alone should almost be sufficient by itself to indicate to a class-conscious worker that he should be on the opposite side.
When Hitler invaded Austria, Czecho-Slovakia, Poland, the other imperialists grumbled a little because a rival of theirs had the nerve to do things in such a high-handed fashion. When Ethiopia was invaded by Mussolini there was also a tempest in a tea pot. But when Stalin invaded Finland the reaction was altogether different. For the simple reason that in a struggle between the Soviet Union and any part of the imperialist world, imperialism as a whole feels threatened.
The League of Nations, dead as a dodo under ordinary circumstances, suddenly revived and expelled the Soviet Union in one day. The Spanish fascist press, echoing the Pope, called for a Christian army to fight the Soviet Union. The humanitarian, Herbert Hoover, took the lead in defending the “democracy” of Mannerheim. Roosevelt, who was responsible for the embargo against Loyalist Spain in its life and death struggle against Franco, is assuming the leadership in the movement to help the Finnish capitalist army defeat the Soviet Union.
 
Imperialists Seek the Defeat of the USSR
Conditions are such as to make inadvisable, at the present moment, an open declaration of war against the Soviet Union by France and England. Bolder imperialist voices in those countries are demanding just that; but more cautious counsel may continue to prevail. Nevertheless, the passing of every day, it is becoming more clearly recognized that the Finnish-Soviet struggle is one of the fronts of the war, in fact today the only active front. Daladier and Chamberlain have stated openly that much more help has been sent to Finland than the average citizen is aware of and that still more aid will be forthcoming.
And is there any revolutionary worker naive enough to believe that Chamberlain and Daladier are interested in saving democracy, Finnish or otherwise? Can there be the slightest doubt that the imperialist world looks upon Finland as its protagonist?
No matter what the results of the Finnish-Soviet war may be – whether Stalin succeeds in his designs (as seems more probable) or gives up his attempt to conquer Finland; whether the Allies will openly declare war on the Soviet Union or will refrain from doing that; or whether a peace can be patched up between Hitler and the Allied imperialists and a combined attack made upon the Soviet Union – no matter what may develop in the near future, it is certain that right now the struggle in Finland is essentially the beginning of a struggle of the imperialist world against the Soviet Union.
Let the revolutionary worker ask himself: what would be the reaction of the imperialists to a defeat of the Red Army by the Finnish capitalist army? Would not the counter revolutionaries the world over, including those still living in the Soviet Union, be overjoyed?
A class-conscious worker can be fairly certain that what will bring joy to the imperialists, to the Hoovers, Roosevelts, Chamberlains and Daladiers, has nothing in it that is good for the workers.
The only conclusion that the class-conscious worker can possibly reach is that, as between the Red Army connected with and, in its own way, defending the Soviet Union based on nationalized property, and the Finnish capitalist army connected with and representing the imperialist world, he must favor and work for the victory of the Red Army. Analyzing all the factors involved, the slogan of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union is applicable in the present struggle in Finland.
That is the conclusion that the Socialist Workers Party has arrived at, and that is the conclusion that every revolutionary worker who follows the principles of revolutionary Marxism will recognize as correct.
But the defense of the Stalinist-controlled Soviet Union requires different tactics from those which revolutionary workers followed in the days when the Soviet Union was led by Lenin and Trotsky. In the next article we shall consider and analyze exactly in what way revolutionary workers in the Soviet Union and in Finland should defend the degenerated workers’ state.
(Continued next week)
 

t Goldman: Supreme Court Dons New Face but Its Purpose Is Still to Serve Capitalist Rule (4 May 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Supreme Court Dons New Face but Its Purpose
Is Still to Serve Capitalist Rule
(4 May 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 18, 4 May 1940, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

By its declaration that anti-picketing laws in Alabama and California are unconstitutional, the United States Supreme Court will lead some gullible people to believe that it has become the guardian of the rights of the workers.
A short while ago the Supreme Court assumed to play the role of protector of the Negro people by reversing a conviction of Negroes who were compelled to “confess” by the use of the most vicious form of the third degree.
That the Supreme Court, as at present constituted, is more liberal than it was can be admitted without argument. It is necessary, however, to understand clearly what that signifies. Essentially it means nothing more than that the Supreme Court now follows the fundamental policy of President Roosevelt, which consists of making minor concessions to the masses in order the better to guard the essential rights of the owning class.
Just as Roosevelt has gained favor in the eyes of many workers by making concessions that do not threaten the existence of the profit system, so the Supreme Court will undoubtedly earn the applause of many by rendering decisions that can be regarded as liberal but which do not endanger the right of the bosses to continue exploiting the workers.
There have always been serious differences of opinion in the camp of the employing class and its representatives as to the best method to be used in keeping labor under control. One group advocates a firm hand – yielding nothing; another proposes to make concessions in order not to lose everything. The Supreme Court for the time being now belongs to the latter group.
 
Do a Smarter Job, the Court Is Saying
When the Supreme Court declares an anti-picketing law unconstitutional, it in effect says to the lower courts and to the legislature: “You fools, can’t you see that by taking away such small and insignificant rights of the workers, you play into the hands of the revolutionists? We believe that it is far wiser and far more effective to let the workers have a minor right and deprive them of a really valuable one.”
What did the court’s decision really amount to? The Supreme Court decided that unions have the right to have a picket carrying a banner in front of an establishment where a strike was called. Of course, having that privilege is better than not having it, but all the same it has come to a pretty pass when we are asked to rejoice and be grateful for a decision granting the workers this elementary right.
One must never forget that it was practically the same Supreme Court that declared the sit-down strike illegal. In comparison to the right of having a picket walk in front of a struck shop with a banner, the sit-down is infinitely more important for the workers. But just because it is so much more important, it was declared illegal by the court.
It is all very well to have a conviction of a Negro reversed when the conviction was obviously achieved by the use of the most brutal torture. But this is nothing in comparison to the fact that the Supreme Court permits the white masters of the South to disfranchise the Negro population.
The Sherman anti-trust law was enacted as a weapon against the trusts. When the Supreme Court perverts that law to be used against trade unions, it strikes a really effective blow against the workers. In return, it can afford to be liberal on a minor point.
The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution was passed for the purpose of protecting the Negroes. Instead it was interpreted by the Supreme Court in a manner which aided mainly the property rights of the bosses. It was then worthwhile for the court to throw a crumb now and then to the workers in the form of a favorable decision on a minor matter, based on the same amendment.
 
Court Will Never Destroy Bosses’ Powers
It is exceedingly important for workers to recognize that a “liberal” Supreme Court will render decisions favorable to the exploited masses only when there is danger that the masses will resent too strongly an adverse decision. And nine times out of ten a favorable decision will come only in connection with a case involving a matter of secondary importance.
And this is certain. Never will the Supreme Court render a decision which will take away the right of the bosses to exploit labor. Why? For the simple reason that the Supreme Court, “liberal” or conservative, was created to protect that very right.
The Supreme Court has always been looked upon as a bulwark of the employing class. Justifiably so, for it has frequently, by its decisions, rushed to protect that class against any legislation that might be harmful to the employers. As a result there has always existed a tendency amongst the workers in favor of abolishing the Court.
Let not the workers be deceived by an occasional favorable decision. As against such decisions on matters of secondary importance, it is important to remember the anti-democratic role the court has played throughout American history.
Considering all possible factors it is more advantageous, in the long run, to do away with an institution that was created for the express purpose of nullifying legislation passed at the demand of the masses.
The workers will be better off if the Supreme Court is abolished.
 

t Goldman FDR’s War Drive Makes Twice-Weekly Even More Urgent! (18 May 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
FDR’s War Drive Makes Twice-Weekly
Even More Urgent!
(18 May 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 20, 18 May 1940, p. 1.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

When one contemplates the tremendous tasks facing our party at the present moment, not even the publication of the Appeal twice a week is sufficient.
When Hitler decided to invade Holland and Belgium, and thus furnished the American ruling class with a better pretext for entering the conflict, he also made the twice a week Appeal an imperative necessity.
The masses from now on will be under tremendous pressure exerted by the rulers of this country in order to make them change their attitude to the war.
They are now against participation in the imperialist conflict. But their hatred and fear of fascism is great indeed and understandable. The task of Roosevelt and of all varieties of liberals and social-democrats is made a thousand times easier because they can play upon this fear of the masses of Hitler and everything that he represents.
Who will explain to the masses the only correct method of fighting fascism? The duty devolves on us.
And to do that we must strengthen our forces. To do that we must surely increase the power of our press.
The first step is to double the propaganda power of our main propaganda instrument, the Socialist Appeal.
Our members and our sympathizers have this primary task – to assure the publication of the Appeal twice a week by their financial support.
 

 Goldman: Leon Trotsky and the Anniversary of October (2 November 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Leon Trotsky and the Anniversary of October
(2 November 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 4 No. 44, 2 November 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

The Russian Revolution continues to live in two ways. It lives because nationalized property continues to exist within the Soviet Union. It lives also by virtue of the existence of an organized section of the working class devoted to the task of defending the Soviet Union through the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy and the extension of the October Revolution throughout the world.
Leon Trotsky’s analysis of the nature of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers’ state makes it possible for us to celebrate the anniversary of the Russian Revolution, knowing that. not all of its achievements have been destroyed. Trotsky’s defense of the principles underlying the Russian Revolution is responsible for the existence of a movement devoted to those principles and therefore able to celebrate the anniversary of the Russian Revolution.
And therein lies the greatest of all of Trotsky’s great contributions to the cause of working-class emancipation.
* * *
Trotsky’s analysis of the nature of the Soviet Union and the causes for its degeneration is the most important single factor in preventing the advanced section of the working class from giving way to the deep disillusionment that demoralized such a large section of the group formerly connected with the revolutionary movement.
The idealistic interpretation offered by the middle-class intellectuals amounts to this: “The Revolution failed because cunning and unscrupulous people pushed aside able idealists. Every revolution must meet the same fate. Hence there is no use to struggle for the socialist revolution.” In contradistinction to the idealistic interpretation of the middle-class intellectuals, Trotsky furnished us with a materialistic explanation of the nature of the Soviet Union and the causes for its degeneration. This is not the place to go into a detailed explanation of that analysis. A bare outline will suffice to indicate the tremendous difference between a Marxist and an idealistic approach to this all-important social problem.
What was the main social conquest of the Russian Revolution? The nationalization by the proletarian state of the means of production. Have the new property relations created by the Revolution been destroyed and has private property in the means of production been re-established? The answer is in the negative.
True, the political superstructure has been radically altered since the Revolution. The democratic rule of the masses in all Soviet institutions has been destroyed. The backwardness of the country, the death of the best proletarian elements during the Civil War, the weariness of the masses, the failure of the proletarian revolution to arise in the more advanced countries, enabled the bureaucracy to concentrate all power in its hands and destroy all forms of Soviet democracy. But nationalized property still remains and the bureaucracy depends for its existence on nationalized property.
The social rule of every class can and does assume different political forms. The capitalist class can and does rule under democratic, monarchical and fascist forms. Proletarian rule must have democracy in order to achieve its objectives but that does not mean that under certain historic conditions and for a certain length of time the rule of the working class cannot be represented through the dictatorship of a bureaucracy or even of an individual.
Then why, asks the superficial person with an air of profundity, do you blame Stalin if conditions made his victory possible? For the same reason that we place the blame upon the imperialists of the different nations for the imperialist war even though we recognize that, in the last analysis, imperialism and not the imperialists are responsible.
 
Defense of the Soviet Union
Trotsky is not the only one responsible for the existence of nationalized property in the Soviet Union. To him, of course, history will allot a tremendous share of the credit for the Revolution which was the cause of nationalized property coming into existence. Trotsky, however, is responsible for the fact that we understand the nature of the Soviet Union at the present time.
And it is our knowledge of the nature of the Soviet Union that gives so much more meaning to our celebration of the anniversary of the Russian Revolution.
Above all Trotsky drew logical conclusions from his basic premises. To consider the Soviet Union as a workers’ state meant to assume an obligation to defend it in any struggle against the forces of imperialism, even though the Stalinist bureaucracy was guiding the destinies of the workers’ state, and even though the bureaucracy committed a political crime in initiating the struggle. Any other conclusion would make the concept of workers’ state completely meaningless from the point of view of a political attitude towards the Soviet Union.
The major part of his writings in the last nine months of his life dealt with the controversy then raging in the ranks of our party. In essence his polemics against the minority that split away from the ranks of the Fourth International was a continuation of his struggle against those who denied the character of the Soviet Union as a workers’ state.
Fortunate indeed was our party, and consequently the whole revolutionary movement, that the GPU did not succeed in murdering Trotsky before the controversy between the majority and the minority of the Socialist Workers Party took place. Trotsky’s articles against the minority-splitters constitute some of his most powerful polemical writings.
Reduced to its simplest terms the question involved in the struggle was: Should a Marxist party defend higher forms of property relations against lower forms? Stated in this manner (and that is the only correct way of stating it) it becomes difficult to see how it was possible for such a controversy to occur in a Marxist party. But the circumstances were such that a group composed mainly of middle-class intellectuals lost its bearings and, under the pressure of the democratic bourgeoisie, it adopted a purely idealistic position.
 
Fought Against the Stream
Most of those who, because of their disillusionment with the Soviet Union under Stalinist control, rejected the theory that the Soviet Union was still a workers’ state, did not end there. Their disillusionment brought them to the point of breaking with all the fundamental principles of Marxism.
Repelled by the ugly totalitarianism of the Stalinist bureaucracy the middle-class intellectuals confused the bureaucracy with the workers’ state and with the socialist revolution and rejected all three.
In this period of reaction the revolutionary movement would have been completely demoralized and destroyed (to be revived no one knows when) had not Trotsky been with us to fight fiercely and effectively against this reactionary disillusionment and on behalf of the principles that made the Russian Revolution possible.
Did any one of the disillusioned intellectuals attempt to show that there was an effective substitute for revolutionary Marxism? They had nothing to offer except – bourgeois democracy. Some talk about “democratic socialism” but essentially their theories reduce themselves to defending bourgeois democracy.
Rejecting the principles of the Russian Revolution the disillusioned ones could find nothing better to embrace than capitalist democracy. In the very period when that democracy was proving its complete impotence in solving a single major problem confronting mankind! In the very period when history placed before us the sole alternatives of fascism or proletarian democracy, the disillusioned ones began to crawl back to the bosom of the bourgeois democracy that was being destroyed before their very eyes.
From this the disillusioned intellectuals jumped to the conclusion that any disciplined party must of necessity degenerate regardless of social conditions. Because Stalin chronologically followed Lenin therefore Stalinism is the logical and inevitable outcome of Leninism.
 
Only The Leninist Party Can Win!
It devolved mainly upon Trotsky to shatter every one of the arguments which the intellectuals attempted to present. Consciously he saw it as his duty, in the midst of disillusionment and reaction, to save the best elements for the proletarian revolution to come.
In this task personal friendship or previous services to the proletarian movement counted for naught with Trotsky. Every one who dared raise any doubts and thus weaken the revolutionary movement felt the lash of his pen. To him the socialist revolution was everything and its achievement was impossible without a Bolshevik party – democratic, centralized, disciplined. The very mistake that he made in his early years on the question of such a party made him all the more determined to prevent others from making similar mistakes.
Against the disillusionment of the intellectuals he pitted his Marxist analysis of the period in which we are living, his explanation of the reaction, his undying faith in the proletarian revolution, his firm conviction that only a disciplined party grounded on the principles of revolutionary Marxism could achieve that revolution.
To educate the vanguard in the midst of the deepest reaction the working class has ever passed through and to keep that vanguard loyal to the principles of the Russian Revolution were Trotsky’s tasks. The very existence of our party is eloquent testimony that he accomplished those tasks.
Celebrating the anniversary of the Russian Revolution without accepting and defending the principles underlying that Revolution is impossible. That we are celebrating the anniversary of that Revolution at the present moment when all around us rage pessimism and disillusionment is due solely to the work of Leon Trotsky.
 

t Goldman: Stalin in Finland - Why He Invaded It and Why He Made Peace (23 March 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Stalin in Finland
Why He Invaded It and Why He Made Peace
(23 March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 12, 23 March 1940, pp. 1 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Our party, in the resolution dealing with the invasion of Finland by the Red Army (Socialist Appeal, Dec. 9), characterized that invasion as an incident in the Second World War. That is what it turned out to be – an incident which ended by the achievement of peace before it became the beginning of a major conflict between the Soviet Union and Allied imperialism.
That the invasion did not develop into an open conflict between English and French imperialism and the Soviet Union is primarily due to the fact that Stalin’s chief aim is to keep from being involved in a major war.
That is what explains the Hitler-Stalin pact. The only enemy Stalin feared was Hitler who, of all the imperialists, had the best chance to attack the Soviet Union. A pact with Hitler would, Stalin thought, do away with the possibility of an immediate war. He was undoubtedly of the opinion that England and France would not go to war over the invasion of Poland and, if they did, he could avoid being involved in such a war.
 
Hitler Repays Stalin
As his compensation for relieving Hitler of the danger of facing enemy armies on Germany’s eastern borders, Stalin received from Hitler guaranties, in the form of territorial concessions in Poland and the Baltic countries which make the Soviet frontiers more easily defended.
Why does Stalin want to avoid a major war? Because war threatens the rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy either through revolution or through a successful attack of one or more imperialist countries.
But if he wants to avoid a major war, why did he invade Finland? Because his demands on Latvia, Esthonia and Lithuania having been granted, he could not afford to permit Finland to defy him. His prestige was at stake and, besides, he was anxious to take advantage of the general situation to increase his defensive strength. He undoubtedly thought that he could settle matters with Finland very quickly.
Against whom is he trying to defend himself? Primarily against Hitler, for it must not be presumed that Stalin is so stupid as not to see that if Hitler is successful against the Allies, the Nazi war machine will turn to the East.
 
Stalin Drops His Puppet
The creation of the Kuusinen puppet government is evidence of the fact that Stalin at first thought of taking all of Finland. A few days after the invasion, in the early days of December, the Finnish government made a plea through Sweden to the Kremlin to renew negotiations. The Kremlin on Dec. 5 haughtily informed Sweden that there was no Finnish government other than the Peoples Government of Kuusinen with which the Soviet government had already “made” a treaty.
However, when Stalin found that his army, led by a general staff which he had decapitated and demoralized, could not repeat the exploits of Hitler’s army in Poland and that, as a result, there was a real chance of his being involved in war with the Allies, he beat a retreat from his original purpose. After the Red Army cracked the Mannerheim line he was willing to call a halt, settle with the same Finnish government which he refused to recognize in December, and thus avoid an attack by the Allied armies.
* * *
Was it merely the Finnish capitalist army that was defeated? In coming out for the defense of the Soviet Union and for the victory of the Red Army as a lesser evil to the victory of the Finnish capitalist army, we took the position that essentially the Soviet Union was at war with the imperialist forces standing behind Finland. It was clear to us that Finland could not have decided to resist Stalin’s demands without the encouragement of Chamberlain, Daladier and Roosevelt. It was clear to us that Finland could not have held out so long without receiving substantial aid from the outside. Only when Finland was ready to capitulate did Chamberlain and Daladier reveal how much armament material they had actually sent and how much more material and how many men they were ready to send if Finland would only keep fighting. Our assertion that Finland was fighting the battle for imperialism was completely confirmed.
 
Why Finns Made Peace
The cracking of the Mannerheim line would by itself be a sufficient reason for the Finnish government to accept peace terms. True, the Allies offered to send 100,000 men and all the material necessary to withstand the attack of the Red Army. But in view of the time that it would require to get these men over to Finland and especially in view of the refusal of Sweden and Norway to permit transit facilities, the Finnish government saw no possibility of accepting that offer.
And then it was certain, as Prime Minister Ryti informed the Finnish Diet, that to accept the offer of the Allies would mean to invite Germany to send its armed forces into Finland. And they could get there faster than the Allied forces. That meant that Finland would become one of the major battlefields of the war. The Finnish bourgeoisie preferred at this juncture to get peace by surrendering to Stalin the strategical frontiers that he had demanded. They had refused to grant his demands when originally made, only on the mistaken assumption – undoubtedly based on promises made to them by the Allies – that the Allies were going to declare war against Soviet Russia as soon as the invasion began.
Why did not France and England openly declare war on the Soviet Union at the very beginning and immediately send a huge army to aid Finland ? It must be recognized that there were serious practical difficulties in the way, chief of which was the attitude of the Swedish and Norwegian governments, unwilling to see their countries become a battleground.
Nor must it be forgotten that, while the contradiction between imperialism and the Soviet Union is real and fundamental, there are also inter-imperialist rivalries and, at this particular moment, those rivalries are in the forefront. British and French imperialism are of the opinion that if they can take care of German imperialism they will have no difficulty in settling scores with the Soviet Union.
Of course, if they conclude that, in order to get at German imperialism they must attack the Soviet Union, they will not hesitate to do so and try to kill two birds with one stone. To defend his government against the charge of cowardice in not joining Finland, Christian E. Guenther, Swedish Foreign Minister, showed that the Allied proposal to send troops to Finland was designed more for the purpose of getting at Germany than to assure Finland’s independence. To a certain extent Guenther is correct. But another primary motive of the Allies in sending troops to Finland would be to inflict a defeat on the Red Army, if possible, and if not, to keep Stalin busy so that he would not be in a position to help Hitler.
 
Why Hitler Wanted the Peace
It can be presumed that not only did Hitler agree to peace between the Soviet Union and Finland but he was actually pressing for it. While his general aim is to involve Stalin in a military conflict with the Allies, he obviously is of the opinion that, at this particular moment, Stalin can be of greater service to him if the Soviet Union is at peace. He was also anxious to avoid war in Sweden, for hostilities there meant a chance of having his supply of iron ore and other material cut off.
Nor is he very anxious to see Stalin entrench himself too strongly in the Baltic, for he realizes that any increase in the defensive strength of the Soviet Union makes his future task all the more difficult. However, his all-important problem is to defeat the Allies. He is perfectly willing to grant Stalin defensive positions if thereby the Nazi war machine can only achieve its main purpose at this moment.
 
What the Soviet Union Lost
It would be folly to deny that the defensive position of the Soviet Union, in a military sense, has been strengthened. But it would be greater folly not to realize that the defense of the Soviet Union depends primarily, not upon military strategic factors, but upon the sympathy of the masses throughout the world. Through the invasion Stalin brought discredit upon the Soviet Union; he destroyed the sympathy of the masses for the Soviet Union and tied them more firmly to the capitalist world. The loss to the Soviet Union because of that is far greater than the gains achieved in a military-strategic way.
No one except the misled people who blindly follow the Stalinist parties believed the absurd statements made by the Kremlin that Finland threatened to invade the Soviet Union and no one except those same people believe now that the Soviet-Finnish peace treaty is a tremendous victory for peace, as is claimed by Moscow and, of course, by the Daily Worker.
If and when the Allied imperialists should succeed in defeating Hitler and proceed with settling accounts with Stalin, or if the Allies should decide to invade the Soviet Union before defeating Hitler, it will be a thousand times more difficult to arouse the masses in opposition to such a war. Stalin has destroyed the faith of millions in the Soviet Union and has once more shown that the Stalinist bureaucracy is weakening the Soviet Union.
 
Stalin Is Not the Soviet Union
Millions of workers do not make the distinction that should be made between the Stalinist bureaucracy and the Soviet Union. Stalin acts in the same manner as Hitler and from that they draw the false conclusion that the Soviet Union is the same as Germany. We condemned the invasion because we knew beforehand that no matter what victories the Red Army would gain, the Soviet Union would lose in the esteem of the working masses, because the masses, repelled by the invasion, would tend also to become indifferent or even hostile to the Soviet Union.
But we were staunch in our defense of the Soviet Union and favored the victory of the Red Army against the Finnish capitalist army representing the imperialist world. Recognizing that nationalized property still exists in the Soviet Union we must defend it in any war against a capitalist nation. All that one has to ask is: what would have been the result of a defeat of the Red Army in Finland? Nationalized property would have been endangered and that is what we defend both against imperialism and against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
Has not the Stalinist bureaucracy strengthened itself because of the victory of the Red Army? Perhaps, yes, temporarily. But would not the Soviet Union be in danger if the Red Army had been defeated? We repeat what we have said a thousand times. The task of destroying the Stalinist bureaucracy is a privilege and a duty which the workers must reserve for themselves and not assign to the imperialists.
 
“Stalinist Imperialism” Theory Blasted
How will those profound theoreticians – the Socialist party, the Lovestoneites and their similars – justify their theory of Stalinist imperialism? Undoubtedly they will make all kinds of gyrations to show that they are correct, but anyone who is not blinded by hatred of Stalin can easily see that what he is after primarily is to obtain defensive footholds. It is well-nigh impossible to explain what he has done thus far on the basis of the theory that he has entered into a partnership with Hitler to divide the British Empire or even (some have said it!) the whole world. Of course people do not have to consider facts; they can let their desires and imaginations run away with them. But then these people are not Marxists,
And when the Supreme Council of the Soviet Union will meet it will undoubtedly nationalize industry in that section of Finland ceded to the Soviet Union by the peace terms. It is true that this will be done in a bureaucratic manner and to that extent it is not what we want. But as against permitting industry to remain under capitalism, even bureaucratic nationalization is progressive. Let the middle-class democrats howl about “Stalinist imperialism,” but Marxists will continue to make a distinction between imperialism and a degenerated workers’ state which, when it annexes territory, takes property away from imperialism and narrows the base of world imperialism.
No one can say with certainty when and under what conditions the Soviet Union will find itself at war. All that our party states is: whenever the Soviet Union will be at war with any capitalist country we shall call upon the workers of the world to defend it because in doing so we are defending the first conquest of the World Revolution. For workers everywhere the main enemy is imperialism. The workers must do their utmost to destroy the power of the Stalinist bureaucracy precisely in order to defend the Soviet Union most effectively.
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - V (9 March 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(9 March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 10, 9 March 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

V
The war being waged between France and England on the one hand and Germany on the other is an imperialist war. A great many people make that assertion without, however, understanding the real meaning of the term “imperialist”. There are many who dump the Soviet Union into the class of imperialist countries and to prove this they point to the invasion of Poland and Finland. The net result of applying the term “imperialist” to the Soviet Union is to give the workers the idea that it is folly to defend the Soviet Union against imperialist countries because it too is an imperialist country.
When we say that Germany, England and France are fighting an imperialist war we mean something more than that the people who happen to be at the head of the government of those countries have bad motives. It is true that Hitler’s aim is to destroy the British Empire and obtain the colonies that Britain now possesses. But it is important to understand that German industry needs these colonies in order to obtain raw materials, markets for its products, and for the investment of German capital.
Great Britain on the other hand wants to retain these colonies for the same reasons that Germany wants to get them. The ruling classes of both countries desire to exploit the hundreds of millions of colonial peoples. The same is true of the French ruling class.
Why? Because these countries are imperialist countries: their competitive capitalism has developed into monopoly capitalism; the banks (finance capitalism) have replaced .industrial capitalism as the real power; every one of these countries needs colonies in which to invest their surplus capital and sell their products.
If and when the United States enters into the war it will be an imperialist war on its part no matter how many times Roosevelt will assert that it is a war to save the world from fascism. The United States, being an imperialist nation, cannot wage a war that is not imperialist in character.
 
Lenin’s Definition of Imperialism
Marxists have insisted on a very strict use of the term “imperialism”; especially since Lenin wrote his pamphlet on imperialism, in which he severely condemned everyone who did not use the term “imperialism” to characterize the latest stage in the development of capitalist nations. It should be used only to apply to the expansionist policy of finance capitalism.
There are of course many people who use the term “imperialist” to designate any kind of aggression, but they are not Marxists, although they might claim to be such.
When the Red Army, in the early days of the Soviet Union, invaded Georgia, the reactionary "socialists” set up a howl about “Bolshevik imperialism”. At present every writer in the capitalist press, every liberal and every pseudo-socialist insists that the invasion of Finland by the Red Army is a sign of “red or Stalinist imperialism”.
Marxists, however, will continue to ask: Is the Soviet Union a capitalist country? If not, then the term “imperialist” to characterize Stalin’s invasions and policies is absolutely incorrect and can only result in confusing the masses and weakening their struggle against real imperialism.
Some radicals of various kinds and types insist that we can recognize the difference between the economy existing in the Soviet Union and that of the capitalist countries and still Use the term “imperialist” to describe Stalin’s policies. They even attempt to justify the use of the term by stating that the aim of Stalin is to increase the “revenue, prestige and power” of the bureaucracy. This is undoubtedly true; but it can be pointed out to these people that the aim of every bureaucracy, including that of the trade unions is to gain “revenue, prestige and power”. That, however, is hardly sufficient to transform the trade union bureaucrats into imperialists, unless one wants to use the term in such a broad sense as to make it meaningless.
In effect, they who shout about the imperialism of Stalin, whether they do or do not recognize any distinction between the economy in the Soviet Union and the economy in capitalist countries, are all against defending the Soviet Union not only in the present conflict with Finland but, it is safe to say, they will refuse to defend it in case England and France send their troops into Soviet territory.
 
Imperialism Is the Main Enemy!
Calling the Soviet Union an imperialist country conceals the fact that the imperialism of France, Germany, England and the United States is the most reactionary phenomenon of modern society and the greatest enemy of the working class and of mankind in general. It is the imperialism of the capitalist countries that causes wars, exploits hundreds of millions of colonial slaves and its “own” workers, causes unemployment and retards the development of the productive forces.
The Russian workers, by expropriating the capitalists and landlords, delivered a terrific blow to imperialism. By means of the foreign trade monopoly the Russian workers erected a wall to prevent the economic penetration of the Soviet Union by the forces of imperialism. One- sixth of the earth’s surface was thereby closed to the imperialist world which was unable freely to sell its products or invest its capital in the Soviet Union – the greatest blow imperialism has ever received.
It has been the policy of revolutionary Marxists to defend colonial and semi-colonial countries, regardless of the reactionary character of their government, against attack by imperialist countries. When Italy attacked Ethiopia we defended Ethiopia even though its ruler, Haile Selassie, was a slave driver of the worst type. We defend China against Japan even though Chiang Kai-shek has butchered tens of thousands of Chinese workers. In defending the colonial and semi-colonial nations we follow the principle that, as against imperialism, the independence of the backward countries is progressive. The defeat of any imperialist country trying to subject a colonial people, is a blow to all of imperialism, and revolutionary Marxists consider it their duty to help defeat their main enemy, imperialism.
If we defend Ethiopia against Italy and China against Japan, how much more is it obligatory upon us to defend the Soviet Union against the imperialist world, in spite of Stalin? The Soviet Union is completely closed to the imperialist world whereas the colonies, whether they are independent or not, are subjected to imperialist exploitation. As yet no imperialist country has the right freely to sell its goods in the Soviet Union or to invest its capital there.
Far-sighted leaders of the capitalist class understand just as well as Marxists that, in the last analysis, the Soviet Union with its nationalized property and its planned economy must, be destroyed or else the whole capitalist world is in danger. Although Stalin’s policies have been of tremendous help to the imperialists, nevertheless, it is hardly possible for the imperialists to permit one-sixth of the world’s surface to be excluded from their clutches and to be dominated by a different form of economy. By and large the alternative has been and, so long as nationalized property continues to exist in the Soviet Union, will continue to be: either the destruction of the Soviet Union or the destruction of the capitalist world.
This does not mean that the rivalries and conflicts between the imperialist countries cease to exist. They continue and, as a matter of fact, the imperialists have succeeded in dragging the Soviet Union under Stalin into their conflicts. At times, as at present, the inter-imperialist conflicts may succeed in pushing into the background the contradiction between the social system in the capitalist world and that in the Soviet Union. From all appearances it seems that England and Germany have decided to fight it out to the last before settling scores with the Soviet Union. But they make a serious blunder who close their eyes to the fundamental contradiction that exists between the capitalist world and the Soviet Union, even under the Stalinist regime. Sooner or later that contradiction must lead to an attempt by the imperialist world to destroy the Soviet Union and open up its territory to capitalist exploitation.
 
Why Stalin Has Nationalized Property
The undisputed fact remains that, within the territory occupied by the Red Army, territory which formerly belonged to Poland, the land and the banks and larger industries were nationalized and thus another section of the world was taken away from capitalism. Stalin could not afford to permit a different ruling class to remain in the territory annexed to the Soviet Union. It is not because Stalin is anxious to advance the interests of the social revolution. All he is anxious to do is to save and strengthen the Stalinist bureaucracy, but by virtue of the fact that this bureaucracy rules over a state where nationalized property exists, it is compelled to destroy capitalism in such territories as it makes part of the Soviet Union.
When Stalin invaded Finland he set up a government which immediately issued a program for the expropriation of the big landlords and for state control of large industry. His aims in Finland were not realized so quickly but the fact remains that Stalin's course in the territory that he invades and occupies is fundamentally different from that pursued by Hitler – or Chamberlain. Stalin’s actions in nationalizing property in the territory he occupied is a confirmation of our theory that the character of the Soviet Union is fundamentally different from the character of capitalist states. It is absolute folly to call imperialism that which in actuality narrows the base of imperialism.
 
Invasion Reactionary – In What Sense
When the contention is advanced that the invasion of Finland is reactionary, we say: yes, yes, that is true. But reactionary in what sense? Reactionary in the sense that it has discredited the Soviet Union in the eyes of its only real defenders, the working masses. But look on the other side of the battlefield and you behold the imperialist world, the most reactionary thing in existence.
For every worker, the world over, the main enemy is imperialism, the breeder of wars and fascism, the master of hundreds of millions of colonial peoples.
Stalin’s policies hurt the struggle against imperialism and are contrary to the interests of the world revolution but the Stalinist bureaucracy rules over a state which has taken one-sixth of the earth away from imperialism.
The victory of the Red Army may temporarily strengthen the Stalinist bureaucracy but the defeat of the Red Army strengthens the main enemy of the working class, the imperialist world. Under no circumstances, therefore, can a revolutionary worker be indifferent in a struggle between the Red Army and any army connected with the imperialist world. To work for the victory of the Red Army in such a struggle as against the capitalist army is a duty of every worker, in the Soviet Union, in Finland or anywhere else.
(Continued next week)
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - VI (16 March 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(16 March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 11, 16 March 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

VI
When Stalin ordered the Red Army to invade Finland, we condemned the invasion; but we did not permit his crime to deter us from our fundamental policy of defending the Soviet Union. The Finnish capitalist government represents the imperialist world and our policy of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against capitalism applies in the war against Finland. While the advanced workers of the Soviet Union must not give up their struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy, and while the advanced workers of Finland must redouble their efforts to overthrow the Finnish capitalist government, both the Russian and the Finnish workers, as well as the workers throughout the rest of the world, must do everything in their power to prevent a defeat of the Soviet Union.
“Terrible”, cried every middle- class democrat, beginning with the liberals and going on through Norman Thomas and his Socialist Call, the Lovestoneites, and even close sympathizers of our movement. This showed that either they did not understand our program or expected us to do what they did: cave in under the pressure of the bourgeois democrats. The difference between all of these people and ourselves is the difference between the revolutionary Marxists led by Lenin in 1914 and the others who called themselves “socialists”. Lenin did not yield an inch to the capitalists when war actually came, while the others showed that in reality they were nothing more than middle-class democrats.
* * *
“Democratic” Arguments for Support of Finland
These pseudo-Marxist critics falsify our position by insisting that our party supports Stalin’s invasion. In the Feb. 17 Nation, in his swan song bidding goodbye to whatever Marxism he still possessed, the Lovestoneite Lewis Corey makes the assertion that according to the Appeal “the invasion of Finland is justified.” These critics omit the obvious fact that from the very beginning we have condemned the invasion on the ground that it has discredited the Soviet Union in the eyes of the working masses.
The Socialist party of Norman Thomas and the Lovestoneites have approximately the same position: more or less open support of the Finnish capitalist government. The Lovestoneites are a little more careful and use a few more Marxist phrases than the Thomasites, but essentially they agree that the Red Army should be defeated by the Finnish bourgeois army.
Let us take a glance at the position of our critics, especially those who claim to speak in the name of Marxism. We need not argue with the liberals, the social-democrats and labor bureaucrats, with the people, that is. who openly support the falsehood that the war between England and Germany is a war for democracy against fascism, with the people who, in advance, have promised their wholehearted support to the American government when it deems it advisable to enter the war. The advanced workers understand these people well and there is no danger that they will follow them.
If there is any danger that the advanced workers, due to their justifiable hatred of the Stalinist bureaucracy, will be led to take a wrong position, it is because there are those who glibly speak in the name of Marxism and advance the false theory that on the basis of Marxist principles we must either support the Finnish government against the Soviet Union or else be indifferent to the victory of either side.
To justify their position both the Socialist party and the Lovestoneites point to the “democratic character” of the Finnish government. They furnish us with figures showing that there are 85 “socialists” in the Finnish parliament and “143 representatives of workers and peasants.” On the same basis, however, the workers should be asked to support France and England. Are there not more representatives of the workers in the parliaments of those countries than in the Reichstag of Germany? These “Marxists” have found a new criterion to determine whether the workers should support one capitalist country as against another, namely, the relative number of representatives of workers in the parliaments of the countries fighting each other!
Revolutionary Marxists can only look with contempt upon these people who have not yet learned or who have forgotten that the capitalist state remains a capitalist state no matter how many “socialists” there may be in parliament, that the capitalist state, in any war, defends the interests of the capitalist class and these interests are of no concern to the workers.
It is only in a case of civil war between fascists and a democratic government that the workers can give material (but not political) support to the latter, That is what our party advocated in the Spanish civil war. In a war between imperialist countries, the only thing that can possibly be at stake are the rival imperialist interests. In the war between Finland and the Soviet Union, the Finnish capitalist army is not fighting for democracy against fascism. Regardless of the motives and intentions of Stalin, the war between the Soviet Union and Finland is a war of forces representing on the one hand nationalized property and on the other capitalist private property.
 
The Soviet Union Represents the Future!
But do not the Finnish workers live under better conditions than the workers in the Soviet Union? Do they not have a higher standard of living and greater “freedom”? They leave the ground of Marxism who present such arguments.
One thing that every worker must understand is that capitalism is in a stage of decay and with it capitalist democracy. Whether in Finland or in any other part of the capitalist world, the workers face a choice between fascist slavery or the proletarian revolution. Capitalist democracy is doomed and whether it is this year or in ten or twenty years it will be destroyed by the fascists – or by the proletarian revolution establishing a higher form of democracy.
Finland is part of the decaying capitalist world. The foundation of the Soviet Union, nationalized property, represents part of that future world of planned economy and the production of goods for the welfare of the people. In the last analysis the existence of the Stalinist regime is to be explained by the fact that the capitalist world still exists.
Let the workers destroy the capitalist world and Stalinism will have no base whatever. It will disappear from the Soviet Union like the scab on a sore from which the pus has been drained.
The advanced Finnish workers, considering the historic interests of their class have no alternative but to defend the Soviet Union from the capitalist world.
* * *
Helping Mannerheim by “Working Class” Methods
The Norman Thomas “socialists” have discovered a method by which they are able to claim that they are not helping the Finnish capitalist government but only the Finnish workers. They ask that help be sent through the Finnish trade unions, whose officialdom – house-broken “socialists” – support Mannerheim. But what class is in control in Finland? Have the trade unions the governmental power? Who controls the army which is the most important instrument of the state, especially during a war? Soft- brained “socialists” tell us that Mannerheim and his White generals have been deprived of power. Can one imagine greater nonsense! The creator of the Finnish capitalist state, the butcher of the Finnish workers, “deprived of power” and – and still the commander-in-chief of the armed forces!
Even more miserable are the arguments of the Lovestoneites, who are proclaiming that the Trotskyites have capitulated to the Stalinists. Coming from the people who up to a few years ago justified every crime of Stalin, including the Moscow frame-up trials, this leaves one flabbergasted. In an article by Donald Graham, in the Feb. 17 Workers Age, we are completely laid low by the profound argument that since we support China against Japan in spite of the fact that Chiang Kai-shek is as ferocious a butcher as Mannerheim we can also support Finland.
For just one little reason, Mr. Graham, does our policy differ. China, a semi-colonial country, is attacked by Japan, an imperialist country; Finland, a capitalist country and the outpost and tool of English imperialism, is attacked by the Soviet Union, a workers’ state even though a degenerated one. Isn’t that a slight difference? And by the way, Mr. Graham; we do not justify, neither do we support the invasion of Finland.
Yes, the Lovestoneites warn the Finnish workers not to trust the Finnish bourgeoisie “who cannot follow an independent policy of revolutionary defense” because it is a pawn of imperialism. But please explain how the workers can fight under capitalist control and still “follow an independent policy of revolutionary defense.” In a war one either fights under the control of the capitalist class and thus aids it or fights against the capitalist class in control of the government.
 
A “Radical” Version of Anti-Sovietism
A small group in the Socialist party, led by Herbert Zam, advocates a policy of defeatism for both camps. The people who advocate such a policy don’t want to be caught helping Finland, which they recognize to be a tool of imperialism, but they are for the defeat of both sides. That sounds more revolutionary than helping Finland against the Soviet Union; but assuredly it is just as much against the principles of revolutionary Marxism.
Lenin advocated a policy of revolutionary defeatism for both camps in an imperialist war. He insisted that to carry on the struggle against one’s own capitalist class even at the risk of a defeat at the front was a lesser evil than class peace and victory at the front. He was perfectly willing to take the risk of a defeat of his “own” imperialist government. If one tries to get at the basic reasons for his attitude it is clear that Lenin formulated such a policy because on both sides of the war the same property relations prevailed. At the very worst, the workers fighting against their own capitalist class would come under the control of another capitalist class. There would be no change in property relations.
Far different is the situation where a workers’ state is involved in a war with a capitalist state. A defeat for the workers’ state means the destruction of nationalized property, a higher form of economy; and no revolutionary Marxist can be indifferent to such a possibility.
The argument is advanced that a defeat of the Red Army by the Finnish army would lead the workers in the Soviet Union to overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy. We cannot exclude that possibility but the far, far greater probability is that a defeat of the Red Army by a capitalist army would result in a capitalist counter-revolution.
History knows no example of a union defeated by the bosses in a serious struggle coming under the control of revolutionary workers as a result of the defeat. A defeat of the union by the bosses means the destruction of the union. To be for revolutionary defeatism within the Soviet Union is like being for the defeat of a union in a struggle against the boss. All the crimes of a reactionary trade union leadership would not make it any less of a crime on the part of a worker to follow a policy of defeatism in a struggle between the union and a boss.
* * *
Will the world revolution gain through a victory of Stalin’s Red Army in Finland? That question is supposed to slay all of us who are for the defense of the Soviet Union. We calmly answer: Will the world revolution gain by a victory of the Finnish capitalist army representing the imperialist world? A victory of the Red Army guarantees the continued existence of the first workers’ state, thus giving the workers an opportunity to clean out the Stalinist bureaucracy. That will constitute a tremendous victory for the world revolution.
Subjected to criticism, any policy other than that of defending the Soviet Union means either consciously to favor the Finnish capitalist state and thus, the capitalist world or objectively to aid the capitalist world by being indifferent to the defeat of the Red Army guarding the nationalized property of the. Soviet Union.
 
We Remain True to Our Program
How easy it was to defend the Soviet Union before war actually came! And especially when Stalin was playing with the democratic imperialists! Many a time did we issue the warning that the’friends” of the Soviet Union would scurry to cover when the test of war would come. The Stalinists, the liberals, the “socialists,” the Lovestoneites, all proclaimed us to be enemies of the Soviet Union. Why? Because we insisted on making a distinction between the Stalinist bureaucracy and the Soviet Union.
The war came and all these fair-weather defenders of the Soviet Union find one reason or another for scurrying to cover. It is not so easy now to defend the Soviet Union as it was when Stalin was flirting with the democratic imperialists.
Our party does not adopt a program to be followed only during times of peace. Our program of defending the Soviet Union was based on the fundamental fact that nationalized property makes of the Soviet Union a workers’ state regardless of Stalin’s crimes. No one has shown us why we should change that program.
* * *
(This concludes Comrade Goldman’s series of articles. Beginning with the next issue, Comrade Goldman will answer questions sent in. All readers are invited to send in questions.)
 

t Goldman: Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union - IV (2 March 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

War in Finland

Albert Goldman
On the War in Finland
Why We Should Defend the Soviet Union
(2 March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 8, 2 March 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

IV
Many and serious have been the crimes of Stalin from the very beginning of his regime. In fact, his internal and his foreign policies constitute one colossal crime against the interests of the workers of the whole world.
Bitterly as we condemn and fight against his crimes and betrayals, nevertheless we do not yield an inch on our fundamental position of defending the Soviet Union against the capitalist world. We distinguish between the Soviet Union based on nationalized property and the Stalinist bureaucracy capable of the worst crimes against the working class.
When Stalin expelled the Bolshevik-Leninists, led by Trotsky, from the Communist party of the Soviet Union, when he hounded and jailed them, he committed a crime against the revolutionary proletariat, but these Bolsheviks, hounded by Stalin, pledged loyalty to the state which they were instrumental in creating.
When, in order to save himself from the danger of an attack by Hitler, he made an alliance with France and, as compensation to the French imperialists, actually ordered the Communist party of France to cease its anti-militarist activities, we condemned the alliance as a betrayal of the workers. But the revolutionary Marxists did not give up the slogan of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union.
By frameups, by torture, by outright murder, Stalin exterminated the generation of Bolsheviks who organized and led the revolution. That crime did not cause us to eliminate from our program the slogan of defense of the Soviet Union.
 
Stalin’s Greatest Crime Was in Spain
The greatest crime that Stalin has committed thus far was the crushing of the Spanish revolution. When Franco began his revolt, the Spanish workers took the factories away from the capitalists and the peasants took the land away from the landlords. Stalin bought his way into the leadership of the Spanish Loyalists, sent a large contingent of his GPU to Spain, took control of the Spanish government, murdered hundreds of revolutionary workers and crushed the Spanish revolution.
The program of our party was written after that crime and in that program was included a section dealing with the necessity of defending the Soviet Union against capitalism.
Why did we cling to that slogan? Because the crimes of Stalin, taken separately or together, did not change the nature of the Soviet Union. They undermined the basic structure; they weakened the Soviet Union but they did not destroy nationalized property and we therefore continued to insist on the unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against imperialism.
* * *
Came the Hitler-Stalin pact. The liberals were dreadfully shocked. They had depended on Stalin to save their democracy and now the great savior changed playmates and left them holding the bag.
Sad to say, some of our own sympathizers were shaken but of their equilibrium by Stalin’s “betrayal” of the “democratic” nations.
Did Stalin betray anyone when he signed the pact with his erstwhile arch enemy? Undoubtedly, he betrayed the working masses, but essentially no more and no less than when he made a pact with imperialist France. If we are going to measure betrayals by degree, his crushing of the Spanish revolution was by far worse than the signing of the pact with Hitler.
 
Why His Alliances Are Crimes Against the Workers
It must be clearly understood that, in and of itself, there is nothing criminal in the leaders of the Soviet Union making a temporary alliance with one imperialist nation against another. Existing in an imperialist world, a workers’ state must of necessity take advantage of the conflicts between the imperialist nations in order to strengthen itself to a certain extent.
What constitutes Stalin’s crime in making these alliances is that he ties the working masses to that section of the imperialists with which he enters into an alliance. When he was courting the democratic imperialists, his agency, the Communist International, was backing France and England against Hitler. Now that he has entered into an alliance with Hitler, the Communists are in fact supporting Hitler. Not so openly, it is true. But openly enough so that an intelligent worker can see what their real game is.
In his alliance with Hitler, Stalin proved his contempt for the workers—he did not hesitate a moment to violate their democratic sentiments. He proved that he never was interested in fighting fascism because it is the mortal enemy of the workers but simply because it represented a danger to his regime. As soon as conditions made Hitler willing to make peace with him, Stalin dropped the fight against fascism.
 
We Predicted The Stalin-Hitler Pact
Our party was not shocked, not even surprised, by the pact. We foresaw the possibility of such an alliance; we warned the workers against that possibility. The Stalinists raged at us; the Stalinist liberals sneered at the “fantastic” idea that Stalin could make an alliance with Hitler.
We turned out to be correct. And events have demonstrated that the pact was a betrayal of the workers. Recognizing it as such, we ask all our critics: what change in the economic structure of the Soviet Union did the Hitler-Stalin pact usher in? We have thus far heard no answer: In fact the economic structure remains the same, and our policy of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against the imperialist world must still be followed.
* * *
Following upon the heels of the pact came the invasion of Poland by the Red Army. More liberals left the Stalinist movement. The whole capitalist press began to howl about Stalin’s "imperialism.” Norman Thomas and his followers took up the cry; the Lovestoneites joined in, and, alas, some of our close sympathizers permitted themselves to be led astray by the crime of Stalin and by the pressure of capitalist public opinion.
We too condemned the invasion, but from a totally different viewpoint. All others condemned it as an “imperialist venture.” We condemned it because it confused the masses, undermined their faith in the Soviet Union and thus weakened it in the struggle which some or all of the imperialist nations will inevitably wage against it. We condemned the invasion in the same way that revolutionary workers condemn reactionary activities of the leaders of their trade union, activities which would not in the least prevent them from defending the union against the bosses.
Revolutionary socialists do not look upon boundaries as sacred. When the Soviet Union invaded Poland in 1920 and Georgia in 1921 no class-conscious worker hesitated for a moment in supporting it. "Socialists" condemned the invasions of those years as “red imperialism” but that was to be expected from lackeys of the capitalists. If and when it is necessary for the Soviet Union, in order to defend itself, to invade the territory of some capitalist nation, it would be perfectly justified in doing so. But it should be done under circumstances where the workers of the world can clearly see the necessity for the invasion. The sentiments of the workers must be taken into consideration because in the last analysis the defense of the Soviet Union depends upon them.
 
Gains from Invasions Outweighed by Damage
Now it is true that to some extent the Soviet Union has gained certain advantages by occupying a section of Poland. One advantage is that all of the Ukrainians are now out of reach of Hitler so that he cannot establish a phoney Ukrainian state to be utilized in an attack against the Soviet Union. There may also be some military-strategic advantages. But all of the advantages put together cannot compensate for the damage the invasion has done because of the terrible effect it has had on the workers of the world.
Had Stalin invaded Poland in order to struggle against Hitler, no class-conscious worker would have objected; it was criminal for him not only to invade Poland but to permit Hitler to seize the best section of Poland. The invasion, in and of itself, is not the crime. The circumstances under which it took place and the effect on the workers make it a crime.
The same thing is true of the invasion of Finland. It is only a simpleton who can condemn Stalin for wanting to fortify important bases on the Gulf of Finland, in order to protect Leningrad against an attack either by England and France or by Germany or by all three. Only middle-class liberals or middle-class "socialists” will take the attitude that the Soviet Union has no right to ask a smaller state to cede important bases for its defense. Class-conscious workers make a distinction between capitalist states and the Soviet Union. It does not at all follow that what we oppose as far as capitalist states are concerned we should oppose in a workers’ state, even though degenerated.
We condemn the invasion of Finland not because the Soviet Union has become “imperialist,” but because under the circumstances it had a terrible effect upon the workers of the world. It was not proved to the workers that the invasion was absolutely necessary to defend the Soviet Union. No attempt was made to appeal to the Finnish workers before the invasion took place. Ridiculous lies were spread about Finland threatening to attack the Soviet Union. The same tactics were used by Stalin in invading Finland as by Hitler in invading Poland. The invasion was criminal because, even if Stalin gets what he wants, it will not be sufficient compensation for the loss of faith in the Soviet Union amongst the workers.
 
We Defend Unions Despite False Leaders
But the invasion is one thing and the defense of the Soviet Union is another. If we condemn Stalin’s invasion, that does not mean that we change our attitude to the Soviet Union.
There are those who argue that even if we consider the Soviet Union as a workers’ state we cannot defend it in every struggle that the Stalinists see fit to throw it into. Suppose a trade union, they argue, calls a strike to compel a boss to exclude Negroes. Revolutionary workers would not support that kind of a strike. Very true. But if that strike, called for a bad purpose, develops into a struggle between the union and the boss and the defeat of the union by the boss must inevitably result in the weakening of the union, then class-conscious workers defend the union against the boss regardless of the cause of the strike. The workers themselves must punish the treacherous leaders and not permit the boss to defeat the union.
Even if we should consider that Stalin’s invasion had an objective which we would condemn, it would not alter our attitude, because the struggle in Finland is essentially, as I explained in a previous article, a struggle between the Soviet Union and capitalist Finland representing the capitalist world. In such a struggle we defend the Soviet Union.
 
Stalin’s Overthrow Is Task of the Workers
Stalin’s objective, however, as I mentioned above, is not something that we can condemn. The invasion is what we condemn. Frequently it happens that reactionary trade union leaders want to organize a section of workers who are opposed to unionism and the reactionary leaders, instead of educating these backward workers, send up gangsters to beat and intimidate them, thus antagonizing not only these but other workers. Nevertheless, if a strike should develop under circumstances where the union is placed in a bad position in the eyes of public opinion, including the public opinion of workers, there would be nothing else for us to do except to support the union to the utmost.
Because we condemn the reactionary leaders of the Soviet Union for invading Finland does not mean that we should permit the Finnish bourgeois army representing world capitalism to defeat the Red Army representing the workers’ state.
Because of its criminal acts against the working masses the Stalinist bureaucracy must be overthrown—but only by the workers. As against the capitalist world the Soviet Union must be defended at all costs.
(Continued next week)
 

t Goldman: Congress Swings Axe at the Wagner Act (16 March 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Congress Swings Axe at the Wagner Act
Bosses’ Association Stooges Aided by AFL Skates
Prepare to Emasculate Labor’s Limited Legal Rights
(16 March 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 11, 16 March 1940, pp. 1 & 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

With the introduction in the House of Representatives of a bill (H.R. 8813) to amend the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act), the campaign to destroy whatever merit the bill has for organized labor has begun in earnest. The bill is the work of a majority of the House Committee to investigate the Wagner Act.
Intelligent workers never fell for the buncombe passed out by the labor bureaucrats that the Wagner Act (the “Magna Carta of Labor” as William Green, calls it) would constitute a substitute for struggle in organizing the unorganized.
These workers understood that the act was won by the workers as a major concession from the Roosevelt regime in order to obtain the support of Labor, and they were more than willing to take advantage of its provisions and especially of the sentiment for organization that it created among the workers. But that required militant union activity.
The act could not and did not serve as a substitute for militant activity. The labor leaders who tried it as a substitute did not get very far in increasing the membership of their unions.
But since it did contain provisions which aided the workers in their efforts to organize, it was to that extent valuable and it remains the duty of all workers to extend and improve the act and to fight strenuously against any emasculation of it. And that is what the Smith committee amendments propose to do.
 
Gums Up the Works
One of the amendments provides for the creation of a new board of three members who will sit as a judicial tribunal to hear evidence on complaints filed by an administrator. Ever since the enactment of the Wagner Act the reactionaries have been howling about its violating “all rules of fair play” in that the Labor Board acts as both prosecutor and judge. What the reactionaries want is to create all kinds of “checks and balances” to make it more difficult for the workers to get a favorable decision.
To achieve that objective one of the amendments proposes to give the courts the right to go into the findings of fact made by the Board and reverse its decision on the facts. At present these findings of fact by the Board are conclusive.
Should the amendments become law the Board would have to follow judicial rules of evidence and base its findings on a preponderance of the evidence. Under the present act the rules of evidence are much more liberal. The general aim of the amendments dealing with the methods of procedure is to give the courts a greater opportunity, on the basis of some technicality, to overrule any decision favorable the workers.
 
Boss-Dictated Elections
The present act was at first correctly interpreted by the Board to give the workers exclusive right to ask for an election. Later on, under pressure of the reactionaries, the Labor Board yielded to the demand of the bosses that they be given the right to petition for elections to determine the bargaining agency for the workers.
It is still, however, in the discretion of the Board whether or not to allow such a petition. The amendment proposes to give that right to the employer as a matter of course, thus giving the boss a chance to call for an election before the union is prepared.
No longer will the poor downtrodden bosses be deprived of their civil liberties. Their freedom of speech will be protected by one of the proposed amendments. In other words, it grants the boss the right openly to intimidate the workers. Furthermore, the employer will not be obligated to make any counterproposal. All he will be compelled to do is to listen to the proposals of the union, and perhaps smile – that’s all.
Unless, of course, the workers will speak a language that he will understand and listen to.
 
Militant Workers Outlawed
The Supreme Court went out of its way to misinterpret the Wagner Act so as to refuse its protection to sit-down strikers. One of the proposed amendments specifically provides that the Board should have no right to reinstate any employee found guilty of violence or unlawful activities.
By such general phrases it is certain that a militant worker will lose any rights that he might have under the Wagner Act. Nor will back pay be granted for longer than a period of six months.
To make sure that the purpose of the amendments should not be misunderstood, it is proposed to strike out that section of the Wagner Act which states that it is the policy of the United States to encourage collective bargaining – thereby giving the courts a further opportunity to interpret the act strictly against the workers.
Factors that aid the reactionaries in trying to put their amendments over are the supine attitude of the AFL leaders who would rather see the Wagner Act destroyed than the CIO succeed in organizing the unorganized, and the reliance of the CIO leaders on the liberal congressmen.
Without any illusions about the limited usefulness of the Wagner Act in organizing the unorganized, militant workers must do their best to organize a campaign against the, proposed amendments sponsored by the National Manufacturers’ Association, amendments which will not only destroy whatever value the Act has for organized labor, but which will in reality transform it into a weapon for the bosses.
 

 Goldman: Do Men Enlist in the Army Voluntarily? (24 August 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Do Men Enlist in the Army Voluntarily?
(24 August 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 34, 24 August 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

If there is one proposition that is utterly fantastic and completely false, it is the one propounded by some of the opponents of the Burke-Wadsworth conscription bill to the effect that the United States should continue to rely on the volunteer system for getting soldiers because that system is a democratic one.
We are not, of course, primarily interested in showing the weaknesses of the arguments of the opponents of the Burke-Wadsworth bill. We also oppose that bill, for totally different reasons than those advanced by most of the other opponents, and our shafts are levelled primarily at those who favor the bill.
Nevertheless, when those who oppose the conscription bill advance the idea that the government should continue the policy of voluntary enlistment because it is democratic we are compelled to state very clearly and very definitely that they are either fakers or fools.
John L, Lewis is one of those loud mouths who makes the following propositions: 1. that we should oppose the Burke-Wadsworth bill and 2. that we should first try the policy of voluntary enlistment and if that policy doesn’t furnish the army with the necessary number of men then conscription should be resorted to.
The second proposition in reality shows that Lewis and others like, him, who have come out for the Maloney amendment providing that voluntary enlistment be tried first, are not interested, in democracy, as they claim to be.
For if conscription is undemocratic before voluntary enlistment proves inadequate, it remains undemocratic after that policy has been tried out and found wanting. The real “democrats”, if consistent, should oppose the conscription bill regardless of the fact that a sufficient number of people failed to volunteer.
 
Hunger Drives the “Volunteers”
But is voluntary enlistment democratic? There is a certain plausibility to the contention that it is and in all probability many workers will yield to that argument.
Who, however, volunteers to join the army or navy ? Exact figures are not at my disposal as to the social composition of the volunteers, but if anything is certain it is that the vast majority of those who volunteer to serve in the armed forces are of working-class origin. The volunteers come from the poorer classes. They are mainly youth who have no jobs, who become terribly disgusted and downhearted when they tramp the streets for days looking for a job and finding none. Their family surroundings are probably not of the best, because poverty and joblessness are not conducive for a healthy family life.
In desperation the jobless youth joins the armed forces. One of his reasons might be that he hopes to learn some trade which will more likely give him a job after his enlistment period expires. Nine times out of ten he either does not learn a trade or if he does he can’t get a job anyway after he gets out of the army.
If there is a son of the more well-to-do who wants to join the armed forces, he does not volunteer. He obtains an appointment to West Point or Annapolis and comes out from these institutions as an officer ready to lord it over every private.
What democracy is there in a system where joblessness, hunger and despair are the real recruiting sergeants?
 
As “Democratic” as All Capitalism
Voluntary enlistment is democratic only on the surface; when placed under a Marxist examination it is found to have merely the veneer of democracy. In this respect it is similar to a great many of the so-called democratic institutions functioning under the capitalist system.
How often does one hear the enraptured 4th of July orator proclaim the great principle of equality before the law which is supposed to represent the very basis of our democratic institutions.
Let us assume even that His Honor on the bench is an individual of the greatest integrity who will give justice to the poor and rich alike without fear or favor. That is of course a very violent assumption when one thinks of the Tammany judges and other judges dominated by the corrupt political machines. But even assuming that justice will be meted out though the heavens fall, what follows?
Imagine two individuals arrested for a minor, offense and fined a hundred dollars a piece. One is a worker making twenty-five dollars a week and the other an executive of some kind making fifteen thousand dollars a year. The latter simply writes a check for the hundred and is out; but how about the worker? He must either stay in jail or else depend on his friends or on the loan shark to raise the fine.
There is formal equality before the law. Both rich and poor were fined an equal amount, but the real inequality is tremendous.
The Negro in the South has the formal right to vote but how about his actual right? He simply has no vote.
The capitalist system is shot full of these formal democratic rights which cannot be enjoyed by the worker because of the real inequalities existing under that system.
It is true that no one compels any individual to enlist in the armed forces of the United States, but in actuality that right not to enlist becomes meaningless to a youth who beholds the alternative of joblessness and hunger.
To insist upon voluntary enlistment as an alternative to the Burke-Wadsworth conscription bill, without at the same time insisting that every youth volunteering should be offered as an alternative a decent job with a decent wage attached to the job, is to be expected from demagogues like Wheeler and Vandenberg; but no one interested in the labor movement should give the least support to such a proposal.
If there is a worker who is class-conscious enough to see the necessity of getting military training he should not volunteer for that purpose. He should demand that he be given military training by his union.
 

 Goldman Funeral Address (31 August 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Funeral Address
(31 August 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 35, 31 August 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Friends, Comrades: In the first instance I want to comment upon some rumors to the effect that the body of Leon Trotsky will be taken away from Mexico to be kept away from Mexico. Representing the widow and those who have fought shoulder to shoulder with Trotsky for his ideas, I wish to assure the Mexican people and those who represent the Mexican people, that no matter where the body might go temporarily, it will ultimately remain here in Mexico, the country that he loved and with the people whom he loved. Justice demands that the country which gave him asylum at a time when every other country slammed its doors in his face, should be the country where the remains of Leon Trotsky will stay, as an honor to the Mexican people and to the government of President Cardenas, who gave him this asylum.
Throughout the world, at this moment, all the poor people, all the oppressed, all those who toil for a living, must weep. For they have lost their greatest champion; they have lost him when they need him the most.
In this, the darkest hour in the history of mankind, when tens of millions of human beings are being sacrificed upon the altar of a war which is not a war of the common people, the one individual who could penetrate the darkness was slain.
The great mind of Leon Trotsky, the mind that pushed aside everything inconsequential, the mind that went to the heart of things, is no more with us.
The voice that represented human progress has been silenced. The pen that wrote so convincingly for right and for justice will write no more.
But even as our grief is profound, so deep is our rage and our hatred – our hatred of the monster who, from his throne in the Kremlin, plotted and ordered the murder of Trotsky, a man whose character and ideas were diametrically opposed to the Kremlin despot.
We shall never forget, and the future generations will never forget that the betrayer of the great Russian October Revolution – the revolution that represents the beginning of the liberation of all mankind – is the murderer of Leon Trotsky.
Stalin and his fellow bureaucrats, yes, all the tyrants of the world are happy now. They can sleep more soundly tonight, for the man who was their mortal enemy has gone from this earth.
But let not Stalin be unrestrained in his joy, For the man whom he murdered has left ideas, and ideas cannot be murdered. These ideas will grow more and more powerful, for they are ideas representing the future of mankind. Millions of toiling masses – the peasants and the workers of the whole world – will ultimately embrace these ideas, and then Stalin, Hitler and all the tyrants will be helpless. For the millions of masses suffering the agonies of war and of poverty will one day destroy the world of Stalin and destroy the world of Hitler. They will build a new world – a world based upon the ideas of Marx, of Engels, of Lenin and of Trotsky. They will build a new world of peace, of true equality, of brotherhood, of real democracy – a world of Socialism.
We pledge our loyalty to the ideas of Trotsky – to fight for those ideas, no matter what the consequences may be. And in this fight against all tyrants, against all forms of oppression, the ideas of Trotsky will conquer.
 

 Goldman: Against Capitalist Military Training Conscription Bills (10 August 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Against Capitalist Military Training
Conscription Bills
(10 August 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 32, 10 August 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Are we for or against the Burke-Wadsworth conscription bill? One thousand percent against it.
Not because of any particular clauses contained in it; not because it is a measure introduced in time of peace and thus violates American tradition. But because it is a measure introduced by a capitalist government for the purpose of defending the imperialist interests of American capitalism.
If our party had a representative in Congress he would vote against any conscription bill introduced by any representative of the capitalist class because it could have as its purpose only the defense of the interests of the capitalist class.
We are bitterly opposed to the capitalist class and to its government and we are opposed to any measure introduced for the defense of that class and that government.
* * *
But we are for military training. We want workers to be trained in the use of arms. We have nothing in common with the pacifists. Our opposition to conscription is not based on the fantastic idea that somehow or other military training is bad for the character of an individual and bad for some kind of an abstract democracy.
We want to see every worker skilled in the use of weapons so that he can help defend the interests of his class.
If any pacifist speaks before a gathering of workers and tries to convince them that they should oppose military training, the revolutionary worker should ask him: “What do you want us to do? Do you want us to be drafted during a war (as we shall inevitably be regardless of your pacifist mouthings) and be sent into the trenches without military training? Do you want us to stand up against the trained thugs of the capitalist class not knowing how to use modern weapons?”
Anyone with half an eye can see that we are now living in a period of war and militarism and the intelligent worker realizes that the working class can meet its enemies only if it is prepared in a military sense.
And it is because we understand the enormous necessity of military training for the workers that we stress that point.
Determined to make every worker see the necessity of military training our emphasis will be on that aspect of the question. Every worker should know that our opposition to the conscription bill is not motivated by pacifist considerations. Every worker should know that we want the workers to be trained in military technique.
 
We Were Wrong on R.O.T.C.
In my opinion we made a serious mistake in the past on the question of our opposition to the Reserve Officers Training Corps at the colleges. The student youth who then were the majority of the youth in our party had all the pacifist characteristics connected with the left wing of the social-democrats. Our agitation against the R.O.T.C. was largely pacifist in character.
This section of the student youth did not see then, as they do not see even now, the necessity of emphasizing the need for military training for every worker and every student who wants to participate in the revolutionary movement.
But then the question arises as to how to get military training for the workers? As a revolutionary party opposed to military conscription by the capitalist state, but at the same time in favor of military training for the workers, we are obliged to propose a measure which would place the training of the workers under their own control.
 
Trade Unions Must Take Charge
What better means than to have organized labor take charge of training the workers in military science? It would be an easy matter for the trade unions to organize camps of their own where the workers would be trained under officers over whom they had complete control.
And so long as there is a, capitalist state able to draft workers for war, why should not that state furnish the funds to defray the expenses of workers’ training camps?
Will the capitalist government grant such a demand? That is immaterial and it depends upon how strong a movement is created around such a demand. Will the workers rally around such a demand? We do not know definitely until we try. Certainly such a demand will appear reasonable and necessary to every advanced worker. And above all it is bound to instill into the minds of many workers the necessity of military training for themselves and their class.
 
If Conscription is Adopted
Assuming that Congress passes some kind of a conscription bill, should advanced workers refuse to be conscripted?
Absolutely not. They should take their place amongst those conscripted just as they take their place among the workers who are exploited in the factories.
To be a conscientious objector is to read oneself out of the revolutionary movement. There is no place in that movement for people who cannot see the necessity of living with the masses whether in the factory or in the barracks.
No revolutionary worker should try to avoid conscription on the theory that he does not want to serve in a capitalist army.
And after having been drafted into the army the revolutionary worker is under an obligation to act in such a way as to gain the confidence of his fellow soldiers. It would be contrary to the interests of the revolutionary movement if he were to be marked and constantly punished for individual insubordination.
We are not in the army to show off our independent spirit. We are there because unfortunately the masses have not yet been won over to our ideas and while we are there we must try our best to make them believe in our ideas.
To be a skilful soldier and to fight for the interests of his fellow soldiers is the best method to achieve the position of leadership which every revolutionary worker should have in order best to serve the interests of the working classes.
 

 Goldman: Answering a Query on Our Draft Stand (17 August 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Answering a Query on Our Draft Stand
(17 August 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 33, 17 August 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

A sympathizer of our party, in a letter which he sent me very recently, takes us to task for our position on conscription. He believes that we should not have raised, at this time, the question of military training under trade-union control and should have confined our agitation purely to a struggle against conscription.
“Most of the young workers”, he writes, “are opposed to conscription, and it is only introducing confusion when you talk to them about the necessity of military training under trade-union control. Leave that until after the conscription bill is passed. It may be right then but for the present stick to an anti-conscription issue.”
By inference our sympathizer indicates that every other group opposing conscription will have nothing to do after the conscription bill is passed. They must fold up and shut up. At best they will be limited to a futile movement to repeal the conscription measure.
Our agitation for military training under tradeunion control, however, will continue. For that slogan is independent of the struggle against a particular capitalist conscription bill. As a matter of fact the thesis of the Fourth International on the Death Agony of Capitalism contains the following demands (among others):

Military training and arming of workers and farmers under direct control of workers’ and farmers’ committees.
 
Creation, of military schools for the training of commanders among the toilers, chosen by workers’ organizations.

... Before the Burke-Wadsworth bill was thought of, during the debate, before its enactment, and after its enactment, our basic demand was, is and will be: military training for workers under control of workers’ organizations.
Because that training is absolutely essential in the present period of war and militarism. Into the consciousness of every advanced worker must penetrate that primary and fundamental idea: military training for the working masses for the defense of their class interests.
It may be true that most of the young workers are opposed to conscription. I seriously doubt that proposition but I shall grant its correctness for the sake of argument.
That would not in the least modify our attitude. For we are not interested in concealing such a fundamental truth from any worker as the necessity for military training. We are interested in impressing every worker with the idea that a negative attitude to any fundamental question is not sufficient.
The capitalist class wants to take every worker into its military clutches for its purposes – our reply is NO! But every worker must have military training and we must demand that his own workers’ organization furnish him with that training.
 
We Stand Alone on This Question
And right now is the time to raise the question. We would, be committing the greatest error if we failed to raise it at this very moment when every worker is thinking about and discussing the problem of conscription and military training.
Every demagogue (in which category I include, of course, the Stalinists), every muddle-headed liberal, every well-meaning and not-so-well-meaning pacifist, is shouting against conscription, is trying to catch the support of those workers who are more or less naturally opposed to the idea of giving up their jobs and being drafted into the army.
Our party alone distinguishes itself from all of these shouting against conscription by saying clearly and definitely: Yes, oppose conscription by the capitalist government but fight for military training for the workers under their own control.
In the last analysis the difference between our attitude on conscription and the attitude of every other group is the difference between people who are simply dissatisfied with the existing order and we who see the problem of our epoch clearly and are determined to solve that problem in the only way possible.
It is the same difference that exists between those democrats who raise pitiful cries about the advance of fascism and offer nothing better to fight that advance than mere opposition to the undemocratic methods of the capitalist class and the revolutionary Marxists who see the necessity for the workers to organize and take over power in order to wage a victorious struggle against fascism at home and abroad.
 
We Do Not Stop Half-Way
Our party opposes every step taken by the capitalists and their government to limit the democratic rights of the workers in any way. Our party urges the workers to struggle for every immediate demand.
But our party teaches the workers that it is not sufficient to wage a defensive struggle against the capitalists or to try to gain a few advantages here and there. Fascism cannot be destroyed in that way. It can be destroyed only if the workers, in addition to fighting for their immediate demands, take power into their own hands.
Our attitude on conscription and military training reflects that positive and militant attitude which every advanced worker must be taught to accept.
It is the same attitude which Lenin took to the question of disarmament. Instead of giving in to the sentiments of some left-wing workers who favored disarmament, he fiercely attacked that attitude as incompatible with revolutionary Marxism. Instead of disarmament, demand, advised Lenin, the right of the “inhabitants of the country to form voluntary associations for the learning of the military arts, the free selection of instructors, their payment out of government funds, etc.”
Instead of joining the pacifists of every type and description to fight conscription in general, our party says to the workers: fight against capitalist conscription; demand the right to bear arms and to have military training under your own control; demand funds from the government for such military training.
Our party will never regret the position that it is now taking on military training.
 

 Goldman: Difference Between Imperialisms? Yes, But Not Decisive (3 August 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Difference Between Imperialisms?
Yes, But Not Decisive
(3 August 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. IV No. 31, 3 August 1940, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.

Practically up until the war started and, even for a while after that, many people who were on the fringe of the revolutionary, camp recognized the truth that whatever differences there existed between capitalist democracy and fascism, those differences would not be involved in a war. Everyone who claimed to be a revolutionary Marxist agreed that the struggle would be one for raw materials, for markets, for colonies. That is, it would be purely and simply an imperialist struggle.
The war came, and now many who formerly swore allegiance to the revolutionary phrase have begun to discover differences of such a nature between Hitler Germany and England as to justify a change in their attitude. A Marxist analysis that holds good in time of peace does not seem to hold good in time of war when the pressure of the ruling group becomes really terrific.
In a series of articles written by Lovestone and in another series written by Herberg, the difference in the situation of the working class that would result from a victory of Hitler as against a victory of Great Britain is presented as the fundamental argument calling for a change in the position of the Independent Labor League (Lovestoneites) on the question of the war. Both Lovestone and Herberg now prefer the victory of British imperialism. And judging by their arguments they not only prefer the victory of British imperialism but are in favor of actively supporting it against Hitler.
It is true that they refuse to draw all the logical conclusions from their position. Somehow or other they stress the necessity of keeping this country out of the war as the primary consideration. To any intelligent worker who refuses to be bamboozled by sophistry it would seem that if a victory of the democratic imperialists would mean so much to him he would do his utmost to achieve that victory. ‘
The attitude of Herberg and Lovestone is the same as the sickening one of Norman Thomas – semi-pacifist, semi-isolationist and semi-socialist.
Personally as between Thomas and open chauvinism, I prefer the position of the Social Democrats who are at least logical. They want the victory of British imperialism and they do not beat around the bush, they openly state that the United States should do everything to assure that victory – and they omit the “short of war” business that is Roosevelt’s stock-in-trade.
And why not? If a victory of British imperialism would further the cause of the working masses, as the Lovestoneites indicate, why not give wholehearted support to Great Britain? It is characteristic of the Norman Thomas type of socialist to say “yes and no” at the same time.
We must admit of course that there are differences betweep “democratic” British imperialism and fascist German imperialism. But only he who looks upon those differences as purely static and fails to see the underlying forces at work both in the so-called democratic and in the fascist countries will determine his attitude on the basis of those differences.
 
No Differences in the Colonies
Those differences cannot be of very great importance to the five hundred million, slaving under the yoke of British imperialism in the colonies and it is hardly conceivable that they would willingly sacrifice their lives to preserve those differences. It must never be forgotten that any party supporting British imperialism thereby loses the support of a half billion colonial slaves.
But let us confine our consideration to the privileged English workers and see whether the differences existing between British and German imperialism should determine the attitude of a revolutionary Marxist. It is in the first instance obvious that the difference between English “democracy” and German fascism becomes ever narrower as the war progresses. The British worker enjoys precious little democracy at the present moment. He will, however, regain all his rights after a British victory, insist those who advocate supporting British imperialism.
And here we come to the heart of the problem. Not that there is any use arguing as to whether the British worker will or will not regain his rights after the war. He undoubtedly will not, but that is not the major point at issue.
A revolutionary party must consider as fundamental, in addition to the fact that it is impermissible to support one imperialism as against another, that we are living in the period of the decline of capitalism, when all tendencies favor the victory of fascism unless the victory of the socialist revolution intervenes.
A victory of the fascists will bring fascism, say Lovestone and Herberg and a victory of the “democracies” will still give us some lee-way. Even granting that, the disadvantages for a revolutionary party resulting from support of an imperialist war outweigh by far the advantages of a problematical short period of very limited democratic rights that might be granted to the workers as a result of a victory of the “democracies”.
For by supporting any imperialist government a revolutionary party is bound to lose the support of that section which is most exploited by the imperialist regime. In supporting an imperialist war a revolutionary party must inevitably make compromises on the home front, discouraging and demoralizing the workers and making impossible an effective struggle against fascism.
A Marxist party, to preserve its revolutionary integrity, must under no circumstances assume a share in the responsibility for capitalist war or capitalist peace. In the period of the decline of capitalism it must show its bitter hostility to the capitalist order by an uncompromising struggle against its own capitalist enemy.
It must stress the fundamental idea that to defeat fascism, foreign or domestic, it is necessary to destroy the capitalist system.
It dare not stress the fleeting differences, but only the essential identity between “democratic” and fascist exploiters.
 

 Goldman: Attorney for Trotsky’s Widow Blasts Story of GPU Assassin (19 October 1940)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
Attorney for Trotsky’s Widow Blasts
Story of GPU Assassin
(19 October 1940)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 4 No. 42, 19 October 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghanfor ETOL.




David Alfaro Siqueiros, the leader of the machine-gun band which attacked Trotsky’s home on May 24th, 1940, less than three months before another GPL assassin, “Frank Jacson”, was successful in assassinating Trotsky, is now awaiting trial in Mexico City for the first attempt on Trotsky. He was captured after a five months’ hunt. Upon his arrest his leading role in the machine-gunning was confirmed by accomplices who have been in jail since June. Unable to deny his complicity, Siqueiros told a weird story to the investigating judge. The following analysis of Siqueiros’ “explanation” was issued to the Mexican press by Albert Goldman, who is acting as attorney for Natalia Trotsky.



*
Stalin’s GPU may be skillful in organizing cowardly murders, but it is not at all skillful in creating stories to explain the criminal activities of its agents.
The story which Siqueiros wants us to believe in explanation for the May 24 assault on Trotsky is as bad as the story which the GPU created for explaining the murder of Trotsky.
If one is to believe Siqueiros, he transformed himself into a detective overnight. The motive for the May 24 attack, according to Siqueiros, was “to find documents in Trotsky’s home proving Trotsky’s counter-revolutionary activities, nationally and internationally.” Siqueiros did not see fit to indicate to the public exactly what documents he was looking for and in what part of Trotsky’s home he hoped to find these documents.
Now it is well known that there were thousands of documents in the Trotsky home. It took six huge cases, especially constructed for that purpose, to ship the documents to Harvard University. It took six guards and secretaries two days simply to get all the documents together and to pack them for shipment.
If Siqueiros was such a good detective, he undoubtedly knew all about the number of documents in the Trotsky home and he also knew that he would have to send into the house at least six people who knew three or four languages, who could spend two or three days in examining all the documents in order to find the ones that he wanted. But the evidence shows that he only sent men with revolvers and machine guns.
The most peculiar thing about this alleged search for documents was that none of the people armed with machine guns and revolvers touched a single document. On the contrary, they threw incendiary bombs in order to destroy the documents. Of course Siqueiros claims that the people who got inside did not do a very good job, but it is peculiar, to say the least, that they did not indicate the slightest desire to find any kind of documents. They did indicate a great desire to kill people and to destroy documents.
Is it possible that Siqueiros will claim that the gangsters kidnapped Sheldon Harte, Trotsky’s secretary, in order to get documents? There are indications in his testimony that he will try to accuse Sheldon Harte of being an accomplice of his, even though Sheldon Harte was murdered.
When the Judge very astutely asked Siqueiros whether it required 300 or more bullets in order to find documents, he nonchalantly replied that it “depends upon circumstances.” We presume that the next time, having learned the lesson that 300 bullets are not enough, Siqueiros will use at least several thousand bullets.
We can expect that from now on the friends and defendants of the GPU, who once upon a time so energetically propagated the theory of “self-assault”, will grab hold of this new theory—that the attack was made in order to discover documents of “counter-revolutionary” activity.
 
Siqueiros’ ‘Justification’ for Machine-Gunning
Siqueiros presumes to justify the assault on the ground that it was an act of revolutionists against counter-revolutionists. We shall at this time not ask the question: “What right has a gangster and murderer to assume the role of a revolutionist?” We shall confine our questions simply to this: “How did Siqueiros conclude that Trotsky was a counterrevolutionist?”
It is very significant that Siqueiros did not take the trouble to mention which of Trotsky’s books he read, and which one of these books is a counter-revolutionary work. Nor did he mention having read a single article that Trotsky wrote. It is a safe guess that Siqueiros did not read a single book nor a single article written by Trotsky, and that his view to the effect that Trotsky was a counter-revolutionist simply comes from the GPU, the organization that Siqueiros is so anxious to defend and at the same time to disassociate himself from.
It would be exceedingly wise for Siqueiros to indicate to the Judge exactly what Trotsky wrote that can be considered counter-revolutionary. Perhaps Siqueiros, like the assassin Jacson, will claim that he had secret conversations with Trotsky in which Trotsky proposed to him that he go to Russia and kill Stalin. At any rate let Siqueiros indicate exactly what Trotsky said or what Trotsky wrote so that the Mexican people and all others can judge for themselves whether or not Trotsky is a counter-revolutionist.
Siqueiros claims to be a revolutionist. Siqueiros also, no doubt, feels that not only Trotsky but Trotskyists in general are counterrevolutionists. He also claims that to kill anyone he designates as a counter-revolutionist is a political act and should be judged accordingly.
It is obvious that if Siqueiros is permitted to go free, then everyone whom he chooses to designate as a counter-revolutionary is there by doomed to death at his hands, and the same of course applies to his friends whose opinions coincide with those of Siqueiros.
 
Tries to Shield Guilt of the C.P. and GPU
Siqueiros’ anxiety to whitwash the Communist Party and the GPU is evident in almost every sentence that he utters. He plays up the fact that he Was expelled from the Communist Party in 1929, as if such an expulsion, assuming it to be a fact, would prevent him from doing everything that the Communist Party and the GPU told him to do.
That he followed the Communist Party line very closely is known to everybody, and he admits it. His attempt to create tactical differences between himself and the Communist Party falls flat, in view of the fact that he never wrote about these tactical differences and no one ever knew about them until his arrest.
And to show that he is not a GPU agent, he naively states that in Spain he was too busy fighting to be a GPU agent ... We do not know how much fighting Siqueiros actually did. The fact is that all the GPU “Colonels” came out alive from Spain, and it is a fact that one of the principal reasons for the defeat of the Loyalist Army was the kind of fighting that “Colonels” like Siqueiros participated in while in Spain. Their main fighting was not against the Fascists, but against the revolutionary workers who were anxious to defeat fascism. Hundreds of revolutionary workers were killed by the GPU in Spain. The GPU “Colonels” succeeded in gaining a victory for Franco.
The testimony of all his accomplices makes it impossible for Siqueiros to crawl out of responsibility for the May 24th attack and for the murder of Sheldon Harte. Nor will he succeed in convincing any intelligent person who doesn’t take orders from Moscow that he acted independently of the GPU. His boasting about the amount of money that he “could make” (and not what he did make) will not convince anybody that the financing of such an expensive attempt as the one made on May 24 was the work of one individual. It could only be done by an organization that has inexhaustible financial resources, like the GPU.
 



The almost unanimous reaction of members of the Socialist party against Harry Lang’s articles in the Hearst press dealing with conditions in the Soviet Union is conclusive proof that the party will take a correct attitude in defending that country whenever it will be attacked by its enemies. The baiting which the Socialist parties the world over have been subjected to by the Stalinist Bureaucracy, through the Communist parties of the various countries, has not succeeded in pushing the vast majority of the membership of those parties into the camp of the enemies of the Russian workers. The theories of social-fascism and the united front from below, the inconceivable slanders hurled at both leaders and rank and filers of the Socialist parties, the disruptive and destructive tactics of the Stalinists would ordinarily tend to alienate the working class masses, not under the influence of the Communists, from Soviet Russia; but fortunately for the revolutionary movement and for the country of the Russian workers, the members of the Socialist parties have almost, instinctively, if not theoretically, made the necessary and correct distinction between  the country of the Russian proletariat and the Stalinist bureaucracy keeping the Russian workers under its heel.
At present, we need not worry that the militant members of any Socialist party will refuse to defend Russia against the attacks of any imperialist country. The sympathy of all conscious workers for the Soviet Union is threatening to go to such an extreme that they will forget to make the distinction between the Soviet Union and the Stalin clique in control and refrain from criticizing the harmful and dangerous actions of Stalin and his servile followers for fear of harming the Soviet Union. That kind of an attitude, carries as much danger as the attitude of bitter hostility to the Soviet Union because of the insane tactics of the Stalinists.
 
Necessity for Criticism
Revolutionary Socialism was born out of a criticism of capitalist conditions and capitalist theories. It can live only by virtue of constantly criticizing itself and subjecting everything including its own theories and tactics to a critical analysis. Let revolutionary socialism cease to be critical and it becomes a dogma incapable of fulfilling its historic task. To approve everything that is done in the Soviet Union or even to keep quiet about those things which we do not approve for fear lest some harm come to Russia because of our criticism is an attitude which no revolutionary socialist can accept. That attitude not only does not help the Russian workers but is dangerous to their cause and to the cause of the revolutionary movement all over the world.
No more loyal and more revolutionary socialist ever lived than Rosa Luxemburg and yet while she was in a German prison she criticized the Bolsheviks for some of their tactics. It turned out later that she was misinformed about what was going on, but that does not alter the fact that she did criticize them at a time of civil war and foreign intervention. It is only under Stalin that the theory of the infallibility of the leadership of the Soviet Union came to prevail and criticism of that; leadership of the considered as “counter-revolutionary.” To surrender the right and obligation to criticize what any leadership does anywhere is to surrender what should “be the most outstanding characteristic of all revolutionary socialists, insistence on critical analysis and intellectual integrity.
There are some who are worried lest the criticism which we level at Stalin and his satellites might furnish ammunition to the enemy. Will not the capitalist press pick up our attacks and use them to confuse and antagonize largo numbers of people? It is highly questionable that a correct criticism from a revolutionary socialist can be used by the reactionaries for their own purposes. Because a criticism from a revolutionary viewpoint draws revolutionary conclusions highly dangerous to the reactionary forces.
But even assuming that here and there the capitalist press will pick up and distort a criticism of conditions in the Soviet Union by a revolutionist. the harm that this might bring is infinitely less than the harm which is bound to result to the revolutionary movement if we keep silent with reference to those conditions which should not exist and which are largely the result of the bureaucratic regime in the Soviet Union.
 
Essential to Distinguish Between Things Criticized
It is all a question of the purpose of the criticism and whether or not it is intended to discredit the proletarian revolution or to aid it. And furthermore it is a question of what is criticize whether the things attacked are the inevitable accompaniment of a proletarian revolution in a backward country under unfavorable conditions or whether the policies of the bureaucratic regime are attacked, policies which are unnecessary and harmful to the cause of the Russian and the world revolution.
One thing is it to sympathize with the wailing of an old aristocrat who laments the loss of his privileged position and another thing altogether to decry the Suppression of all democracy for the working class. To point to the low standard of living amongst the Russian masses without an explanation that the cause of such a low standard is due to the backwardness of the country and to the lack of aid from the working classes of the west is one thing; to describe the unnecessary hardships of the working masses in Russia and place responsibility upon the Stalin regime for its adventurous policies with reference to the tempo of industrial development during the latter part of the first five year plan is a criticism on a different plane. To mention the difference in the standard of living between the officialdom of the party and of the G.P.U. on the one hand and the lower paid category of workers on the other is a correct criticism, provided one explains that in a transition period between capitalism and Socialism differences in standards of living are bound to exist, but that the differences existing In the standards between different sections of the population in Russia are out of proportion and reflect the irresponsible powers of the higher officialdom.
One type of criticism is harmful and the other beneficial to the interests of the working class revolution.
 
Lang’s Attacks Reactionary
Measured by every conceivable standard, the articles of Harry Long in the Hearst press are nothing short of a vile attack on the Socialist movement of the whole world. Coming at a time when there is considerable darker of an attack by Germany against Russia, at a time when Hearst is in the midst of a wild campaign to discredit the revolutionary movement in this country and. above all the failure of Lang to make distinctions and explanations, the articles if road by any workers would tend to create tremendous confusion and antagonism not only towards Russia but towards the whole socialist movement. Hearst knew what he was about when he printed the articles; Lang, we must presume, also knew what he was doing when he resurrected those articles, printed some time ago in the Forward, for Hearst. The reactionary Hearst, however, got what he wanted; Lang got more than he bargained for in the form of the hostile reaction of Socialists.
But here it is necessary to clarify issues and make distinctions.
For a Socialist to write in the capitalist press is perfectly legitimate. Provided what he writes furthers the interests of the revolutionary movement. Many great socialists, Marx himself for that matter, wrote for the non-socialist press. It would indeed be a great thing if the capitalist press were to print all articles written by revolutionary socialists. Only a fanatic would object to writing revolutionary articles for the enemy press. It is not the place where the article appears but the consent of the article that is important.
 
Trotsky’s Criticism Revolutionary
The Stalinists point to the fact that the capitalist press accepts article’s from Leon Trotsky as conclusive proof that he is the “spearhead of the counter-revolution.” But anyone not blinded by factional hatred reading Trotsky’s articles in the capitalist press would readily admit that the revolutionary movement is not harmed in the least by those articles that on to contrary many who are hostile to the Soviet Union because they do not understand what is going on there begin to understand and “become friendly – not to Stalin it is true – but to the ideas represented by the October revolution.
Why does the capitalist press accept articles from Trotsky if the effect is favorable to the revolutionary idea? To look upon the capitalist press simply as an instrument of the ruling class to befuddle the minds of the working masses is a mechanical conception verging on the absurd Only at a moment of great revolutionary upheaval does the ruling class press become so careful about its content that it ceases, to pay attention to circulation. Under normal circumstance the element of circulation is an exceedingly important factor and if an article by a well known individual will add to the circulation, it might be printed regardless of the revolutionary character of that article. Only recently, McFadden’s   magazine “Liberty” published an article by Trotsky wherein the latter showed that the difficulties experienced by communism in Russia would not exist after a working class revolution in this country and that there would be no such tyrannical bureaucracy In the United States as there is in Russia.
No wonder that the publishers took care to insert a boxed announcement that James Davis, ex-secretary of labor, would write an answer proving that Trotsky does not tell the truth.
If Lang’s articles were of the sort that Hearst would, be compelled to reply to, no one would criticize him for writing on the Hearst press. We must repeat: If we keep in kind the contents of the article, the purpose of the article, the purpose of its publication both of the writer and the publisher, and to effect the article has upon the readers, we can decide whether it was wrong to have such an article published in the capitalist press.
 
Accurate Picture of Russian Conditions Impossible Without a Theory
Is Lang truthful in his description of the incidents he claims to have seen while in Russia? Does he give an accurate picture of conditions in Russia? It must be stated categorically that it is impossible to give an accurate picture of what is going on in the Soviet Union without an understanding of the fundamental forces that influence the development of the working class revolution in the world in general and in the Soviet Union in particular. Without a knowledge of socialist theory and especially of the theoretical controversies that have been raging between Stalin and his opponents with reference to the problems confronting the Soviet Union and the world, revolution it is hopeless to attempt to evaluate conditions and Russia and to have any correct idea of the general tendencies of development in that country.
It has been said, correctly, that ninety-eight percent of the visitors to Russia come back with their presuppositions concerning conditions in that country confirmed. The contrasts are so many and so great that it is exceedingly easy to find those conditions which one expects. Tremendous construction and production and inconceivably bad quality; living conditions, for important people, that are as good as can be expected and desired, and for millions of workers an abominably low standard of living. Workers who are bitterly hostile to the regime. Peasants who tell you of the tremendous improvement in their conditions in comparison with the conditions existing under the Tsar, and peasants who shake their heads sadly and express longing for the days of old.
A devout communist visitor chooses those aspects of life in Russia which show the tremendous progress achieved since the revolution; a Harry Lang and Ripley see only those conditions which seem to indicate that the revolution was futile and brought only harm to the people. An impartial and accurate traveler might report everything in its true colors but without a knowledge of revolutionary theory would be lost in a maze of contradictions. It is necessary to distinguish and explain and one cannot do that on that on the basis of accepting the Stalinist mythology nor the vindictive distortions of Lang and other enemies of the Soviet Union.
What Lang reports might be the truth but if he does not mention that conditions have improved tremendously since 1933 and if he does not mention the phenomenal achievements in the development of industry his reports are only half-truths. Especially are his reports absolutely worthless if he does not distinguish between gains made as a result of the seizure of power by the Russian proletariat and the losses suffered since that seizure due to the bureaucratic Stalin regime.
 
Whom and What to Blame for Certain Conditions
Can one deny the tremendous suffering of the peasantry and the working class of Russia in the period when Stalin was insanely liquidating the Kulaks by administrative measures thus arousing such furious hostility amongst the peasants that they killed most of the live stock and caused hunger throughout the country? But whom shall we blame? The Bolshevik revolution, or the Initiator of the policy of forced collectivization, Stalin? Those who were most active in guiding the revolution were the very ones who objected to Stalin’s policy of collectivizing one hundred. percent of the peasantry regardless of the ripeness of conditions.
Recognizing the remarkable improvement in Soviet economy should not blind us to the fact that great harm was done to industry and to the workers in industry by the sudden change from an exceedingly slow to a dizzy tempo in industrial construction. And how can one understand the whole problem of the industrialization of Russia and whom to blame for the errors committed if one is ignorant of the controversies raging with reference to that problem within the Communist party? The answer to the argument that Stalin recognized his mistakes and slowed down the tempo of construction as well as the speed of administrative collectivization is that there were those who like Trotsky warned about these blunders before and not after they were committed.
 
Events in Soviet Union Concern All Socialists
Owing to the vicious attacks made on the Soviet Union by the right-wing Socialists there is the tendency on the part of many well-meaning members of the Socialist party to take an attitude of “Hands off the Soviet Union”, which in practice means endorsing everything that is done by the Stalin regime. Both from the point of view of theory and of practice that is an incorrect attitude.
The founders of the socialist movement conceived of it as an international movement. Not because the proletariat of different countries were bound to help one another for some ethical or sentimental reason but because capitalism has created an international division of labor and the economic interdependence of the whole world. The working class of every country is vitally affected by the failure or success of the proletariat of any one country. It follows therefore that policies followed by a working class party in any one country should be of interest to, because they influence the existence of, the working class of every other country. The international character of the socialist movement actually means that a member of the Socialist party of Japan has a right and a duty to follow and to criticize the tactics of the Socialist party of Venezuela or any other country.
The proposition that what happens to the working class of any country is of tremendous concern to the working class of every other country should be questioned by no one after the Hitler victory which set into motion a wave of reaction throughout the whole capitalist world. It is clear or should be clear to everyone following current events that the workers of Russia were most affected by Hitler’s victory, Because of the fact that Russia is a workers’ country the failures and successes of the Russian workers are of greater importance to the world proletariat than the failures and successes of the working class of any other country.
Even accepting the point of view that it is possible to “build a socialist island in a capitalist world, that is, accepting Stalin’s theory of socialism in one country, a critical attitude to the policies of the Soviet loaders still remains necessary. A major premise of that theory, if not the only premise, is that after socialism is built in Russia the whole world, becoming aware of the existence of a terrestrial, paradise, would gravitate towards socialism with an irresistible force. Consequently the believers in that theory should  watch carefully lest any mistake be made in the process of erecting the socialist edifice. But alas! that theory seems to have the effect of destroying all critical faculties with reference to the problem of revolutionary socialism and they who have uncritically accepted that theory have relieved themselves both of the necessity of thinking about Russia and of the necessity of struggling to achieve the social revolution in their own country.
 
Conditions in SU Affect Socialist Movement Everywhere
To revolutionary Marxists who understand that to save the Russian Revolution it must be extended to the most important capitalist countries of the world. everything that goes on in Russia must be followed closely and critically. We need not accept the official theory of socialism in one country to be convinced that conditions in Russia furnish powerful arguments for or against the socialist revolution in other countries. What a handicap revolutionists in capitalist countries are under when they are constantly compelled to explain why there is no democracy for the workers in Russia and why there are so many and such great distinctions in the living conditions of the different sections of the population. It is not so difficult to explain the low standard of living in the country which was economically undeveloped before the revolution, but it is exceedingly difficult to explain the existence of terror and the suppression of freedom of criticism seventeen years after the revolution and especially in view of the undoubted economic progress.
The harm that the communists have done to the revolutionary movement by exaggerating conditions in Russia is almost inconceivable. Hundreds of non-Russian workers during the first give year plan flocked to Russia after listening to verbal pictures painted of conditions in Russia by delegates who were given chicken for breakfast, dinner and supper. Most of those non-Russian workers either left Russia with disillusionment if not hatred in their hearts or remained there grumbling and sulking. Some no doubt became acclimated and wore satisfied. But the latter cannot undo the damage suffered by the Soviet Union by virtue of the return of American and other workers disillusioned and disgusted. And it is not only the Soviet Union that is harmed; it is not only the communist movement that is harmed; the socialist movement also must suffer because of the fancy exaggerations of the “friends” of the Soviet Union.
Criticism of the Stalinist regime from a revolutionary Marxist viewpoint cannot weaken the Soviet Union in the slightest. Its intention is to strengthen that country and its effect is the same. In the last analysis, the policies pursued by the leaders of the Russian workers   are responsible for the strengthening or weakening of Russia. Criticism of wrong policies and bad leadership never does and never will harm the revolutionary socialist movement.
“Friends” of the Soviet Union, who give to every one of Stalin’s platitudes a profound revolutionary significance and who justify every one of his zig-zags, will be the very ones to run for cover when a serious attack against the Soviet Union will be launched. Critics of the Stalinist regime from a revolutionary Marxist viewpoint, who are called “enemies” of the Soviet Union, will defend the workers’ country not only against Lang, but also against the imperialists who are watching for the opportune time to destroy the Russia of the October Revolution. No one knows better than revolutionary Marxists that the destruction of the Soviet Union will set the clock of history back for many decades if not generations. But they also know that the real defense of the Soviet Union is the proletarian revolution in Europe and America.
 



Like a flock of vultures hovering over what they hope is a carcass the official and unofficial communists (right, left, centrist, upper, lower, etc.) watch the Socialist Party with mouths watering in expectation of grabbing a chunk out of it. Here and there some well-meaning but not well-grounded Socialist Party member falls into the claws of one of the anointed groups and this whets their appetite. To convince their own members that the labor of hovering is not in vain, and to convince some young and innocent Socialist party members to forsake a “dying party”, the leaders of the various communist groups must prove to themselves and their followers that the Socialist party is turning to the right.
A simple method is followed. First convince everyone that a left National Executive Committee is in control; then produce what is obviously a right resolution and one can prove to everybody’s satisfaction that there is a right turn.
The left-wing socialists within the Socialist party are under no illusions. They know that the NEC is not under the control of the old guard but they are also aware of the fact that it is not under the control of the revolutionary Marxists. Only three members of the National Executive Committee can be counted in the left-wing camp and under such circumstances a rational human being not under the influence of false hopes can and must expect actions and decisions on the part of the NEC which are distinctly of a right character. But Stalinists, Lovestoneites, and leaders of the new-born Workers’ Party are under the necessity of saying to radical workers in general and to left-wingers in the Socialist party in particular: “See, we told you sol The left turn in the S.P. is a fake. It doesn’t exist. Come and join us, the only true representatives of the revolutionary gospel.”
A false and absurd approach. The strength of the leftward currents in the Socialist party is not at all adequately reflected in the N.E.C. These currents have just begun to show themselves. They will gather clarity and momentum with time and provided the revolutionary Marxists do not run away from them.
Let the vultures continue to hover and remain hungry!
*  *  *  *
The two resolutions which the Stalinists, Lovestoneites and Workers party people (it would be an insult to Trotsky to call the latter “Trotskyites”) so gleefully seized upon to prove their contention that the Socialist party has moved to the right, are the ones passed at the last N.E.C. meeting and which deal with the united front and with the Revolutionary Policy Committee, It would be folly to conceal the fact that the resolution on the R.P.C. represents a dangerous stop to the right; we are the last to defend the majority of the N.E.C. for adopting that resolution. But we are certain that the loft wingers in the Socialist party will not permit this resolution to go unchallenged. They will certainly paralyze any effort by the reactionary right wing to expel members of the R.P.C. merely on the ground of membership in the R.P.C.
But we shall deal first with the united front resolution. In general the left wingers can concur with that resolution. The resolution is obviously a compromise in the effort to avoid an inner-party struggle on the united front issue. We must openly recognize it as such. Prom the point of view of abstract principle it is not correct to permit such an important tactic to be left to the individual states. But a Marxist does not judge a tactic from the point of view of abstract principle. It is necessary to consider all the factors involved. When one takes into consideration the inner-party situation a compromise on the united front policy with the communists was essential and correct. ESPECIALLY IN VIEW OF THE FACT THAT THE UNITED FRONT IN THIS COUNTRY DOES NOT MEAN UNITING THE WHOLE WORKING CLASS BUT UNITING AN INSIGNIFICANT SECTION OF IT WITH THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE WORKERS NOT THE LEAST INVOLVED IN THE UNITED FRONT. We must retain the principle of the united front; we must not close the door to it. The formula worked out by the NEC is as good as any to prevent an inner-party struggle on that issue and at the same time to retain the united front in principle and to permit local united front activities. Should the New York right-wing insist upon fighting on that issue now it would be isolated.
If the resolution erred somewhat, it erred on the side of leniency to the “splinter groups”. When Lovestone appeared before the committee with a united front proposal he should have been given a lesson on the united front in a short reply which should run somewhat as follows:
“Dear Comrade Lovestone:
The united front as you undoubtedly know, has moaning only if it can lead to action. Action, dear comrade, requires masses. You undoubtedly get the point.



 


Comradely,  .......”



It must be said in passing that it is wrong in principle to demand of the Communist party that it give up its “theory” of social fascism before entering into a united front with it. The N.E.C. resolution makes such a demand. If circumstances occur which justify a united front with the communists we must come to some agreement with them on THE FORM OF ACTION without requiring that they give up any of their theories no matter how insane they may be. Just as we cannot permit them to dictate to us what we should think of them. The very necessity of the united front springs from the fact that we disagree on vital principles. Freedom of criticism should, not be abrogated even during the united front. Unfortunately, by criticism, the Stalinists mean lying and slander. This explains the origin of the idea that during the united front no criticism of the parties in the united front be permitted.
While the revolutionists within the Socialist party can readily support the N.E.C. resolution on the united front they must on the other hand severely condemn the resolution on the Revolutionary Policy Committee. That resolution considers the theory that “armed insurrection is a proper Socialist method of achieving socialist aims as a dangerous departure from socialist principles and tactics”. The N.E.C. goes on to say that “such doctrines are not only in conflict with the position of the Socialist party but are subversive of its aims and purposes.”
Had the majority of the N.E.C. remembered the declaration of principles adopted at Detroit it would have remembered a clause contained in that declaration to the effect that “if the capitalist system should collapse in a general chaos and confusion which cannot permit of orderly procedure, the Socialist party whether or not in such a case it is a majority will not shrink from the responsibility of organizing and maintaining a government under the worker’s rule.” If the above quotation means anything at all it means that the Socialist minority must obtain power through an armed insurrection. How else could a minority achieve power? Without attempting too extensive an analysis of the quotation it at least gives rise to the inference that there may be some circumstances justifying an armed insurrection. It can therefore be said that those members of the NEC who voted for the declaration and also voted for the resolution placed themselves in an inconsistent position. They should publicly state that they have either changed their minds on the declaration or they overlooked that point and made a mistake in voting for the resolution.
The phrase “armed insurrection” occurs in an article in the Revolutionary Socialist Review which gives excerpts from an Appeal to the members of the Socialist Party. The Appeal published in April 1934 contains no such phrase. Whether or not it was inserted in the Excerpts or whether the Appeal was changed to include the phrase we are not in a position to state. We shall assume that the change was made with the consent of the members of the Revolutionary Policy Committee although several members of that committee have asserted the contrary to be the truth.
What caused the authors of the Excerpts to insert the phrase, “armed insurrection”? Suspicious people have intimated that the phrase was inserted with the express purpose of getting members of the R.P.C. expelled and thus add to the membership of the Lovestoneites. No evidence has been presented to prove that contention and we must therefore dismiss it. Obviously the leaders of the R.P.C. wanted nothing loft to inference and imagination. They wanted to show in detail exactly what the Workers’ Councils would do to achieve power. A praiseworthy intention but neither correct nor necessary under all conditions. It is worth a whole lot to keep the party legal and to do that it is certainly worth while to refrain from using the term “armed insurrection”. We are of the opinion that the leadership of the R.P.C. committed a grave error in changing the original Appeal.
But the left wing Socialists outside of the R.P.C., in spite of their serious disagreement with the R.P.C., must insist upon the right of members of the Socialist party to advocate the idea that armed insurrection is a proper socialist method to achieve power. This does not in the least bind other members of the party and does not commit the party as such to advocating the necessity of armed insurrection.
It should not be necessary to remind those members of the N.E.C. who voted for the R.P.C. resolution that they laid down a fundamental policy with reference to a certain doctrine and to certain members of the party. The N.E.C. is not authorized to do so. Only a convention of the party is in a position to formulate fundamental party principles. And only when a thorough discussion is conducted by party members on the principle upon which the convention is to take a position. The N.E.C. is to carry out in action the fundamental policies laid down in the convention.
When after the formation of the Industrial Workers of the World the question of the right of those who advocated sabotage to be members of the party came up, it was settled not by the N.E.C. but by a convention. And no other procedure can be tolerated by those cherishing democracy and freedom of discussion within the party.
Nor is it any justification for the resolution to say that it does not provide for the expulsion of members of the R.P.C. because of their membership in that group. When a resolution declares that a certain doctrine is subversive to the aims and purposes of the Socialist party there follows only one logical conclusion with reference to those who advocate that doctrine. It may be that Comrade Thomas for instance did not see the logical implication of that resolution but the right wing of the party does see it. The New York old guard immediately set into motion the machinery for expelling the R.P.C. members from the party. They will begin a witch-hunting campaign which will not be limited to members of the Revolutionary Policy Committee.
A serious campaign must be carried on against the resolution by every left-winger in the party and any attempt to expel anyone because of membership in the Revolutionary Policy Committee must be fought to the last ditch. The right to present a minority viewpoint and to discuss freely is at stake.
 



The failure of working class parties claiming to be based on Marxian principles to win the support of the American workers has been and. is the primary factor in the periodical interest in and activity on behalf of the creation of a Labor party on the British model. Organized labor by which is meant the American Federation of Labor, has kept at more than a respectful distance from the Socialist party and from all other parties the purpose of which was to change the capitalist order of society. And unorganized labor contrary to the theories of those who contend that unorganized labor is more radical than organized labor has followed in the political footsteps of the A F of L and as a result the workers have up to now been supporting either one of the two capitalist parties.
Many within the Socialist movement have expressed the opinion that the name “socialist” or “communist” has kept the workers away from parties bearing those names and have advocated a change of name as a method of weaning the working class away from the Democratic and Republican parties. This very simple idea is still expressed by some socialists who write for and follow the American Guardian. To get socialism, in the opinion of these profound politicians, both the capitalist and working classes must be fooled. Others with a greater understanding of Marxism have looked to the formation of a Labor party as the instrument for tearing the working masses away from the capitalist parties. At the present moment the former tendency is shown in articles by Oscar Ameringer and George H. Shoaf in the American Guardian, while the latter tendency has   found expression amongst members of the party both of the right and left wings who understand the difference between a third party and a Labor party and who understand that Socialists can have nothing in common with those who want to form a third party.
Numerically speaking a Labor party can of course also be a third party. Should a Labor party in the British sense of the term come into existence and contend for supremacy with the Republican and Democratic parties it would be a third party but only in that restricted sense. We must keep in mind that the term Labor party should be applied only to such a party that has as its base organised labor, in which organized labor plays the dominant role while the term “Third” party should be used to mean a party formed, by middle class elements and in which organized labor, if it plays any part at all, will be of secondary importance. A  party formed by a possible combination of Huey Long, the Utopians, Townsendites, Upton Sinclair and Oscar Armeringer will be a “Third” party, while a party organized by the International unions of the American Federation of Labor will be a Labor party.
The reason for the present interest in the question of a Labor party is not difficult to find. The hopes aroused in the hearts of the laboring masses by the promises of the Roosevelt administration and particularly by the National Industrial Recovery Act are beginning to disappear. The rise in wages which several millions of the most underpaid workers obtained through the various codes was more than off-set by the increased cost of living. Section 7-A which the officials of organized labor depended upon to bring the unorganised into the American Federation of Labor brought many more workers into company unions than into the Federation. While it would be wrong to allege that the faith of the masses in Roosevelt has entirely disappeared, enough disappointment has been generated in the ranks of organized labor to make even Green threaten vaguely about independent political action. We are still quite a distance from the time when the bureaucrats of the A.P. of L will come out for a Labor party, but the mere suggestion of such a thing has created a great deal of discussion in the radical movement.
To the amazement of everyone interested in the revolutionary movement the Communists blithely ignoring everything they said about the “social-fascists who advocated the formation of a Labor party”, came out as the champions of such an idea. This sudden change was of course kept a dark and. mysterious secret from everybody including the Communists. Armed with instructions from the Moscow Holy of Holies, Browder came running to the Communist Social Insurance Convention and presented the Papal Bull. The consent, applause and veneration of the faithful who had just finished beating up the Lovestoneites for advocating a similar idea showed that the idea of a Labor party was just as acceptable to the Communists as any other idea emanating from the Russian Mt. Sinai. The poor Communists who had only a day or so before religiously repeated the injunction against any Labor party now just as zealously urge the “rank and file” to form anything that might slightly resemble some kind. of a Labor party. But what can one expect from a party that is nothing more than a religious cult worshiping the God Lenin and his Prophet Stalin?
For the purpose of showing one kind of a “Labor” party that we must shy away from it is worth while analyzing to some extent the nature of a Labor party as conceived by the Communists. If one understands the nature of the Communist united front from below the Communist conception of a Labor party can be easily grasped. Provided of course one can make any sense of the first idea which is highly problematical. The Communists do not want a Labor party which is a revolutionary party nor do they want a party that is reformist. The closest one can get to their idea is that their Labor Party will be a revolutionary reformistic party advocating revolutionary reforms. One who does not know the Communists might say that that is about as far as they can possibly go in making confusion worse confounded, but those who know them well always expect one better.
Necessarily in the eyes of the Communists, no Labor party is a real labor party which is led by trade union bureaucrats or by Socialists. Such a party as the English Labor party is no Labor party at all since it has no Communists or “rank and filers” in the leadership. From now on we can expect to see a great many local “Labor” parties organized by way of a “united front” between the Communist party, all its numerous alphabetical auxiliaries, some liberal or possibly “socialist” minister and the housewives. Organized labor will of course be invited to be the tail to the Communist kite but we can count on the stony indifference of organized labor to such an invitation. Outside of the fact that Labor will not be in that party it will be a real “Labor” party. To the initiated it will be the Communist party under a different name. Those who are inclined to doubt the above prophecy should investigate the Communists effort to organize a “Labor” party in San Francisco where the Epic organization which no longer exists but which has been “captured” by the Communists, and the Utopian organization together with all the regular Communist auxiliaries have been invited to attend a conference for the purpose of forming a “Labor” party.
In contradistinction  to the Communists we must clearly realize that a real Labor party at the present time in this country, will have as its backbone the conservative International Unions of the A. F. of L. and the leadership of such a party will undoubtedly be in the hands of the conservative officials of those unions. Those who have the dominant influence in the trade unions will have the same influence in the Labor party. It would be the merest folly for us to participate in the formation of any Labor party unless at least a very substantial number of powerful unions furnished a real labor base for such a party. And one can add that the unions necessary are more, many more than the Socialist needle trade unions. Local Labor parties are not excluded; in such parties the local labor unions must furnish the foundation.
But why, many will ask, should revolutionary Socialists occupy their time and expend their energy in organizing a Labor party? Are we not, should we not be interested primarily in organizing and in building a revolutionary Socialist party for the purpose of conquering political power? Why help create a party that will compete with the Socialist party and possibly in the future become an obstacle to the revolution?
If one thinks in an abstract manner and does not analyze actual conditions and social relationships one can easily come to the conclusion that it is no concern of revolutionary socialists to build any party but their own. Such is the method of reasoning followed by Comrade Shachtman in an article dealing with the problem of a Labor party in the March issue of the New International, organ of the Workers Party. Using some general assertions which Trotsky made with reference to the same problem, Shachtman without any attempt to analyze the specific class conditions existing at the present time easily solves the whole problem with the mere allegation that “there is no room in the present conditions of the class struggle for the stable existence of a Labor party.
What the conditions are, why there is no room   is something left for the reader to imagine. Much easier is it to assert than to enter into an analysis. The closest that Shachtman comes to furnishing us with some argument and not merely with an assertion is that “assuming that it is formed in the United States it is more likely than not that it will take shape as a directly anti-revolutionary (ergo, anti-progressive) party.” Leaving out the weak attempt at prophecy the assertion would have merit if it meant that to help in the formation of a Labor party at the present time would create a present anti-revolutionary force. The sentence does not really mean that but I am giving Shachtman the benefit of the doubt in order to furnish him with a sensible argument. And this brings us to the very crux of the problem.
Will the formation of a Labor party act as a progressive or a reactionary factor at the present time? Were there in existence now (and not in the indefinite future) a mass revolutionary party with a tremendous following in the working class then it would be an anti-revolutionary act to help in the formation of a Labor party. We can all agree to that. But even Shachtman will agree that his Workers party is not as yet a mass revolutionary party. That Is why he must have recourse to the vague phrase “it is more likely than not”, speaking of some uncertain future. But we are interested in the present and neither we nor the workers in general can be satisfied with the categorical assertion that “the only genuine labor party is the party of revolutionary Marxism”. And it is hardly necessary to retain a Sherlock Holmes to be certain that Shachtman means by that the Workers party.
Analyzing present conditions we must come to the conclusion that a Labor party will tear the working masses away from the two capitalist parties something that no working class party has succeeded, in doing, and. will set the workers into motion in the right direction. To that extent a Labor party will perform a progressive function and. thus justify its existence. And since it would be a progressive step we cannot simply he satisfied with sitting back and saying “if the workers take that step we shall join them”. We must urge and convince the workers to take that step. Which means that we must at every opportunity attempt to convince the labor unions to form a Labor party.
Is there then no possibility at all of winning the masses away from the capitalist parties without a Labor party? It would be absurd, to hold to such a proposition. We shall ultimately succeed in winning the working class to Socialism with or without a Labor party. We can only say that at the present period the formation of a Labor party would hasten the process of winning the working class for Socialism. Should it happen then millions of workers decide to follow the Socialist party (or let us make a violent assumption, the Workers party) before a Labor party comes into existence it  will then be   our duty to fight against the formation of a Labor party.
That ultimately the Labor party, if formed, will become an obstacle to the revolution can be asserted with a great deal of assurance. The fundamental Marxian principle that a revolution requires a disciplined revolutionary party composed of the most conscious elements of the working class and led by experienced and decisive revolutionary Marxists would justify the conclusion that in all probability the bureaucracy of a Labor party will in a critical moment oppose the revolutionary party. Does this mean that we should oppose the formation of a Labor party now when it would constitute a progressive step because in the future it will be an anti-revolutionary force? We might as well oppose the formation of trade unions because in all probability the union bureaucrats will oppose the revolution in a critical moment. It would indeed be an exceedingly ideal situation if the revolutionary Socialist party would have no obstacles at all to overcome. But alas, we live in a real and not in an ideal world.
Will the Socialist party be compelled to surrender its existence upon the formation of a Labor party? Undoubtedly it will not be able to function as a party in the sense of putting up its own candidates for elections and have its own election platform. To the extent that its influence will penetrate the Labor party to that extent will the election platform be what the Socialists will want it to be and to that extent will the Labor party candidates be members of the Socialist party. But in general the Socialist party will have to accept the organizational discipline of the Labor party. Under no circumstances, however must the Socialist party consent to be liquidated. It must function as an organized group within the labor party carrying on its propaganda for Socialist aims and methods. It is only on the condition that the Socialist party will be given freedom to propagate its own ideas that it can think of consenting to enter into a Labor party. Should a Labor party be formed which will demand of the Socialist party that it surrender any of its fundamental principles before it can gain admission to the Labor party then it will be our duty to reject such a demand. It would then be our task to gain sufficient influence within the trade unions composing the Labor party in order to gain admission without surrendering any Socialist principle.
The fact, however, that in the beginning a conservative union officialdom would prevent our admission into a Labor party should not in the least make us opposed to such a party. The formation of such a party even though we would not be admitted would constitute a progressive step. And. this alone should determine our attitude. It is hardly likely that under present conditions a conservative bureaucracy could for long keep the Socialist party out of a Labor party. If a Labor party will be formed it will be largely due to the pressure from below and Socialists have enough influence to compel the officials to admit us as a group.
Within the Labor party our function will be to win more and more workers over to our viewpoint and to, our organization. There will be no greater opportunity than a Labor party to bring our party into close contact with millions of workers who will “be convinced by both our message and our tactics. We can build a revolutionary Socialist party large enough and influential enough to make an attempt to win political power independent of the Labor party if necessary. But we need not at present solve all the possible problems that might arise in the future in connection with the existence of a Labor party. It should be sufficient for us that right now the formation of a Labor party will be a tremendous step forward for the labor movement and consequently for the Socialist party.
There are comrades who seem to be of the opinion that we must not enter into any Labor party unless it accepts the ultimate aim of abolishing the capitalist system and introducing the co-operative commonwealth. It would be gratifying if the Labor party would accept the ultimate goal and that would not in the least obviate the necessity of a party composed of revolutionary Marxists. But it would be wrong to make the acceptance of that ultimate aim a condition to our entry into a Labor party. We must get it into our minds that a Labor party will in all likelihood at any rate in the beginning, be more reforest than the right wing Socialists. It might be formed simply for the purpose of trying to win some immediate demands and nothing more. But that is not the decisive factor for us. It is the fact that Labor will begin to act as a class or the political field and that a Labor party will set into motion forces beyond the control of the conservative officialdom that we should take into consideration above everything else.
The working class will come to accept the idea of following a revolutionary Socialist party not because all the workers will read our literature but because bitter experience will teach it that there is no other way out. The working class always tends to take what appears to be the easiest path and only after constant disappointments will it come to realize that the path of revolutionary struggle offers the only solution. This presupposes a revolutionary Socialist party that is close to the masses and participates actively in all their struggles, constantly teaching and learning from the masses. And while it is not absolutely essential that the working class pass through a period of reformism nor is it absolutely certain that it will, the greatest probability is that it will do so and the sooner and faster it goes through such a period via a Labor party the better for the revolutionary movement. In the present period of the decay of capitalism we can confidently expect that the period of reformism through which the working class will pass will be of short duration.
We must guard against any effort to form a Labor party prematurely. There is always the temptation to come together with a few unions either on a national or local scale and launch something that is called a Labor party but which is far from being such. It is incorrect for us to talk as if we can decide to form or not to form a Labor party. We are not the ones to launch a Labor party; organized labor alone has it in its power to do so. All that we can do is to urge and convince organized labor to take the initiative in forming a Labor party. There must be no playing around with “Labor” parties.
And with those members of the Socialist party who are anxious to unite with any and all middle class liberal elements to form a Third party there can be no compromise. When Oscar Ameringer writes: “I give not a whit what means it employs to reach the goal, be it third party, new party, old party or no party at all” he shows such utter middle class confusion and such amazing ignorance of the ABC of Socialism that the N.E.C, of the party would be justified in ordering him to attend classes in Socialism conducted for the Falcons. All that we can say is that it would be best for Ameringer, who is ready t o support the Communists, Soviet Russia, Long, Sinclair and the Detroit Declaration of Principles, to follow “no party at all” to achieve his goal.
It must be understood from the outset that what the people grouped around the American Guardian want is not a party of Labor but a party of the middle class. That Socialism can be achieved only by way of the class struggle is an idea totally unfamiliar to them. Between such “socialists” who might support the Detroit Declaration and the right wing socialists who oppose the Declaration but who understand at least that Socialism must depend for its realization upon the working class, we prefer the latter any time.
And the reason why a third party should be formed according to the proponents of that idea is because fascism is around the corner and a third party is the only instrument with which to save democracy. If in Germany neither the Socialist nor the Communist parties basing themselves on the working class could defeat fascism, how in the world one can expect a middle class party not based, on labor to prevent the victory of fascism, is a mystery not easily solved. Perhaps Comrade Shoaf reasons that since the German working class could not defeat fascism it is best to depend upon the middle class. Just as logical to expect the capitalist class to bring Socialist into existence.
As a matter of fact some advocates of a bona fide Labor party urge the formation of such a party in order to defeat fascism, which everyone seems to see around the corner. If fascism was victorious in Germany, Austria and Spain where there were millions of organized Socialist workers, there is less reason to expect that a politically backward Labor party will save this country from fascism. It will be the tactics which a future Labor party will follow that will determine whether or not fascism will win. If it will choose the policy of the “lesser evil” as the German Social Democratic party did, or if it will wait until the last moment as the Austrian Social Democratic party did, then we shall suffer the same fate as our Austrian and German brothers suffered. In and of itself the formation of a Labor party does not mean a victory against fascism nor the winning of some immediate demands. Whether or not that will occur will depend on the policies which a Labor party will follow.
The one almost certain thing that a Labor party will accomplish will be the beginning of independent political action on the part of the American workers and that alone is a sufficiently progressive step to justify our advocacy for the formation of a Labor party. As said above, it will set the workers into motion in the right direction and once set into motion they will undoubtedly find the path of revolutionary struggle.
The End.



Comrades: The reports of Comrade Waltmire and Comrade Despres on the election campaigns in the 34th and 5th Wards bring out with great clearness two fundamentally contradictory conceptions as to the purpose and nature of a socialist election campaign. Almost from the very beginning an election campaign has been one of the points that divided the revolutionary from the reformist socialists, and it is safe to say that it will continue to be so until the working class is in political control of the nation.
Neither Comrade Waltmire nor Comrade Despres has made any attempt to conceal their attitude. With disarming frankness Waltmire tells us that if a Socialist party election campaign has two objects, one to win office and another to make socialists, he was interested primarily, if not only, in winning office and was not at all concerned in making socialists. He wants us to “believe that only after winning office will he concern himself with the problem of making socialists and that such a method of approach affords the greatest possibility of success.”
“In our ward we wanted votes; in the fifth ward they wanted members” are his exact words and he gave utterances to this sentiment with great complacency exceedingly confident of its correctness, and I dare say he is some what surprised that not all comrades agree with him.
Comrade Despres who conducted the election campaign in the fifth ward with Comrade Krueger running for Alderman, with justifiable pride, reported that twenty-three new members joined the branch as a result of the campaign and that the 614 votes obtained in the ward represented people who can be considered as having voted not only for the immediate demands contained in the platform, but for the idea of socialism. He emphasized the fact that they solicited votes not because Krueger is a good man, an honest man, a church member or a professor but because he is a socialist and a member of the Socialist party, advocating socialist principles.
Supporters of Comrade Waltmire and his election campaign point to the fact that in the 34th Ward close to 3,500 votes were cast for Waltmire, while Krueger obtained only 600 votes. They admit that not one additional member was recruited into the party by Waltmire’s campaign but that is of very slight importance in comparison with the number of votes. This is the standing argument of all reformists, the argument that has been used over and over again by those who think that the socialist society can. be ushered in by getting people to vote for the right kind of candidates regardless of platform or program. Have recent events in Germany, in Austria taught them nothing at all? Have they not learned that merely to depend on number of votes is to lean on a broken reed and live in a house of cards? Apparently so!
Of course I can point to the fact that the 34th Ward is an old socialist stronghold containing a radical working-class population composed largely of Jewish, Norwegian and Swedish workers. The 5th Ward on the other hand is inhabited mainly by middle-class elements with no socialist traditions. This could easily account for the difference in the number of votes. One could claim without any exaggeration that had the 5th Ward comrades waged the same kind of socialist campaign in the 34th Ward they would have obtained at least as many votes as Waltmire polled. But I shall not stress this point at all; I shall make the same assumption as Waltmire and his supporters, namely, that he obtained a larger vote because of the nature of his campaign and not “because the population of his ward has had a long socialist training.”
Now it ought to be obvious to every Socialist that socialism will not come into existence unless the majority of the people are willing to struggle for socialism and that means that they have some idea of what it is. If the people who vote for a Socialist do not do so because he is a Socialist but because they do not know that he is a Socialist, of what earthly use can that be for achieving the socialist goal? Socialism must depend upon the consciousness of the wording masses and not upon their lack of knowledge. The idea that we should first be elected to office and then teach socialism   to the masses is so utterly   absurd that it should not even be discussed. It can be stated with the greatest of assurance that a candidate on the Socialist ticket who refrains from teaching socialism during the campaign, with the idea that he will do so after ho is elected will not only forget all about socialism while he is in office but will forget all about his promises to fight for the immediate demands of his platform.
From the point of view of achieving socialism 600 votes, obtained conducting a campaign where socialist ideas and the Socialist party are stressed, are worth ten times more than 3,500 votes polled in a campaign where the necessity for the struggle for socialism was not stressed and where the Socialist party, its program and its tactics were shoved into the background.
A casual analysis of the campaign literature distributed by Waltmire and that distributed on behalf of Krueger sharply brings out the difference in the two campaigns. In the case of the former, Waltmire’s personal virtues were stressed, the “fighting parson” was glorified in the case of the latter, emphasis was laid on the nature of capitalist society and the necessity of the conquest of political power by the working class for the purpose of introducing socialism. The immediate demands in the literature of both candidates could undoubtedly be improved. One is gratified that cheaper milk and cleaner alleys found in Waltmire’s platform were omitted in the list of Krueger’s immediate demands.
Waltmire and those who see things eye to eye with him in this controversy take the position that if the Socialist party is to amount to anything it must go into a political campaign with the idea of piling up votes and not of teaching socialism. I insist that this is not at all the correct formulation of the question. The question is not: Shall we go into a campaign to win or to teach socialism, but it is: HOW SHALL WE WIN FOR SOCIALISM ... True we must go into a campaign to win; but to win what and how?
Absurd is it to say that the Socialist party is a political party only to the extent that it succeeds in winning votes. The Socialist party is and must be a political Party throughout the year and not only during election campaigns. It is a political party when it organizes unemployed workers and when it participates in the economic struggles of the working class. An election campaign is simply one of its important political functions and should not at all be considered as something independent of all its other work. An election campaign may be of infinitely less importance than a militant strike. A campaign is of value to the extent that it teaches and mobilizes the masses for winning socialism.
No one denies that during an election campaign the workers pre more lively to listen to a discussion on economics and politics than during any other period! and we can do that “best if we run candidates for the purpose of winning for socialism and that can be effectively accomplished only by showing the workers and middle class the necessity to struggle for the immediate demands and for the ultimate abolition of the capitalist system.
Besides the number of votes cast for a Socialist candidate, another criterion for the success of a campaign is the number of members recruited into the party through the campaign. It is inconceivable that a real socialist campaign should not attract members to the party and to those of us who realize that socialism can not be introduced without an effective revolutionary Socialist party recruiting members into the party is not all of secondary importance. Obtaining votes for Socialism and members for the party go hand in hand.
Comrade Waltmire stressed the fact that in his platform he mentioned that he was “endorsed by the Socialist party.” A very curious formulation not at all justified because the election was theoretically “non-partisan.” That phrase conceals Waltmire’s membership in the party more than it reveals it. Proudly he asserted that the reactionary Daily News and the conservative Municipal Voters’ League also endorsed him. One could just as easily surmise that he was a member of the Municipal Voters’ League. For a Socialist candidate simply to state that he is endorsed by the Socialist party is a slap in the party’s face.
No comrades, the attitude expressed by one comrade that we must get results no matter how we get them, is a self-defeating one. That attitude led Upton Sinclair into the Democratic Party; that attitude will lead. many a member of the party into some kind of a Progressive party. No Socialist can afford to forget for one moment the fundamental Marxist principle that we can achieve socialism either through the conscious action of the working class aided by the middle class, or we do not get it at all.
Have we already forgotten? Is it so difficult for us to remember that only two years ago the Hitler cohorts smashed the Social Democratic party of Germany and the Communist party without any resistance? And together, they had millions and millions of votes; victory will come to the working class only if it is conscious and willing to struggle and sacrifice and if it is led by a determined revolutionary Socialist party. To deceive ourselves with numbers of votes is to prepare for ourselves the fate of our brothers in Germany the hell of fascist concentration camps and the chopping off of our heads.
 



The decision of the Supreme Court holding the National Industrial Recovery Act unconstitutional and thus bringing to an end the various codes created a sufficiently deep stirring among the laboring masses to justify a campaign of explanation and a program for the purpose of mobilizing the workers to guard whatever they had won by virtue of some codes and to achieve further gains.
 
Reformist versus Revolutionary Utilization of NRA Decision
Two lines of conduct were possible for a political party representing the working class to meet the situation arising out of the decision. The decision could be used as the spearhead of a campaign to give Congress the right which the Supreme Court said it did not possess. A working class party utilizing the decision for that purpose would in no way differentiate itself from any liberal, group composed of people who conceived, of the possibility of reforming capitalism and making the lot of the working class tolerable under that system. The demand to “liberalize” our constitution to permit social legislation is not at all a demand peculiar to the working class. Conclusive evidence of that fact is furnished by Roosevelt’s intimation that the constitution must be amended to permit the Federal government to legislate on those subjects covered by the N.R.A. It is a demand which all enlightened defenders of the present system support. The fact that all other capitalist countries have that power shows how little that power really means to the working class.
To follow the line of conduct indicated above would stamp a working class political party as hopelessly opportunistic.
Another method to follow for the purpose of utilizing the decision to educate the masses and gain support for the Socialist Party is to show that the working class cannot and dare not trust a capitalist government to guard the interests of the working class and that it must rely on its own strength to achieve and retain the concessions wrested from the capitalist class. It was a glorious opportunity to bring home to the workers that what a capitalist government for one reason or another grants to them can be taken away very easily if reliance is placed on that government but that which the workers through their own struggles win for themselves and guard with their organized strength cannot be taken away so easily.
Could a six-hour day or a minimum wage gained by organized struggle be declared unconstitutional? The simplest worker would understand the meaning of such a question.
It was the duty of a revolutionary party to point out that. lesson to the workers and furthermore to call upon them to act on the basis of that lesson. It was necessary for the Socialist party to call upon the workers to organize and struggle and achieve by their struggle much more than that which Roosevelt had given them through the NRA as a sop.
The course which a party followed to meet the situation created by the Supreme Court decision determined whether that party was a socialist party or a liberal party, whether it was a revolutionary party or a reformist party.
 
Political Action Includes Organized Struggle
Should we then neglect the political aspect of the decision and urge the workers to confine their efforts merely to economic action? Should we cease all efforts to pass social legislation and concentrate on trade union activity? NOT AT ALL!
To urge the workers to rely upon their own organized strength does not mean to neglect political action. It simply moans that even in questions of legislation the only real force to rely upon is the organized strength of the working class. To forget that the class struggle plays the dominant role not only in trade union activities but to all forms of working class activities is to forget the ABC of socialism. Assume that the Supreme Court has the power to declare laws favorable to the working class unconstitutional, it does not at all follow that the organized struggle of the masses will have no effect upon the court. Assume that the Supreme Court has no such power, it does not follow that without any organized, struggle any favorable legislation will be passed. Of all factors the organized struggle of the working class is far and away the most important single one determining whether any concessions will be obtained from the capitalist state.
But will it not be easier to achieve favorable legislation if we get the working class to struggle and at the same time grant congress the specific right to legislate on matters affecting the condition of workers in industry? Why not first clear the ground, so to speak, by passing the amendment giving congress that right and then wage a struggle for social legislation? A totally incorrect way of considering the whole matter.
 
We Must Favor the Amendment
but Only as Part of the General Struggle
Let it be first of all understood that it would be absurd to carry on a campaign against such an amendment; no realistic revolutionary socialist would oppose the passing of such an amendment. The whole question revolves not on whether the Socialist party should   favor the “workers’“ amendment but on the correctness from a revolutionary point of view of bringing out this amendment as the center of a campaign to meet the situation resulting from the adverse decision  with reference to the N.R.A.
Reading the socialist press, one would be justified in concluding that the Socialist party is of the opinion and so informs the workers that the solution to all their immediate problems and the answer to the hostile attitude of the court is the Hillquit amendment. To be convinced of that; it is not necessary to read the press published by the out-and-out reformists, the press typified by the New Leader and the Wisconsin Leader, but it is sufficient to read an editorial entitled Judicial Hitlerism in the Socialist Call, a weekly published by the Militant group in the party. “There can only be one answer to this dictatorship of the judiciary,” says this editorial. “It is: PASS THE HILLQUIT WORKERS’ RIGHTS AMENDMENT!” (capitals in original).   If the organ of the Militants contains such sentiments it can be imagined what the reformist press contains. [1] (see note below)
THE INCORRECTNESS OF THE CAMPAIGN AROUND THE AMENDMENT CONSISTS NOT IN FAVORING THE AMENDMENT BUT IN MAKING IT APPEAR AS THE ONLY THING NECESSARY TO SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF THE WORKING CLASS.
What was necessary immediately after the N.R.A. decision was to emphasize the necessity for organization and struggle for such immediate demands as the thirty hour week with an adequate minimum wage, unemployment insurance and the prevailing wage rate for the unemployed on work relief. And as part of the struggle for these demands it would be necessary and correct to put forth the constitutional amendment. It is simply a question of emphasis which makes one campaign revolutionary and correct and the other reformist and incorrect.
Foolish indeed would we appear before the working class were we to take the definite attitude that first we must have the constitution amended and after that we shall propose such demands as indicated above. And while nowhere in the Socialist press does this idea clearly appear, the nature of the whole campaign would tend to give that impression to those workers who read our press.
 
Necessary to Destroy Not to Create Illusions
Nor is the question of creating reformist illusions in the minds of the workers an unimportant one. Goodness knows they have too many such illusions as it is and the function of our party is not to add to them but to attempt to destroy them. When an immediate demand is put forth we must take into consideration the possibility of rallying the working masses for a struggle against the capitalist class and its state around that demand; we must also take into consideration the consciousness of the masses and the possibility of intensifying their class consciousness. It is not always easy to judge exactly what kind of immediate demand will best serve the purpose of mobilizing the workers and in the struggle also destroying their illusions. One of the tests of a revolutionary Marxist is to formulate such demands and not to hesitate to change them if they are not in harmony with the consciousness of the workers at a particular time and if instead of destroying they create illusions.
Revolutionary socialists differentiate themselves from the reformists in their conception of the state and the road to power. It is interesting to note how enthusiastic the right-wing socialists are about the amendment. That amendment harmonizes so well with their whole conception of gradualism. First we’ll change the constitution; then we shall introduce one good law after another; and one fine day the workers will wake up pleasantly surprised to find themselves in the midst of a socialist world.
The fact that the reformists also support a certain demand does not of course make it obligatory for the revolutionists to reject such a demand. As a matter of fact, it is the method in which agitation for a demand is carried out that distinguishes a revolutionary Marxist from a gradualist and not the demand itself necessarily. The reformist wants to achieve an immediate demand without struggle and as one of the necessary steps to achieve socialism without struggle. The revolutionary Marxist wants to achieve the demand through struggle, to mobilize and educate the workers in the struggle as a step towards the final struggle for power.
We take it for granted that socialism cannot be introduced by a change of the constitution and the enactment of one law after another. We take it for granted that the state is an instrument to serve and protect the interests of the capitalist class and it is pure utopianism to expect that the working class can use that instrument for the ushering in of a socialist world. It is the class struggle in its most tense form that will decide what class will have power and whether a socialist world will be created. The European capitalist countries have no Supreme Court which can nullify parliamentary legislation and the working classes of those countries will have no easier time to gain power and “build socialism than the working class of this country.
Consequently in putting forth a demand such as an amendment to the constitution    exceedingly great care must be exercised not to give the workers the idea that socialism can be ushered in constitutionally. Again it must be repeated that it would be exceedingly mechanical to conclude, because of our conception of the nature of the state and the road to power, that we should be hostile or even indifferent to a constitutional amendment. Socialists have and must always interest themselves in the nature of the capitalist state.
They must fight to have it democratized even from the point of view of capitalist democracy. But in that struggle we must be constantly teaching the workers that not capitalist democracy and not the capitalist state will bring us socialism but workers’ democracy and the workers’ state.
 
Not a Workers’ Amendment
It must be made clear in our general agitation in support of the amendment that we do not consider it as the cure-all for the ills of the working class. From that point of view it is a grievous mistake to call the amendment the “Workers’” amendment. There is nothing about the amendment which contains the special philosophy of the working class. Other sections of the population the liberals in general, will undoubtedly favor some such amendment. There is no threat in this amendment to the capitalist order; there is nothing in it which will be of peculiar benefit to the working class. All it does is to grant congress the authority to pass whatever laws it deems fit dealing with the matters enumerated in the amendment. This is not sufficient to justify calling it the “workers’” amendment.
A real “workers’” amendment would be one that specifically provides for the socialization of industry and a prohibition of exploitation. That kind of an “amendment” will not come as a result of amending the constitution but of formulating a new constitution after the workers achieve power. All other “amendments” will not help and in supporting them we must not create more and greater illusions.
* * *
Notes
1. In the issue of the Socialist Call of July 27, 1935, appearing subsequent to the writing of this article, an editorial appeared which went a long way to placing the Hillquit amendment in its proper perspective. That editorial clearly states that “revolutionary socialists have never believed that capitalism can be abolished by a series of reforms that will gradually transform the capitalist system into a socialist system.”
 







(The following article was written before the Nazi-Soviet war began. As it indicates, Stalin’s present foreign policy will soon lead to a cessation of Stalinist strike activity – EDITOR)





What Motivates Stalinist Trade Union Policy?
The role that the Stalinists have been playing in a few of the recent and important strikes brings into sharp focus the question of the relationship between Stalin’s foreign policy and the trade union tactics of the Communist Party of this country. Especially has this question come up and been much discussed since the strike at the North American Aviation plant in Inglewood California.
Those reading our press need not be reminded that we have nothing against strikes because they are under Stalinist control. Here it is simply necessary to recognize the fact that some of the recent strikes were under Stalinist leadership, as much as we may regret that fact from a point of view altogether different of course from that of those who attack the strikes as interfering with the war industries.
What motivates the Stalinist leaders in calling strikes at the present time? For Roosevelt and all of his supporters – from the extreme reactionaries to the liberals and social democrats of the New Leader – the answer is simple. Stalin wants to help his partner Hitler and therefore has instructed his agents to interfere with the “defense” industries by calling strikes.
 

The Roosevelt “Explanation” Is False
This contention is given the widest publicity and is used as a pretext by Roosevelt administration officials to label strikes as subversive. On that proposition, too, all the liberals and social democrats are basing their condemnation of strikes in so-called defense industries. They are justifying even the use of the army to break the North American Aviation strike on the ground that it was led by C.P. members conspiring to sabotage defense.
Reactionaries, liberals and social democrats, in attributing to the Stalinist leaders the specific intention to sabotage defense industries, utilize a correct general principle but distort that principle in order to serve their own purposes. The principle that the trade-union policies of the Communist Party, just as all of its major policies, are, in general, determined by the foreign policy of Stalin, is absolutely correct. But to conclude from this correct general principle that the Stalinists call strikes at this time for the specific purpose of sabotaging defense industries means to use a correct general principle not as a guide to explain events, but as an excuse for a reactionary and red-baiting policy.
People who reason mechanically would expect that because Stalin changed his foreign policy with the signing of the pact with Hitler he would therefore issue instructions for a campaign of strikes in all democratic capitalist countries. But these people forget that in the period of Stalin’s great friendship for the capitalist democracies there were strikes led by his followers in this country and in France.
True, the Stalinists put the brakes on the militant strikes of the French workers. Stalin feared a revolutionary upheaval in France because that would endanger not only the French capitalist democracy but also the rule of the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. Nevertheless there were many strikes in France led by C.P. members.
For it must not be forgotten that Stalin’s power rests partly on the influence he can wield through the various Communist parties over sections of the working masses. And to gain influence among the workers it is necessary for the Stalinists to assume leadership in the struggles of the workers.
With the shift in Stalin’s foreign policy, as symbolized by the pact with Hitler, the brakes on working-class militancy were released. The militancy of the rank-and-file Stalinists was permitted full play. It is therefore correct to say that in the last analysis the fomenting of strikes at the present time is a result of Stalin’s foreign policy.
 

Soviet War Would Lead to a New Situation
But this does not mean that the immediate purpose of the Stalinists in leading the strikes is to sabotage the war industries or to exert pressure on Hitler or to prove that Roosevelt is just as much of a fascist as Hitler. The fact of the matter is that the Stalinists cooled down considerably and definitely retreated after the North American Aviation strike was broken by the army. It is even probable, judging by their subsequent actions, that they realize that they made serious errors in strike strategy in the North American Aviation strike.
Should Stalin join Hitler in a struggle against Britain and America, then Stalinist-led strikes could be attributed to an intention to sabotage war industries but Stalin has not as yet been compelled by Hitler to become the latter’s ally in actual warfare.
Naturally, had the war assumed a different aspect, had Stalin been allied with France and England against Hitler, the Stalinists would have tried to prevent any strikes in the countries of the capitalist allies of the Soviet Union.
 




Why Stalinists Now “Attack” Hitler
In the press of the Swedish Communist Party, there have recently appeared manifestos of both the German Communist Party and the Italian Communist Party. In both of them the Stalinists go beyond calling the war an imperialist one on both sides. They come very close to calling for a struggle against Hitler, characterizing the war of the Yugoslavs and Greeks against the Germans as just war and designating the Germans as “robbers in the Balkans.”
What significance do these attacks of the Stalinists have as an indication of Stalin’s foreign policy at the present time? Every intelligent person interested in politics and who is not a devout follower of the Kremlin dictator knows by this time that the Communist International and its affiliated Communist parties are instruments of Stalin’s foreign policy. To understand the major policies of the various Communist parties, one must understand the fundamental line of Stalin’s foreign policy. It follows also that through a study of the policies of the Communist parties one can obtain a clue to Stalin’s line on foreign affairs.
On the surface, there is an apparent contradiction between the policy of appeasement Stalin has been following with reference to Hitler since the conquest of the Balkans, and the attacks levelled against Hitler in the Stalinist press. It would almost appear as if Stalin has suddenly decided to permit the Comintern to follow an independent policy. But this cannot be, and it requires only a little thought to convince one that the attacks of the Stalinists against Hitler are intended to serve Stalin’s foreign policy.
Stalin’s appeasement policy follows from his fear of Hitler and his desperate desire to avoid war with Germany so long as the German army continues with its victories. The attacks on Hitler on the part of the Communist press follow from Stalin’s desire to exert pressure on Hitler in order to convince the latter not to attack but to come to some agreement with him. At the same time these attacks are intended to retain some influence with the workers in the democratic capitalist countries.
It is because of Stalin’s more serious situation that the connection between his foreign policy and the tactics followed by the Communist parties has become less clear than it has been up to now.
 

Previous Stalinist Lines on Hitler
The relationship between Stalin’s foreign policy and the policies of the various Communist parties during the collective security period was so absolutely clear as to require no explanation. Stalin feared an attack on the part of Hitler and he was trying his best to get the capitalist democracies into a military alliance with the Soviet Union. The Communist parties were shouting for collective security, defending capitalist democracy and calling for a war against fascism.
It is undoubtedly true that during all of that period (certainly after Munich), Stalin was sounding out possibilities for an agreement with Hitler, but since Hitler at that time did not find it necessary to enter into an agreement with Stalin, the fight “for democracy against fascism” was kept up both to prepare the ground for a possible defense against Hitler and to exert pressure on him to change his course.
The switch in Stalinist foreign policy symbolized by the Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 was naturally followed by a shift in the policies of the Communist parties. At that period also the connection between the policies of those parties and Stalin’s foreign policy was quite clear. All the blame for the war was placed on Great Britain and France. The war was imperialist only so far as these two countries were concerned. Nothing was said about German imperialism. Stalin was out to help Hitler consolidate his first victories and to get peace. For the time being Stalin, in the words of the Manifesto of the Fourth International on War and the Proletarian Revolution, “sold Hitler the Comintern along with oil and manganese.”
But Hitler’s phenomenal victories, unexpected by the Kremlin, brought fear into the heart of Stalin. Instead of peace or a war where neither side was completely victorious, Hitler by his victories became so powerful as to become an infinitely greater menace to the Soviet Union than he was before the war. Stalin saw this as well as anybody else. What was he to do? To go back to the democracies was out of the question so long as Hitler remained victorious. It was necessary for Stalin to begin a very cautious policy of preparing for the possibility of an attack by Hitler and at the same time of inducing Hitler to avoid attacking him and come to some new agreement with him.
 

Stalin Again Offers Hitler His Wares
It is probably true that Hitler has no fear of Stalin’s Communist parties. But even if Stalin knows that, he is still under the necessity of using every form of pressure available to him for the purpose of staying Hitler’s hand. Just as he sends troops to the Polish frontier in order to try and impress Hitler with his military preparedness, so does he set into motion his foreign instruments in the hope of impressing Hitler with his following outside of the Soviet Union.
The policy of attacking Hitler in the Stalinist press outside of the Soviet Union also serves to retain the hold Stalin still has over a section of the working class, Stalin’s friendship with Hitler destroyed the greater part of whatever influence he wielded on sections of the working masses of countries outside of the Soviet Union. He would like to keep the influence he still has in order to increase his bargaining strength both with Hitler and with the capitalist democracies if and when a shift towards the latter is deemed necessary.
For Stalin the difference between the Comintern and oil and manganese (all of which he sells to the highest bidder) is that whereas he can take back the Comintern, he cannot take back the oil and manganese. For the time being he has taken the Comintern back from Hitler.
 




Roosevelt’s “Freedom of the Seas”
Roosevelt’s sudden resurrection of the doctrine of freedom of the seas brings to mind a prediction made by Comrade Trotsky. When the first draft of the Manifesto of the Fourth International on the Imperialist War and the Proletarian Revolution cam up from Coyoacan, it contained a sentence to the effect that American imperialism will intervene in the world war under the slogan of freedom of the seas. That sentence was in the paragraph which is now the first on page 9 of the printed Manifesto. The present formulation is: “Under one or another pretext and slogan the United States will intervene in the tremendous clash,” etc.
I recall that when I read the first draft and saw the definite prediction on the part of Comrade Trotsky that the slogan of freedom of the seas would be utilized by the American imperialists, my usual caution prompted me to raise an objection. It was rather risky, I argued, to make such a definite prediction, especially in view of the fact that the United States had partially, if not wholly, surrendered the right of freedom of the seas by the Neutrality Act. My objection was delivered to Comrade Trotsky and with his customary habit of giving in on secondary questions he agreed to the present very cautious formulation. But he did not agree that the freedom-of-the-seas idea had been surrendered by the American ruling class.
* * *
The present formulation in the Manifesto does not exclude the possibility of the utilization by the imperialists of the slogan of the freedom of the seas. Indeed, it was worded so as not to exclude that possibility. But I must confess that at that time the idea that Roosevelt would utilize that slogan appeared extremely improbable to me. It was used by Wilson and because of that, very fact it appeared to me that it would not be utilized by Roosevelt.
Freedom of the seas is not a slogan capable of arousing tremendous enthusiasm amongst the masses. Can one imagine huge numbers volunteering to join the army and navy to protect the right of U.S. merchant ships to deliver goods to foreign countries? It is not a slogan that even the ruling class would become enthusiastic about (although in so far as it is connected with trade and profit it is far more truthful than the slogan of fighting for democracy). As a matter of fact, there was no serious opposition to the passing of the Neutrality Law which in effect surrendered the doctrine of the freedom of the seas. There was some opposition from some elements of the reactionaries, but not on a large or serious scale.
 

Why the Slogan is Revived
It cannot therefore be the purpose of the administration, in its revival of the slogan, to obtain greater support either amongst the masses or amongst important sections of the ruling class. As far as the masses are concerned, the slogan of a struggle for democracy against fascism remains primary. The masses can be gotten to support the war only because of their fear and hate of fascism. And as far as the ruling class is concerned, even that section which is now opposed to Roosevelt’s foreign policy, it will support the war because its basic economic interests are involved.
Insisting on the right of the freedom of the seas at the present time can be explained only on the theory that the Roosevelt administration wants to go further than it has gone in helping Britain defeat Hitler and at the same time prepare some “legal” basis for entry into the war. Because Roosevelt made such a flat statement some time ago that convoying means shooting and shooting means war, he would like to find a different way than convoying by which to intervene actively in the shooting war. The doctrine of freedom of the seas might furnish the necessary pretext. It certainly furnishes a legal justification for the “patrol system.”
 

What the Slogan Really Means
And then it must not be forgotten that the doctrine in itself is a very good one to hold in reserve for the future even as against British imperialism. What does freedom of the seas actually mean? It certainly does not mean what it says. For it is obvious that only those countries can have freedom of the seas who are powerful enough to enforce it. The countries without a strong navy must in actuality look to their “protecting” big brothers to give them freedom of the seas. Freedom of the seas in actuality means the right of the strongest to dictate the conditions under which merchant ships of other countries will be permitted to ply the ocean.
Before the war became total in its character – that is, before monopoly capitalism gained complete control of the economic life of the world and before the whole nation became an integrated part of the war effort – it was possible for a number of rules to be observed during a conflict between two nations. It was possible under limited circumstances to make some distinction between contraband and non-contraband goods. But under modern conditions everything is contraband because everything is necessary for waging war. Monopoly capitalism based on the highest development of technique made all rules of war obsolete.
There can be no such thing as freedom of the seas when the world is dominated by a few strong imperialist nations warring amongst themselves for supremacy and exploiting all the weak nations. True freedom of the, seas can exist only when world economy is organized on a socialist basis with the whole world freely participating, in the production and exchange of goods. Freedom of the seas will come into being when the working masses will organize such a world.
 




The Lesson of France’s About Face
So. Vichy is now at war with the British. Only in Syria to be sure, but it is a war nevertheless and the tendency must be for the war in Syria to develop into a full-fledged conflict between the erstwhile allies, taking in many fronts.
And does this mean anything to the gentlemen who have been considering the war from the very beginning as one of democracy against fascism? Are the middle-class democrats and those in the ranks of the labor movement who saw in France, when it was at war with Germany, one of the champions of democracy, capable of learning a lesson from this sudden about-face on the part of the men who were leaders of the French nation at the time it was fighting on the side of Great Britain?
I am referring only to such people who are sincerely devoted to democracy and are really anxious to defeat fascism. There are many many thousands of these people who have convinced themselves that they have no course to follow except to support the democratic imperialists against the fascist imperialists. These people are oblivious to the obvious lesson that can be drawn from the fact that Vichy is now on the side of Hitler. To the democrats the “collaboration” of Vichy with Hitler simply means that the bad antidemocratic people have succeeded in obtaining control of the French government and the French people and thereby brought to a halt the fight for democracy.
The important thing to remember is that the leaders of Vichy – the Petains, the Darlans, the Weygands – were fighting for France against Germany and were extremely important cogs in the French “democracy” before Hitler’s conquest of France.
And it is foolish to assume that these people wanted a Hitler victory. For they knew that they were not fighting for democracy but for French imperialist interests. They may have been responsible for the French defeat; they may have been incapable of leading the French to victory but it seems to me to be absurd to say that they preferred a Hitler victory.
 

Same Men Support Hitler Who Fought Him
If anything proves that the French government under Daladier and Reynaud was not fighting for democracy but for French imperialist interests it is the fact that the French army and French navy were officered by men who are now willing to fight on the side of Hitler against British and American “democracy.” The Darlans and the Weygands are the same type of men and with the same ideas and sympathies now when they are collaborating with Hitler and fighting in Syria against the British as they were when they fought against Hitler. Since no one is so naive as to believe that they were transformed into fascists because France was defeated the conclusion is inescapable that an army allegedly fighting for democracy was officered by men who, if they were not completely fascist, had no interest in democracy.
Absolutely certain is the proposition that the British and American armies and navies are no different, in the type of generals and admirals commanding them, than was the French army. The higher officers of the British and American armed forces are just as little interested in democracy as are the Darlans and the Weygands. Not even the middle-class democrats with their colossal capacity for self-deception would contradict this assertion.
 

The Case of De Gaulle
Is the case of De Gaulle proof to the contrary? Every one of De Gaulle’s statements proves that it is not democracy he is fighting for but the French empire. He simply believes that it is necessary to support Britain to the end in order to save French imperialist interests. And De Gaulle, by the way, is only an exception. The vast majority of the higher officers are solidly behind Vichy. They are not and never were interested in democracy.
That the army and navy are subject to the authority of the government and so long as the government is democratic the armed forces will be fighting for democracy regardless of the fascist sympathies of the higher officials is about the best argument the democrats can produce, But what a miserable argument that is! Even assuming that this is true, it means that a democratic government is willing to take a chance on being stabbed in the back by an army controlled by officers whose sympathies are with fascism.
It is absurd however to claim that a reactionary army can be fighting for a progressive cause. The army reflects the actual relationship in society much more accurately than Parliament or Congress. If the higher officers all come from the upper class or are connected with the upper class, if in their mode of thinking and acting they show no sign of democracy then it is as certain as anything can be that the army can not be used for a war for democracy.
 

The Red Army Under Trotsky
In the Red Army under Trotsky officers of the Czarist Army were used but the real power was in the hands of the political commissars. The officers were simply technicians following out orders. In the armies of the British and American “democracies’’ the officer caste is supreme.
To those who are convinced that this is a war for democracy against fascism we say: Look at Vichy, gentlemen, and you will see that an army led by such men is not an army fighting for democracy. And the generals and admirals of Vichy are no different from the generals and admirals of London and Washington. Only a democratic socialist state can create an army which in structure and ideas is capable of fighting for true democracy.
 



Albert Goldman, attorney for Leon Trotsky during his lifetime and at present attorney for the Socialist Workers Party and also one of those indicted by the St. Paul Grand Jury, issued the following statement:
“I consider these indictments as the most flagrant violation of civil rights ever perpetrated by any government in the United States. They make a mockery of the claim of the Roosevelt government that it is in the war on behalf of democracy.
“When the case comes to trial it will be proved that the charges and the indictments are nothing but persecution calculated to help Daniel J. Tobin keep unwilling truck drivers in his union. After Tobin decided to place a receiver in charge of Local 544 of the Minneapolis truck drivers, the workers voted to secede from Tobin’s union and join the CIO. Tobin then whiningly complained to Roosevelt, who set the Department of Justice into motion, and the result is the indictments.
“Local 544 seceded from the AFL on June 9th. On June 13th Tobin sent a telegram to President Roosevelt, who issued a statement aimed against Local 544. After that the leaders of Local 544. and members of the Socialist Workers Party were indicted. The coincidence of dates conclusively proves the real motives of this indictment.
“The charge made in the indictments that the Socialist Workers Party conspired to overthrow the government by force and violence is an old charge which all reactionaries have used to, crush anti-war and anti-capitalist sentiments. The Socialist Workers Party is an open political organization dedicated to the ideals of socialism and its present function is to educate the workers to understand the real causes of war, fascism and unemployment, and to convince the workers that to do away with these evils of modern society it is necessary to establish socialism. This is the only kind of conspiracy of which we are guilty.”
 



It is to be expected that many people who accept our fundamental principle of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union should be anxious in some way or other to translate that principle into action. Once the principled question of the necessity of defending the Soviet Union is accepted, we are still left with the problem of HOW to defend the Soviet Union. What shall we in this country do to defend the Soviet Union? These questions are uppermost in the minds of many members and sympathizers of our party.
Should our party begin a campaign for U.S. government aid to the Soviet Union under the Lease-Lend Act? The Stalinists are making that demand the basis for their agitation. Should we join them in that demand? The answer is, emphatically – No!
There have been situations in the past where a similar problem presented itself to the revolutionary movement – the problem of asking a capitalist government to help a cause in which the working class in general and our party in particular were interested.
 
The Example of Ethiopia
When Italian imperialism sent its-troops to conquer Ethiopia, a wave of indignation swept through the working masses throughout, the world. All class-conscious workers were for the defense of Ethiopia. The imperialist, democracies were not at all enthusiastic about, Mussolini’s efforts to conquer Ethiopia but they decided to remain “neutral,” that is, to offer indirect help to Italian imperialism.
The question at that time arose as to whether or not we should raise a demand for government sanctions against the Italian effort to subjugate the Ethiopians. We definitely opposed such a demand and raised the counter-slogan of working-class sanctions.
Our position was based on the following reasons: First, we. cannot rely on any capitalist government to fulfill progressive tasks; Second: we cannot make a demand for government sanctions because the very nature of such a demand would have a tendency to compel us to support the government, in all imperialist war which might result from the exercise of sanctions; Third: it is essential for us to stress independent working-class action.
 
The Example of Loyalist Spain
During the struggle between the Loyalist government and the fascists in Spain the same problem was posed. Again we took the position of independent working-class activity in defense of Loyalist Spain. We favored material aid to the Loyalist government but, for the same reasons that actuated us in the case of Ethiopia, we refused to campaign for government aid but insisted on independent working-class action for aid to the Loyalist government.
We were, of course, opposed to any government embargo on shipments to the Loyalist government. The embargo represented a hostile act by Roosevelt which prevented the Loyalist government from purchasing arms. We carried on a campaign against the embargo.
Nor would we have opposed, the sending of aid by any capitalist government to the Loyalist army. There is a difference between not raising any objection, when a capitalist government sends aid, and agitating for such aid. The key to the whole question consists in the understanding that we cannot rely on bourgeois governments to aid our cause. Neither can we take any responsibility for bourgeois governmental policy.
And if the above reasons made it impermissible for us to agitate in favor of governmental aid in the case of Ethiopia and Loyalist Spain, they certainly make it impermissible to carry on a campaign on behalf of U.S. government aid to the Soviet Union.
 
Class Defense versus Class-Collaboration
The United Slates is involved in the imperialist conflict. It is not officially neutral as it claimed to be in the case of the Italian invasion of Ethiopia or of the civil war in Spain. It is a non-belligerent ally of Great Britain. When Hitler ordered the Nazi army to attack the Soviet Union, the Roosevelt government condemned the attack. It has promised aid to the Soviet government because it is interested in the defeat of Hitler. In all probability the Roosevelt government will send aid to Stalin, not because it is interested in a victory for the Soviet Union but because it wants the defeat of Hitler.
It must be remembered that, while it is necessary to defend the Soviet Union, it is also necessary to be in opposition to the imperialist war of the U.S. government. In fact, the real defense of the Soviet Union – the class defense – demands a relentless opposition to all the imperialists in this war. We must therefore be a thousand times more careful about doing anything which would tend to bring us into a partnership with the Roosevelt government and weaken our opposition to its imperialist war.
Were we to agitate for aid to the Soviet Union by the Roosevelt government, would we then not be compelled to favor convoys to guarantee the arrival of the material shipped to the Soviet Union? Should we then not demand that the waters to Vladivostock be kept open by the U.S. government against Japan? Opposed as we are to the imperialist war, it is absolutely essential not to take a single step which would tend to weaken our position in the eyes of the masses.
To leave the ground of independent working-class action in favor of a working-class cause is to jeopardize the cause itself.
 
Soviet Government Can Ask Aid
Nothing that we say with reference to the impermissibility on the part of a revolutionary party to agitate for government aid to the Soviet Union applies to the Soviet government itself. Just as it is permissible for the Soviet government to enter into military agreements with capitalist states, when necessary, so is it proper for the Soviet government to ask for aid from a capitalist state. We have not the slightest objection to having the Soviet government ask for aid or having the United States government grant aid.
Our duty is to organize the working masses to defend the Soviet Union.
This brings up the question of the advisability of attempting to organize certain practical actions to defend the Soviet Union. By that is meant such actions as a section of the workers did organize on behalf of the anti-fascist struggle in the Spanish civil war. Shall we try to raise funds or send workers to fight in the ranks of the Red Army? These questions are not principled ones. The answer to them depends on practical considerations.
In the Spanish civil war the Loyalist government needed men and material. It had money but the capitalist democratic governments refused to sell it armament material. A campaign for men and materials to fight the fascists in Spain was something that was perfectly plausible to the workers and was therefore perfectly in order.
But in the case of the Soviet Union the situation is quite different. The Soviet Union certainly has plenty of men; it has vast quantities of material; those materials it lacks it can, unlike Loyalist Spain, obtain in England and the United States.
 
The Best Method to Defend the USSR
Analyzing the situation from all angles, we come to the conclusion that the most effective method available to revolutionary Marxists in the United States for the defense of the Soviet Union is the method of political support, of explanation, clarification and propaganda.
That the Soviet Union is a Workers’ State despite Stalinist degeneration. That every worker should defend it. That victory for the Soviet Union is victory for the socialist future of humanity. To win the workers of the world to these positions would be infinitely more important than any capitalist “aid” for the Soviet Union.
And to win the workers, it is necessary to answer a thousand different questions which trouble the minds of the workers, thanks to the confusion spread by the enemies of the Soviet Union and by the Stalinist falsifiers.
We must tirelessly explain that the program of Soviet victory is not dependent on capitalist “aid” but on the efforts of the Soviet and world working class. The revolutionary propaganda methods employed by Lenin and Trotsky against imperialist intervention in 1918–1921 can wreak far more havoc upon the Nazi armies than could be done by any capitalist aid. Revival of the democratically elected Soviets, and release of all pro-Soviet political prisoners and their restoration to their rightful place in industry and the army, would strengthen the Soviet Union immeasurably.
That the defense of tho Soviet. Union is not to be placed in the hands of capitalist governments; that only the workers can or will really defend he Soviet Union, and that they can defend it in the last analysis only through taking power away from all the imperialists and establishing Workers’ Governments – this is our way of defending the Soviet Union. We dedicate ourselves to win the working class to that glorious task.
 




The Soviet Union’s Military Limitations
It is undoubtedly true that even under the best of circumstances the Soviet Union, in a strictly military sense, could not, at this time, be a match for Germany. By the best of circumstances is meant a situation where the Soviet Union would be led by a party such as brought victory to the Russian workers and peasants in the years of 1917–1920.
Even if Lenin and Trotsky were alive and guiding the destinies of the Soviet Union, the military strength of Germany would be superior to that of the Soviet Union. For the simple reason that the military strength of a nation depends in the long rung upon the development of its industries and transportation. Nothing that Lenin and Trotsky could have done would have succeeded in raising the general productive capacity of the Soviet Union to a level equal to that of Germany. The industrial capacity of the Soviet Union would, be far greater than it is, had the conditions during the Lenin-Trotsky regime continued to prevail up until now. The destruction of workers’ democracy by the Stalinist bureaucracy has been the greatest single factor in retarding the development of Soviet industry. For under a system of planning the right of the workers to check and criticize is a guarantee of the proper fulfillment of the plans. Take that right away and substitute for it the uncontrolled will of the bureaucrat and planned production loses a very large proportion of its effectiveness.
The Stalinist bureaucracy to a large extent nullified the tremendous potentialities of planned economy. Both the quantity and quality of products (especially quality) suffered because the Soviet masses had the right only to execute the plans of the bureaucrats. The strength of the Soviet Union would have been immeasurably greater, from the point of view of its industrial capacity, had the masses been directly involved in the formulation and execution of plans.
In addition to weakening the Soviet Union on the industrial front, Stalin has sapped the strength of the Red Army by removing and executing over ninety per cent of the highest and most qualified commanders. With those for whom black is white and white black, the removal of so many generals and admirals constitutes strengthening of the army, but people of average intelligence and not blinded by a fanatical loyalty to Stalinism will easily recognize the demoralizing effect that the removal of so many higher officers must necessarily have had on the Red Army.
Even if one should accept the preposterous and vicious falsehood that all the commanders executed were fascists it would still leave an army without the services of officers who had the necessary experience and ability to lead it against such a powerful instrument as the Germany army.
Do these facts mean that the Soviet Union, under any circumstances, would be destined to defeat? Not at all!
 

Revolutionary Policy Could Defeat Hitler
For the Soviet Union, were it under revolutionary Marxist leadership, is in the possession of a weapon that is denied to every capitalist country, the weapon of revolutionary propaganda, the powerful appeal to the masses over the heads, of their rulers. Revolutionary Marxists at the head of the Soviet Union would utilize that weapon to its fullest extent and it is this weapon that would more than compensate for the comparative military weakness of the Soviet Union.
Stalin is not capable of utilizing and will not utilize this all-powerful weapon. This is already indicated by the shocking fact that the heroic traditions of the October Revolution and of the Civil War period have not been appealed to.
Instead, the Russian workers and peasants are appealed to on the basis of traditions that have nothing to do with their glorious revolutionary past. Here are a few gems gleaned from the Daily Worker:
“Everybody knows how valiantly the Russians fought during the battle on the ice of Peipus Lake, April 5, 1242, when the Knights of the Teutonic Order were routed – the distant predecessors of today’s fascists.” (Daily Worker, June 25)
“The whole world knows of the splendid historical victory of the Russians and their allies- – the Poles and Lithuanians – near Tannenberg in the fifteenth century, in July 1410. The destiny of the Slav world was at stake then ... The German Teutonic knights threw the flower of their forces into the fight ... The battle was a fierce one. The Germans were utterly routed. From then on the Teutonic Order was shattered and went to its inglorious end ...” (Daily Worker, June 26)
“In the 16th century, the troops of Ivan the Terrible routed the German invaders in the Baltic ... The struggle for the Baltic states was a long one, running into tens of years, a struggle full of unparalleled heroism on the part of the Russians ...” (Daily Worker, June 26)
It is obvious that Stalin is avoiding anything remotely connected with the revolutionary tradition of the Russian workers. He wants to assure his capitalist allies of his respectability. Whereas Churchill and Roosevelt openly announce their hostility to Communism (which they of course confuse with Stalinism) Stalin has not a word to say about capitalism.
Indeed, the glorious traditions of the October revolution are completely alien to the Stalinist bureaucracy. But they are a living part of the Soviet Union, inspiring the Russian workers and peasants to a fierce struggle against the capitalist enemy. If the Russian masses win it will be in spite of the Stalinist bureaucracy.
 




Our Analysis of the Hitler-Stalin Pact
It is a fundamental law of politics that a major political error, if persisted in and if not corrected in time, necessarily leads into ever greater and more numerous errors until one is led to adopt a wrong political line on almost all fundamental questions.
The Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 unnerved and disoriented everyone who did not cling to the fundamental Marxist analysis, made by Trotsky, of the Soviet Union and the Stalinist bureaucracy. As our readers will recall, a minority in our own ranks (now no longer with us) jumped to the conclusion that the pact indicated a close alliance between Hitler and Stalin for the purpose of conquering and dividing the whole world, at least the British Empire.
It was quite common for all the middle-class democrats and also the minority in our ranks to speak of the Berlin-Moscow Axis being pitted against the London-Paris Axis. Their hysteria reached unbelievable heights, at the time of the invasion of “democratic” Finland (now, under the same government, fighting on the side of the Nazis).
As against all of these people our party explained the pact on the basis of Stalin’s fear of a major conflict and his anxiety to avoid it at all costs. We were careful to point out, however, that it did not follow from the fact that Stalin wanted to avoid war that war would avoid him.
We also contended that one of the aims of the Stalinist bureaucracy in sending the Red Army into Poland, the Baltic countries and Finland was to strengthen its military-strategic position. True, like all bureaucracies, the Stalinist one wanted to increase its power and prestige, but Stalin also had an eye on fortifying his military-strategic position.
Against whom? Geography answered that it could be only against Hitler. England and France had no way by which they could attack the Soviet Union while Hitler was right on the border of the Soviet Union.
To those who were not blinded by hate of Stalin it was as clear as daylight that Hitler’s designs against the Soviet Union were not given up. The Soviet Union still had raw materials that German capitalism needed and the fundamental antagonism between a Hitler Germany and the Soviet State remained. We did not hesitate to state on innumerable occasions that the Nazis would attack the Soviet Union.
It was not possible to predict exactly when and under what circumstances Hitler would attack the Soviet Union. We obviously underestimated, recently, Hitler’s urgent need for the raw materials of the Soviet Union in order to prepare for a long war against England and the United States. Unable to bring British imperialism to its knees; Hitler had to turn his guns on the Soviet Union in order to prepare himself for a long war. He certainly had intended originally to conquer England first because that would have left the Soviet Union completely at his mercy but, unable to do so, Hitler shifted his plans. The democrats and erstwhile Marxists who held the theory that Stalin and Hitler had entered into a partnership for the purpose of conquering and dividing the world, find it completely impossible to explain the sudden attack of Hitler on the Soviet Union.
 

The Fatal Line of the “Workers Party”
Let us take, for instance, the statement of the former minority of our party, issued immediately after the attack on the Soviet Union. This document of the “Workers Party” very nonchalantly states that whereas the Soviet Union up to now was part and parcel of the imperialist camp of Berlin-Moscow-Rome-Tokio, it is now part of the imperialist camp of London-Washington-Moscow. The statement clearly indicates that the Soviet Union was to be considered in the same light as Germany and Italy before Hitler’s attack and is now to be considered in the same light as England and the United States.
Having asserted this, the “Workers Party” is then confronted with the necessity of an explanation for such an unusual change in imperialist partnerships. The explanation it gives is as follows:
“Because it does not resolve its multitude of problems by the extension of its rule, but only increases the number of problems to be resolved, German fascism has now found itself forced to plan for a longer and more destructive war. This is why Hitler has now turned upon his ally of yesterday, etc. etc.”
All this about Hitler is perfectly true – but it does not follow from the “Workers Party” idea of a joint agreement on the part of Hitler and Stalin to divide the world.
For, if one claims that such a close partnership existed between Stalin and Hitler, then the fact that Hitler found himself in trouble need not and would not lead to his attacking the Soviet Union. Just as Hitler came to Mussolini’s aid when the latter was in trouble, so could Stalin have come to Hitler’s aid when such aid was needed. If Stalin had been so intimately connected with Hitler as to have agreed to divide the world with him, the most natural thing would be for Stalin to open the doors to Hitler and offer anything Hitler needed. He would give him more oil, more wheat and more of everything necessary for his partner to win. And if he did not have enough, Hitler would understand the situation and not ask for more than Stalin could give.
Is it possible to show by the example of the shift on the part of France from a partnership with English imperialism to one with German imperialism that such a shift occurred in the case of the Soviet Union? The example of France proves the exact contrary. France had to be defeated and had to establish a completely new government before shifting from one imperialist camp to another. In the case of the Soviet Union there was no defeat and no change of government. The whole situation becomes grotesque on the basis of the theory that Stalin and Hitler by the pact of August 1939 agreed to conquer and divide the world.
But those who leave the firm ground of revolutionary Marxism and persist in their errors must inevitably reach the realms of political stupidity if not of downright betrayal.
 




On the “Character” of the War
The character of the war has changed. So says the Communist Party.
The character of the war has not changed. So claims the Workers Party (Abern-Shachtman).
Diametrically opposite conclusions but both are wrong because both are the result of purely idealistic reasoning. Having left the ground of Marxist materialism, neither the Communist Party nor the Workers Party is capable of arriving at a correct analysis and adopting correct political conclusions.
To believe the Stalinist leaders, the first shot fired into Soviet territory, at the command of Hitler, had the miraculous effect of bringing about a change in the character of the war. From a war between rival imperialisms it was transformed, as far as England and the United States are concerned, into a different kind of war.
The Stalinists have not as yet described the exact character of the war but they have said enough to conclude that the war, on the part not only of the Soviet Union, but also of Great Britain and the United States is now one for democracy against fascism, for the right of nations to determine their own destiny and for the right of peoples to lead a happy and contented life. And this change occurred by virtue of the fact that the Soviet Union is now participating in the conflict.
It is not to be expected that the Stalinist leaders will furnish cogent arguments for their present contention. They simply make that assertion and expect everyone to accept it without argument. How and why did the character of the war change? Their answer is: by the entry of the Soviet Union. That of course is not an argument, for we are still left in the dark as to how the entry of the Soviet Union into the war created a change in its character.
The argument implicit in the Stalinist contention is that before the attack on the Soviet Union the war was imperialist in character because the governments conducting the war were interested in acquiring or defending colonies, markets and spheres of influence. Churchill and Roosevelt were conducting a war for imperialist purposes.
As soon as the Soviet Union was attacked Churchill and Roosevelt dropped their imperialist aims and began to struggle for democracy and the sacred rights of the peoples. What caused them to change? That is immaterial. It may be that the beloved and great Stalin used his powers to make them change. But whatever the reason was, Churchill and Roosevelt got religion, repented, became good Christians and stopped fighting an imperialist war.
From their sudden change, whatever the reason may be, it necessarily follows that imperialism is not, as Lenin taught, a stage of capitalism, but a policy of a government. Obviously, if it is a policy it call be changed over-night, if necessary. According to this Stalinist conception the character of the war is completely divorced from the character of the economy of the country waging the war. It depends upon the character and motives of the people at the head of the government.
 

Shachtman’s Method Is Like the Stalinists
Now let us examine the contention of Shachtman and his Workers Party to the effect that the character of the war has not changed. By that the Workers Party means that the Soviet Union was waging an imperialist war when it was allied with Germany and it is now waging an imperialist war as an ally of the capitalist democracies.
In this column last week I showed that, basing oneself on the theory that Hitler and Stalin were partners for the purpose of conquering and dividing the world, it becomes impossible to explain the sudden decision of Hitler to attack his partner-in-crime. Be that as it may, Hitler’s decision was made and Stalin, according to Shachtman, is now waging an imperialist war not to divide booty with Hitler but to guard his ill-gotten gains from his erstwhile ally.
Why is the Soviet Union waging an imperialist war now? The Workers Party answers: Because the Stalinist bureaucracy is playing a reactionary role. It wants to subjugate the working class of the world to the war machines of the imperialist democracies; it is fighting to retain control over territories it has seized and also “over the internal colonies of the Kremlin overlord”; it is fighting for its aristocratic privileges. The Workers Party utilizes the same method of idealistic reasoning that the Communist Party uses.
Both the Communist Party and Shachtman conceive of the character of a war as something independent of the nature of the economy of a country waging the war.
As against this idealistic method of reasoning, our party bases itself on Marxist materialism. The character of the war is determined by the nature of the economy of the countries participating in the war. Germany, Great Britain, the United States are imperialist countries, that is, their capitalist economy has reached an imperialist stage. They are therefore waging an imperialist war regardless of whether tho bad Hitler or the good Roosevelt is at the head of the government. The character of the war, as far as these countries are concerned, has not changed by the attack of Hitler on the Soviet Union. They are still imperialist countries. It is therefore impermissible for a Marxist party to support their war.
Since private property in the means of production has been destroyed in the Soviet Union and has not been reintroduced, there can be no such thing as Soviet imperialism, in the Marxist sense of the term. The Soviet Union therefore cannot be and is not waging an imperialist war even though the Stalinist bureaucracy is interested in safeguarding its own power, prestige and influence. The Soviet Union, even under Stalin, is waging a war to defend nationalized property against German imperialism. It is therefore mandatory on every class-conscious worker to defend the Soviet Union.
A deep gulf separates the reasoning of the Communist and Workers Party on the one hand and the Socialist Workers Party on the other. It is the difference between middle-class idealism and revolutionary Marxist materialism.
 




The Proponents of a Negotiated Peace
From the very beginning of the war there have been groups in both imperialist camps anxious to achieve peace. Hitler himself, after having overrun Poland and since then, has offered to enter into peace negotiations. In this country the “isolationist” section of the capitalist class has been urging and even clamoring to have Roosevelt take the initiative in starting peace negotiations. The flight of Hess, which more and more appears to have been undertaken for the purpose of sounding out the possibilities for peace negotiations (either with or without the consent of Hitler), has furnished the “isolationists” with another opportunity for demanding a negotiated peace.
From the attitude of any group on the war it is simple to deduce what its attitude will be on the question of a negotiated peace. War, as has been explained by us many times, is only a continuation of politics by other means and the policy of any political group towards war and peace has the same general pattern.
When the reactionary section of the “isolationist” wing clamors for peace it is understandable, because its “isolationism” is based primarily on two factors: (1) fear that the war will lead to revolutionary upheavals, and (2) sympathy for fascism. It is of course understood that a negotiated peace at this time would mean a victory for Hitler. The minimum Hitler would achieve would be domination of all of Europe. Another factor which plays an important role in the anxiety of reactionary forces to achieve a negotiated peace is the idea that such a peace will enable Hitler to throw his forces against the Soviet Union.
 

Norman Thomas’ Case for Negotiated Peace
Humanitarian democrats of the type of Norman Thomas must also favor a negotiated peace. In the first place war is bad, as far as these humanitarians are concerned, because it brings suffering and death. For them peace, any kind of peace, is better than war – even though Hitler should gain control of all of Europe. Then again war is bad because it threatens the existence of whatever democracy there is in this country: in their anxiety to save democracy in one country they are perfectly willing to let Hitler kill it in all other countries.
People like Thomas cannot be taken seriously because they base their politics not on the basis of a realistic analysis of the forces actually at work, but on their vain hopes and desires. There is no more disgusting spectacle than a “Socialist” Norman Thomas, gushing all over for peace, making an alliance with people like Lindbergh, who is controlled by the most reactionary forces on the political scene.
 

Why Roosevelt Now Opposes Peace
Against a negotiated peace at this time is the section of the ruling class led by Roosevelt. This section, anxious to destroy the most dangerous rival of American imperialism and confident that it is able to do so, sees no reason for entering into negotiations for peace. As far as the British imperialists are concerned, a negotiated peace at the present would mean a serious defeat. They have to continue the struggle so long as there is a chance for victory – although even a victory means in reality a victory for American imperialism.
Should the war drag on, however, both Roosevelt and Churchill may be compelled to accept the idea of a negotiated peace.
And just as all groups in the camp of imperialism adopt an attitude on negotiated peace which is in fundamental agreement with their attitude on the war, so does our policy toward negotiated peace flow naturally and inevitably from our attitude toward the war. Better still, our attitude on negotiated peace follows from our basic attitude towards capitalist society in its imperialist stage.
 

Our Position on Negotiated Peace
It must be understood that a negotiated peace or any kind of peace arrived at by imperialist rivals can be only an imperialist peace just as a war fought by imperialist rivals can be only an imperialist war. Both have as their motive force the question of colonies, raw materials, markets and spheres of influence. From this basic factor it follows that our position on a negotiated peace is the same as our position with reference to the war. We are opposed to both because they are imperialist in character.
Naturally it is not sufficient to state this basic proposition and leave it as it is. Further explanation is essential. Every demagogue, every enemy of ours, will attempt to utilize our basic position for the purpose of convincing people that since we are opposed to a negotiated peace we are for a continuation of the war.
While our basic position toward an imperialist peace is the same as our attitude to imperialist war, our tactics with reference to a negotiated peace would differ considerably from our tactics with reference to imperialist war. Against an imperialist war we carry on a constant campaign in the sense that we attempt to mobilize the masses against dragging the country into such a war. And at a certain stage during the war we may use the slogan of peace.
We would not carry on a similar agitation against a negotiated peace. We could not possibly utilize a slogan of “stop the peace.” It is true that a representative of our party in Congress would vote both, against a declaration of imperialist war and against the acceptance of an imperialist peace. But in his explanation he would make clear the reasons why he votes against that “peace.”
We can sum up as follows: They are really not against war who are not for the overthrow of the system that produces war; they are not really for peace who are not for the overthrow of the system which makes peace impossible. They only are against war and for peace who continue the class struggle both during imperialist war arid during imperialist peace.
 




Rudolf Hess Refutes Max Eastman
As if to help refute the arguments of Max Eastman in his letter to the New York Times of May 11, Rudolf Hess decided to fly to England. In this letter Eastman takes up the cudgels against those who contend that for the sake of retaining democracy in this country it is best to stay out of the war even if England should lose because of the failure of the United States to enter the conflict. Norman Thomas is an example of the people against whom Eastman levels his arguments and it is not very difficult for Eastman to make a good case against the believers in the possibility of democracy in one country.
We would not interfere in this controversy were it not for the fact that Eastman also attempts to prove that the war is a struggle of tyranny against freedom. And it is in this connection that the flight of Hess can be adduced to refute Eastman. For no matter what theory one accepts as an explanation of the sensational flight one fact stands out: Hess came to England to meet an old friend, a man of wealth, a member of the English ruling class. He came to meet him and undoubtedly many others, whose company he had enjoyed prior to the war, for the purpose of discussing peace. He felt that the war had not destroyed that friendship; it had merely made it difficult to continue their common sports.
It can be taken for granted that Rudolf Hess has not suddenly been transformed into a democrat. Assuming that he had a disagreement with Hitler, it certainly was not centered around the question of democracy. If he has any intentions to discuss peace terms with his British friends it can also be taken for granted that no question of transforming Germany into a democracy is involved. Hess knows very well something that Eastman has chosen to forget: the British ruling class, the class that conducts the war and will make the peace, if it will ever get to that point, has absolutely no objection to the Nazis because of their theories about democracy.
 

What Eastman Does Not Prove
How does Eastman try to prove that the war is a “struggle between democracy and tyranny ... between two ways of life”? Simply by listing twenty one traits characteristic of totalitarianism. He shows that fascism destroys freedom and all intellectual life, is guilty of lying and hypocrisy, destroys the labor movement, etc. etc. All true enough.
But admitting that everything that Eastman says about fascism is true and assuming even that none of these traits can be found in the democratic capitalist countries, the question still remains: what have these characteristics of fascism to do with this war? Eastman fails to prove, he does not even attempt to prove, that on the part of England the war is being fought either to exterminate these characteristics of fascism or even to prevent them from crossing the channel.
By characterizing fascism, one does not prove that the motive force of the War is a struggle between tyranny and freedom. Assuming that the Germans all had bad table manners while the English were all veritable Chesterfields, that would not prove that the war is a crusade for good table manners.
Not once did any influential member of the British ruling class suggest that England declare war against Germany because the Nazis did not practice the precepts of political democracy. Eastman considers Winston Churchill the champion of democracy and refers to his speeches and to Hitler’s Mein Kampf as examples of the deep contrast between the two ways of life.
 

Eastman Conceals the Crucial Facts
But Eastman either does not know or does not care to reveal the well-known fact that Churchill placed himself on record as a great admirer of both Mussolini and Hitler. But that was prior to the war and Churchill did not have in mind that he would some day become the champion of democracy.
Why is it that Eastman also fails to mention the role the English ruling class played in helping Hitler consolidate his position in Germany? How is it that he also forgets the fact that neither Churchill nor Roosevelt rushed to defend the Spanish Loyalist government against attack by the fascists? In that struggle, by the way, the revolutionary Marxists were in favor of giving material support to the Spanish Loyalists because we recognized it to be a struggle between fascism and capitalist democracy and between the two we prefer the latter. That was a civil war between the forces of fascism and those of capitalist democracy and revolutionary realists are not indifferent to the outcome of such a war.
But where is there any proof that this war is being fought for capitalist democracy against fascism? Every bit of evidence proves conclusively that this is not a war on behalf of democracy. Does not the conduct of the British ruling class prior to the war prove it? Was the war by the anti-Semitic Polish ruling class also a war for democracy? Did the unlamented Metaxas, the tyrant and murderer of thousands of Greek workers also fight for democracy? And did Yugoslavia raise its banner on behalf of democracy?
It is of course impossible to say beforehand what the outcome of this war will be. But one thing is certain. If it continues for a long while without a definite decision and without the intervention of the proletariat, a negotiated peace will be arrived at. That negotiated peace will not have anything to do with democracy and freedom. It will have everything to do with colonies and spheres of influence.
For this is an imperialist war, a war, that is, where the motive force is the question of colonies and markets and raw materials. The political system of the rivals may differ but that is not what is involved.
It is absolutely essential for the working class and all those interested in progress to destroy fascism. But it cannot and will not be done by supporting this war fought for colonies and the right to exploit millions of colonial peoples.
 




The Stalinists Ignore Fascism
In this column last week it was pointed out that both the Stalinists and the group behind Lindbergh, for different reasons to be sure, completely ignore, in their anti-war propaganda, the question that agitates the minds of millions of workers. This is the question of what to do about the danger of fascism represented, as far as these millions of workers are concerned, by a possible victory of Hitler.
If there is any additional evidence to prove that the Stalinist leadership side-steps this question it can be found in the May Day Manifesto published in the Daily Worker. In. this lengthy document this question is not even mentioned, let alone discussed. It is hardly believable but it is the truth that, at this time when the danger of fascism looms large in the minds of the workers, the word itself occurs in the manifesto only once. And then very casually and with reference to some acts of Roosevelt.
As against the Lindbergh group and the Stalinists who ignore the question of fascism, the pro-war New Dealers led by Roosevelt, and the anti-war Socialist Workers Party never for a moment leave the question of fascism out of consideration. For altogether different reasons it nevertheless remains a fact that in the propaganda of the Rooseveltians as well as in our propaganda the problem of the relationship of fascism to the war plays a tremendously important role.
 

Roosevelt’s Use of the Fascist Menace
Roosevelt and the New Dealers, including the Social-Democrats, utilize the fear the workers have of fascism in order to tie the working masses to their war efforts. All the forces clamoring for war play it up as a war for democracy against fascism. Some are absolutely cynical and understand very well that fascism has nothing to do with the basic causes of this war and they know that if the United States goes into the actual fighting it will not do so in order to defeat fascism but to protect its imperialist interests. It would be naive to believe that the reactionary Democrats of the South and the reactionary Republicans of the North are interested in democracy.
A great many other people, it must be admitted, are absolutely sincere in considering this war as one for democracy and therefore in advocating American participation in it. The sincerity of some and. insincerity of others have little or nothing to do with, the question. The fact remains that only by picturing this war as one against fascism is the government able to obtain the support of the masses for its war efforts. How else could the support of the masses be obtained?
It is undoubtedly true that the vast majority pf the English workers support Churchill because, they believe that they are fighting for democracy against fascism. The stubborn courage of the English workers in going through the hell-fire of constant bombing can be explained only on the assumption that they are willing to fight to the death against a fascist victory. The leaders of their organizations have not shown them any way to fight fascism other than by supporting Churchill.
When Roosevelt will decide to commence actual fighting he will use the same methods used by the ruling group in England to obtain the willing cooperation of the working masses. He has already placed trade union leaders in governmental boards and he will do it to a. greater extent when actual shooting will start. It is to the trade union leadership that he will assign the greatest responsibility for convincing the workers that-this is a war against fascism.
 

Our Program Against Fascism
Our party, in its own way, constantly stresses the connection between fascism and the war. In the first place we emphasize over and over again that this is not a war for democracy against fascism and that Roosevelt, in dragging us into the war, is not doing so because he fears fascism but to defend and extend the interests of American capitalism. The policy of aiding Britain “short, of war” or by means of war does not have the altruistic purpose of defending British democracy but of defeating the most dangerous imperialist rival of American capitalism.
How often have we said it, and we shall continue to repeat it, that fascism is a product of the capitalist system and even if the capitalist democracies should win, fascism would not be destroyed and the danger of fascism would be just as great if not greater than it is at present.
In the second place, we take into consideration the legitimate fear of the workers of a possible victory of Hitler and all that he stands for. Opposition to the imperialist war is absolutely imperative for every Marxist, but he who refuses to take into consideration the fear the workers have of fascism- and all, that it means and does not adapt his agitation and propaganda to that fact, is not a Marxist but a sectarian.
Unlike the Stalinists we are not at all afraid to tackle that problem because we hav e the answer to the question that is troubling the minds of the worker, the question of how to defeat fascism. The sum and substance of our program to defeat fascism here and abroad is the socialist revolution. Only a Workers’ and Farmers’ government can wage a successful war against fascism.
To sum up:

The group behind Lindbergh ignores the problem of fascism because it sympathizes with and has strong tendencies towards fascism.
 
The Stalinist leadership ignores the problem because it has no revolutionary program to solve it.
 
Roosevelt and his followers constantly emphasize the problem in order to tie the workers to the war efforts of American imperialism.
 
Our party brings the problem to the fore by stressing the necessity for the workers to take over governmental power.

Between us and every other group there is the vast gulf existing between those who support capitalism and those who want to destroy it and thus destroy fascism.
 




[Fascism in Germany]
It is interesting and instructive to see what connection the various groupings in this country make between the war and fascism. In their propaganda with reference to the war, how do they utilize the fact that Germany is in the hands of the Nazis?
While we deny that this war is a struggle of democracy against fascism, it is impossible to deny that Germany is in the grip of fascism. Fascism therefore enters as an important factor in the sense that various groups utilize or fail to utilize it in their attitude and propaganda in relation to the war.
Two political tendencies either ignore the existence of fascism entirely or relegate it to a place of secondary importance. They do not attempt to furnish an answer to the problem agitating the minds of the workers: How to defeat fascism in Germany and therefore prevent it from conquering this country? An analysis of the attitude of the group that has shoved Lindbergh to the front as its spokesman and the attitude of the Stalinist leadership shows that these two groups are almost alike in so far as they give no clue to the solution of the problem mentioned above.
 

Lindbergh and Stalinists Have No Answer on Fight Against Fascism
The Stalinist press is exceedingly anxious at present to distinguish itself from Lindbergh. In the early days of the war there was a distinct tendency on the part of the Stalinist leadership to make advances to Lindbergh, but the decisive German victories in Europe and the consequent shift of policy on the part of Stalin brought the flirtation of the Stalinists with Lindbergh to a halt. Lindbergh’s fascist leanings and connections was also an important factor in the Stalinist turn away from him. They ran the risk of losing too many of their supporters by making an alliance with Lindbergh and his friends.
In the speech Lindbergh delivered in New York on April 23, he did not say a word about fascism. He confined himself to what he termed the practical question as to whether or not the United States, by helping England, can prevent a German victory. Whether he is competent to deal with this question and whether he is correct in replying to it in the negative are immaterial. The important point is that he ignored completely the question of fascism. By ignoring it he says in effect that so far as he is concerned, he has absolutely nothing against it.
Let it not be understood that Lindbergh and his group of fascist admirers are fifth-columnists in the sense that they would like to deliver this country into the clutches of Hitler. Such fifth columnists can exist only in a small country that has to subject itself to one or the other of the imperialist camps. No important figure in this country, no matter how great an admirer of Hitler he may be, would for one moment consent to having Hitler dominate the United States. The group behind Lindbergh wants American capitalism to play not only an independent but a dominant role in world affairs.
While Lindbergh stated that he would consider the defeat of the British Empire a tragedy, he did so from the point of view of one who realizes that the existence of the British Empire is an excellent thing for the continued existence of the supremacy of imperialism. There is also no doubt that his group would gladly pick up a few of the most important pieces of a defeated British Empire. From the same general, point of view the group behind Lindbergh would consider a defeat of Hitler a tragedy. That might lead to some very serious consequences to the stability of the capitalist system. The ideal for Lindbergh is a negotiated peace where the three powerful capitalist ruling classes of the United States, of England and of Germany would work harmoniously to exploit the rest of the world – naturally with American capitalism getting the lion’s share. This is the program and the hope of all the appeasers.
If no negotiated peace is possible then Lindbergh obviously prefers a German victory. He does not say so specifically but no other conclusion is possible. His preference is not motivated by pro-Germanism but by pro-fascism. A victory of Hitler means that the “wave of the future” comes that much closer to this country. Not in the sense that Hitler will conquer this country but because the idea of fascism will gain tremendous support.
 

The Stalinist Attitude Toward Fascism
If Lindbergh’s silence about fascism indicates that he would like to see that system introduced into this country, the Stalinist silence with reference to the same problem indicates that they have no program for fighting fascism effectively. I do not. mean to say that the Stalinist press is silent about fascism in general. I mean that the Stalinist leadership, in its attitude and propaganda with reference to the war, does not attempt to show what the workers should do in order to defeat fascism.
Incontrovertible proof of that statement exists in the program of the American Peace Mobilization; which must be considered the official program of the Stalinists. This program does not say a word about the problem of fascism and the war.
Again a warning is necessary. We do not claim that the ignoring of the problem by the Stalinist leadership indicates that it has the same attitude as Lindbergh and his group. Surely the vast majority of Communist party members and sympathizers are bitter foes of fascism. But, so far as the Stalinist leaders are concerned, they are Stalinists first and foremost, that is, they fight for Stalin and no more. Everything else is secondary.
The Stalinist leadership ignores the problem, because it has no answer to it. An effective answer can be made only by those who, like ourselves, see in the taking pf power by the working class the only road to destroy fascism everywhere. Only the revolutionary camp can give such an answer. The Stalinist leadership, tied as it is to Stalin’s foreign policy, can givto no answer to this all-important problem. That is why the Stalinist leadership, like Lindbergh’s group, say nothing about it.
 




Why Is Stalin Premier Now?
Why did Stalin appoint himself Premier or Chairman of the Council of Peoples’ Commissars of the USSR?
Formulating the question in this manner brings out the point that Stalin’s assumption of the office of Premier is more important than the fact that Molotov was thereby removed from one of his offices. Had someone else displaced Molotov it would have been the removal of Molotov and not the fact that a certain person was substituted for him that would have to be considered as the important factor. As it is, it is Stalin’s assumption of the office that deserves the greatest attention.
Not one but several factors must be taken into consideration to explain Stalin’s decision. There is one explanation, however, that we shall absolutely ignore and that is Duranty’s idea that Stalin has of a sudden lost his modesty. Since that profound delver into the Russian soul makes the statement that Stalin never assumed any office because of modesty, Duranty must be saying that now Stalin has for some reason or other divested himself of that modesty.
Many interpret Stalin’s move as a purge of Molotov. That factor cannot be ignored. Molotov’s wife was removed as a candidate on the Central Committee of the party at the 18th Party Conference; this appeared to indicate that Molotov was already on the skids. He is still Commissar of Foreign Affairs, however, and if it is Stalin’s intention to put Molotov where Litvinov and Voroshilov are at present, it will probably not be long before Molotov’s request to be relieved of that office on the ground of ill health or some other reason will be presented to Stalin who will very graciously grant that request. But, while the desire to remove Molotov may be a factor, it does not in the least explain why Stalin should not have appointed someone else instead of appointing himself.
And if the Kremlin autocrat has decided to discard Molotov, it must in all probability also mean that he has decided to change the policy with which Molotov has been connected, just as his removal of Litvinov was meant to announce a change from the policy of collective security. What new policy can he have in mind? Either to throw in his lot with the democratic imperialists or else to become part of the Axis. But the latter course would not constitute a change of policy of such a nature as to demand the removal of Molotov. It would only be an extension of the policy followed since the Stalin-Hitler pact. Only a decision to join the democracies could explain the removal of Molotov if a change in policy was what determined that removal. And such a change is hardly probable at this time when Hitler is still riding high.
 

A New Agreement with Hitler
Another agreement between Stalin and Hitler seems to be in the cards, an agreement whereby Hitler, as Duranty cynically puts it, would give Stalin some wool off the backs of the Persian lambs and take all of the Middle East for himself. Just as Stalin received part of Poland, the Baltic countries, part of Rumania and of Finland, so would Hitler give him something of Iran or Afghanistan or some other concession in return for a free hand in the Near and Middle East.
But even if Stalin intends to change his policy Molotov could be removed and someone else placed in his position. Furthermore Molotov would then also be removed as Foreign Commissar. Can it be that Stalin has appointed himself because, having killed off every able person he has no one to take Molotov’s place? That would hardly be a real obstacle, for he could find some puppet to replace Molotov just as he found puppets to replace people more capable than Molotov. Stalin does not demand abilities but a willingness to take orders.
It would seem, then, that neither his desire to remove Molotov nor his intention to alter his course could explain the fact that Stalin appointed himself as Premier. Certainly they are not primary factors in Stalin’s latest step.
It must be taken for granted that Stalin’s appointment of himself indicates the existence of a serious situation confronting the Soviet bureaucracy, both internally and foreign. Even though everyone knows that important decisions are made only by Stalin, Stalin’s formula has been to blame bad conditions not on the policies but on their execution. In a very serious situation the bureaucracy would want to create the impression that the great Stalin himself is now going to participate actively in carrying out decisions. It may also be argued that, now that Stalin is officially part of the government, decisions will be arrived at more quickly and the seriousness of the situation demands quick decisions.
 

Stalin’s Personal Character
Nor can the personal factor be ignored. It is worth noting that Stalin has played quite an open role both in the pact with Hitler and more so in the pact with Matsuoka. The idea of playing a role similar to that of Hitler and Mussolini must have come to him many times. While manipulating behind the scenes is more in keeping with Stalin’s character, the more open part played by his fellow-dictators has its advantages. The stage may very well be in the process of preparation for Premier Stalin to meet Chancellor Hitler.
Aside from Stalin’s motives in taking the step that he did, it is an indication that the Communist Party no longer exists in the sense of its being a living and functioning instrument. It is true that Lenin also occupied the position of Chairman of the Council of Peoples’ Commissars at the time when the party was everything in the Soviet Union. But when one takes into consideration what has happened to the party since Stalin came to power, one must conclude that Stalin sees no sense in being the head of an organization that has no life in it. As Premier he becomes the official head of the bureaucratic caste which in reality has all the power that the party once had. After Stalin got rid of the party he became Premier.
He thus stepped into the office that Lenin once held. And by doing so makes it more clear than ever that his role is directly contrary to that of Lenin.
 



The Issues in the Trial

[Introductory Remarks]

A Warning on the Dangers of Prejudice

The Issues in This Case Are Crystal Clear

Documents versus Verbal Testimony

Prosecution Emphasizes Certain Pamphlets

What Socialism Can Do for Humanity

Our Aim Is to Establish a Socialist Society

What Is the Marxist Conception of Social Laws?

The Class Struggle in Society Today

Capitalism in Decline Throughout the World

We Seek to Organize “the Immense Majority
in the Interest of the Immense Majority”

What We Mean by Majority

What the Seeking of a Majority Means

Reactionaries Will Instigate Violence Against Majority

Historic Examples of Violence by Reactionaries

Why We Are Revolutionary Socialists

Our Anti-War Opinions Are Being Prosecuted

Our Attitude Toward Imperialist War

Fascism Is the Product of Decaying Capitalism

The Proletarian Military Policy of Our Party

Military Training Under Trade Union Control

Part 3
 



Darkness at Noon
by Arthur Koestler
267 pages. Macmillan Publishers. $2.00. 1941
This time the attempt to answer the question – Why did they confess? – is made in the form of a novel. Ever since renowned leaders of the Russian revolution were brought into a Moscow court and startled the whole world by their eagerness to plead guilty to all the crimes in the counter-revolutionary calendar, many people have claimed that no satisfactory explanation has been given of their conduct. In Darkness at Noon, Arthur Koestler provides us with his answer to the all-engrossing riddle.
It would be more accurate to say that Koestler gives us his solution with reference to one type of defendant in the Moscow frame-ups. For he intimates that some of the defendants might have “confessed” because of torture or because of threats to their families or because of promises to spare their lives. In Rubashov, the main character of the novel, the author deals with an educated and cultured Old Bolshevik who played an important role in the Bolshevik Party from its very beginning and in the Russian revolution. And since Rubashov typifies practically all of the chief defendants in the trials it is correct to say that the author attempts to explain the confessions of all of them, such as Bukharin, Radek, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rakovsky, etc.
Anyone who has studied the trials, knows the history of the individuals involved and, above all, understands the history of the Bolshevik Party and the causes of its degeneration can have no hesitation in concluding that Koestler’s attempted solution is a complete failure.
 
Koestler’s Explanation Worthless
That the reasons for the disproved and unbelievable confessions can form the subject-matter of a novel and can, perhaps, best be explained in a novel can be taken for granted. But it must be written not only by a great artist who can probe into the psychological depths of the individual but by one who understands Marxist politics. In the form of a novel the author is able to present (and if he is a real craftsman, in an artistic way) many psychological factors that would be out of place in a political tract. But all of the interesting psychological factors must revolve around and be connected with a correct basic theory explaining the social conditions and their causes at the time of the trials. Let the novelist ignore those conditions or assume an incorrect theory in explaining them and his excursions into the psychic processes of his characters, while interesting and even offering elements of truth, cease to have any real value as far as explaining the motives and actions of the defendants is concerned.
Almost all of the reviews dealing with the book conclude that it is a great piece of literature. It is difficult to understand why, unless the reviewers have been convinced by the author’s solution of the mystery of the confessions. They are overawed by the superficially dazzling psychological analysis of Rubashov as he argues with himself whether to sign or not to sign the document which will constitute his confession at the public trial. The book in many spots is quite dull and since the explanation advanced for the confessions is more than nine-tenths false, the novel has no value. It must be reviewed only because it raises important problems concerning the nature of a Bolshevik party and its alleged amoral character.
Reduced to the simplest formulations (and doing this may distort the author’s theory to some extent) the central thesis of the novel is as follows: Rubashov, an intellectual of long-standing in the Bolshevik Party, is arrested for “oppositional activities”; he capitulates and “confesses” to everything his jailors indicate, because he thinks that the advancement of those ideas in which he believes and for which the party stands demands that he confess.
“Questions of personal pride; prejudices such as exist elsewhere against certain forms of self-abasement; personal feelings of tiredness, disgust and shame – are to be cut off root and branch ...”
In deciding to plead guilty to any crime designated by the bureaucrats Rubashov argues that he is simply carrying out to its logical conclusion the fundamental principle of the Bolshevik Party, even in the days of Lenin, that the end justifies the means.
We are here confronted with the stock accusation made by all the ex-radicals who have seen the error of their ways and have embraced “democracy,” to the effect that the crimes of Stalin are the logical and inescapable consequences of the party regime under Lenin and Trotsky. It is this idea, that Stalinism is the inevitable outgrowth of Leninism and even of Marxism, that is used most frequently as a justification by those who have turned their backs not only on Stalinism but also on revolutionary Marxism.
 
Bolshevism Has Nothing in Common with Stalinism
Not one of the recent converts to capitalist democracy has shown or even attempted to show how the theories and practices of the Bolshevik Party under Lenin gave birth to the crimes of Stalin. It is enough for most of them simply to state that Lenin’s party adopted the principle that the end justifies the means and that therefore it was inevitable that the degeneration of the party under Stalinism would ensue.
What means did the party of Lenin use that were ignoble and criminal? Did any party member in the days of Lenin ever suggest the possibility of having a member confess to counter-revolutionary crimes that he was never guilty of in order to serve the interests of the party? Was there ever a suggestion ‘that torture to obtain false confession, even from class enemies, was justifiable? What conduct was ever justified by Lenin’s party, what principle was ever enunciated in Lenin’s days, which could by any reasonable deduction be considered as the starting point of an inevitable degeneration into the practices of Stalin?
The social-democrats are fond of referring to the advice of Lenin to have party members do anything and everything necessary to fool and deceive trade union bureaucrats anxious to expel revolutionists from the trade unions. Here we must state frankly that revolutionary morals demand that every revolutionist deceive the oppressor and his servants in order to be able to continue with his work. No one can ever convince us that this type of “cheating” and deception will inevitably lead to Stalinist degeneration.
There is, of course, and there can be no general principle enabling one to determine, in all cases, what means are justifiable in the pursuit of an end which one considers as great and noble. In general the struggle for socialism can be achieved only through, and therefore demands, a propaganda that is based on accuracy and truth. They who fight for a cause that is progressive are compelled to base themselves on the truth and are compelled to reject methods that are despicable. All revolutionary propaganda that has as its aim to convince the masses to follow a revolutionary course can, in the long run, have no effect if it is based on lies, half-truths and distortions.
But to conclude from this general principle that a revolutionist, at all times, must tell the truth, even to his enemies anxious to betray and destroy his revolutionary activities, would mean in practice to give up all revolutionary activities.
There is no denying that revolutionists can make serious errors on some tactical question. It is quite probable that things were done by members of the Bolshevik Party or by the party itself during the Russian revolution that can now be seen to have been mistakes. If, in the heat of the struggle, some Bolshevik is unnecessarily cruel to an adversary it is absurd to attribute it to the alleged fact that the party believes in the principle of the end justifying the means.
Unfortunately no one has discovered a method by which the class struggle can be conducted in a gentlemanly way, according to rules and regulations. Bloodshed is terrible, cruelty is abominable, and it is regrettable that the oppressed masses, in their struggle to advance, have been and will be guilty of excesses. The revolutionists as well as the moralists can regret that fact but the revolutionists will proceed with the struggle to advance the interests of the masses and do their best to prevent excesses while the moralists will do nothing to advance the interests of the masses.
It is only the Stalinist bureaucrat in a novel, written by one who does not understand the real problems involved, who can argue that, because Gandhi’s pacifism is of service to the masters, therefore Stalin’s cruelty and violence against the millions of peasants and against the proletarian revolutionists are justified. The revolutionary Marxist says: Gandhi’s pacifism serves the interests of the British imperialists and their Indian servants while Stalin’s violence serves the interests of the Stalinist bureaucracy,
 
Bourgeois Moralists Slander Bolshevism
Our moralists point to the fact that show-trials were held even under Lenin and Trotsky. But these show-trials were not Moscow trials. There is nothing wrong in utilizing a trial of the enemies of the Soviet regime in order to show the masses the real character of those enemies. What was wrong with the Moscow trials was not that they were showtrials but that they were frame-ups against revolutionists; they were based on false evidence obtained by torture.
Does that mean that frame-ups and false evidence would be justified if used by revolutionists against counter-revolutionists? By no means! Revolutionists would not have to use these methods. If anyone could prove that they were actually used we would have no hesitation in condemning them. A mistake could be made in some individual case but it is excluded that a system of torture and frame-ups would be introduced by revolutionists against any group.
The author of the novel makes the intellectual Old Bolshevik Rubashov argue on the basis of the liberal moralist. One must choose between Gandhi’s pacifism and Stalin’s cruelty; between personal integrity and complete indifference to the moral character of any act so long as it serves the interests of the cause; between decency and reason. Rubashov who by nature prefers decency and personal integrity finally is convinced that he should choose reason and social utility and therefore confesses to crimes he never committed. What complete and utter nonsense!
Unquestionably in the course of a great upheaval delicate and perplexing personal problems may confront an individual member of the party, A relative or close friend is found to be on the other side of the fence. Shall one spare him because of that ? It is quite possible that some innocent person is accused of counter-revolutionary activities. Shall one spend valuable time in defending him? Some members of the party will act one way; others in another way. What is infuriating, because it is false, is the proposition that the Bolshevik Parry demanded that the sentiment of kindness and decency be destroyed. To permit such a sentiment to violate one’s revolutionary duty, to endanger the revolution because of sentimental reasons is one thing, to suppress sentimental kindness and be cruel as a matter of principle is quite another thing. The Bolshevik Party has never and will never demand that.

In the whole book there is not a single reference to the actual conditions that compelled Rubashov to argue with himself – whether to confess or not to confess. The existence of a bureaucratic caste, the conditions that led to the growth of that caste, the struggle of the bureaucracy to preserve its power and privileges – of this there is nothing. A reader innocent of these questions would never guess that there was such a thing as a bureaucracy that was responsible for Rubashov’s arrest.
 
Why Did the Defendants Confess?
Assuredly the novelist is not obligated to write a thesis on the social and political developments in the Soviet Union but if he undertakes to write an explanation of the “confession” of an Old Bolshevik without taking those developments into consideration then his explanation is worthless. It is more correct to say that the author has a political explanation for the “confession” but one that has no value since it is based on the proposition that some original sin existed within the very make-up of the old Bolshevik Party.
A great novelist studying the psychological reaction of those called upon to confess and who do so would not leave the reader ignorant of the basic factors explaining the demand for the confession and the yielding to the demand.
That the character of the individual confessing is an important factor is not to be denied. In the last analysis that explains why some Old Bolsheviks preferred to die without confessing while others confessed. But still it is necessary to explain why people who in their youth showed readiness to die for an ideal played such a miserable role in their old age. What happened in the years after the revolution that made possible the march of Old Bolsheviks before Stalin’s appointed judge and their sickening self-betrayals? The skillful novelist would have shown the successful revolution, the creation of a bureaucracy of which these Old Bolsheviks were a part, the softening and weakening of their characters by virtue of their position in the bureaucracy.
Rubashov ceased to be a Bolshevik at the time when he either participated in a scurrilous attack on Trotsky or when he kept quiet in the face of such an attack. He is not in the tradition of Lenin who tolerates falsehoods against a loyal revolutionist. There may be polemical exaggerations but they can easily be distinguished from frame-ups.
And once one capitulates because of possible hardships – and the hardships for a revolutionist under Stalin were infinitely greater than for a revolutionist under the Czar – then the road to any confession in order to avoid torture is opened up.
The element of torture is practically excluded as the motive for Rubashov’s confession. The theory of the author that the defendants in the Moscow trials confessed because they believed it to be necessary for the good of the party, falls to pieces, for the simple reason that they were under arrest and understood that they would remain so unless they confessed. Were these confessions obtained from men who were free and who knew that nothing would happen to them if they did not confess, then there would be some plausibility to the theory advanced by the novelist. Not until one shows that a party member consented beforehand to be arrested and to go through the whole mumbo-jumbo of confessing, knowing all the time that nothing would happen to him if he refused, could we take such a theory seriously.
So long as they who confess know that the least they will suffer is prison, if they do not confess, then it is absurd to argue that they confessed voluntarily for the sake of the party’s welfare.
A novelist could make out a good case for the theory that some who confessed argued themselves into believing that they did so to advance the welfare of the party. The human mind will go to great lengths to rationalize and create excuses. But then one must not confuse the excuse with the real motive. The real motive for the confession was to avoid torture for themselves and their families. Not to avoid dying because that is exactly what the prisoners wanted. The real hold that the GPU had on the prisoners was their fear that they would be kept alive under conditions where life was so dreadful. The reason for the failure of the prisoners to renounce their confessions publicly at the time of the trial was not that they would be killed but the fear that they would not be killed. “If you say that the confession is false you will not be afforded the peace of death but the torture of living” was the ultimatum the GPU gave the prisoners.

The individual bureaucrats in the form of the jailors are dealt with not as bureaucrats fighting against people who they fear might possibly create an opposition and thus endanger the position of the bureaucracy but as people who are fanatically devoted to a great idea and who proudly boast of their belief that the end justifies the means. The bureaucrats of the novel are not fighting for their power and privileges but for a great end.
If you believe Koestler these bureaucrats will seriously argue that in a controversy as to the advisability of building large or small submarines, Stalin must kill those who oppose him on that question because they who advocate large submarines endanger the defense of the Soviet Union. The point is not that some fanatical, fifth-rate bureaucrat might not make such an argument but it is presented seriously as a logical and necessary development of the party’s alleged dictum that the end justifies the means. And there is more nonsense of a similar character in this novel that has been proclaimed as great by the ignorant, the naive, and by those who have turned their backs on revolutionary Marxism to embrace a dying capitalist democracy.
In his writings on the Moscow trials, Trotsky has given us a valid explanation of the “confessions.” He who wants to write a great novel explaining the confessions must first understand Trotsky’s political explanations.
 






This is the second installment of the brilliant final argument of chief defense counsel and defendant. Albert Goldman to the jury in the Minneapolis “sedition” trial. The initial portion of this address, published in last week’s Militant, included a conclusive refutation of the federal prosecution’s charges that the Socialist Workers Party and its program constitute a “conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence.” In years to come, this speech will be read and studied as a model both of a principled defense of the rights of working-class political minorities, and as an historic exposition of the ideas of Marxian socialism.



* * *

What We Mean by Majority
Mr. Anderson read an article of mine which I introduced into evidence just before closing the case for the defense. It was published in The Militant of March 29, 1941.
In order to prove that we did not believe in convincing a majority of the people, Mr. Anderson showed that in that article I used the term “majority” without mentioning the people and at other times I used the term “majority of the working class.”
What do I mean when I use the phrase “the majority of the working class?” Read the section that I have already cited from the Communist Manifesto. Read in my pamphlet, What is Socialism, that section where I state specifically that there are probably no more than three million people who can be considered capitalists in the United States. Read that section in my pamphlet which says that the working class in an industrially developed country like the United States, constitutes a majority of the people. And then read that section where I say that the workers, even though they are in a majority, must have the help of the middle classes, especially of the farmers, in order to achieve victory, and you will see that I cannot mean, what Mr. Anderson says I mean, that is, a majority of only one class, a minority of the people.
The industrial wage workers are the ones to take the lead in the struggle against the capitalist system. In the first place, they come more directly in conflict with the owners of industry – in the big steel mills, auto plants, mines, etc. In the second place, the industrial wage workers are used to working together – cooperation is the key word under socialism and the industrial wage workers in their factories learn to work cooperatively. They understand that it is necessary under conditions of modern industry to work cooperatively in order to build an automobile or a complicated machine.
The farmer, on the other hand, working on his own land, tends to be individualistic. It is necessary for the workers to get the support of the farmers. In my pamphlet I state that in a socialist society the farmers will finally come to realize the advisability of cooperative farming. The point that I want to emphasize is that whenever we use the expression “the majority” or “the majority of the people” or “the majority of the working class” we mean one and the same thing – the same thing that I read to you from the Communist Manifesto:
“All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority in the interest of the immense majority.”
 

What the Seeking of a Majority Means
I am certain that, if the government in this case were simply interested in bringing into court possible violators of a law, it would have moved for a dismissal of the case immediately upon learning that the Socialist Workers Party aims to get a majority of the people to accept its ideas. If counsel for the government did not know our position before, they should by now have wired Washington for permission to dismiss the case because the phrase majority of people settles all questions as far as our guilt of advocating the violent overthrow of the government is concerned.
I presume, ladies and gentlemen, that you do not think the defendants are insane. You may not agree with us; you may think that we are Utopians, but I believe you consider us sane people. Only insane people, however, would be capable of actually preferring and desiring violence. If there is an individual who says that he wants a violent overthrow of the government, a violent transformation from the capitalist system to the socialist system, he belongs in the insane asylum.
And if, as is shown by our writings, we want a majority of the people to accept our ideas, why should we advocate a violent change from capitalism to socialism? What does advocate mean? To incite, to urge. We would then be convicted of saying: Even though we shall get a majority of the people behind us, we still want to overthrow the government by violence. The fact that we want a majority of the people to accept our ideas proves beyond all doubt that we want a peaceful transformation.
I want to repeat this fundamental proposition because it is all-important: If we want a majority of the people, as we do, to accept our ideas, then we must be in favor of a peaceful “destruction” of the government. Does peaceful destruction sound paradoxical? Not if you understand it correctly in the sense that it means the removal of certain persons ruling on the basis of certain principles, and replacing them by other persons obligating themselves to rule upon different principles. When government counsel failed to
stress the fact that the Socialist Workers Party desires to have a majority of the people on its side, it could only be explained on the hypothesis that Washington in this case was out for a conviction regardless of the evidence.
The only interpretation that honest people can accept of the idea of violence as contained in our program is the following: We predict that even after a majority of the people will be won over to the ideas of socialism and will try to establish socialism peacefully, the minority, organized by the capitalists, will resist with violence. Especially is that true now, because of the rise of fascism.
 
The Prosecution Distorts Our Ideas
One factor that you must take into consideration and always be on your guard against, is the possibility of distortion by excerpts. A person writes an article, a party formulates a program based on fundamental theories. Along comes a prosecutor and snatches an excerpt here and a sentence there. The possibility of distortion is very great.
“Think not that I am come to bring peace on earth. I come not to bring peace, but the sword, and the son shall be set against the father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law.” Is not the one who wrote these two verses an advocate of violence and hatred? If Mr. Anderson did not know that the Prince of Peace uttered these words, he probably would seek to indict the author.
Every piece of great literature can be distorted. The Bible can be made into an obscene book simply by taking out certain excerpts. This is the method which the jury must guard against. Excerpts can be found from the writings of Karl Marx, from our program, from Trotsky, from Lenin, which would indicate that we want and we advocate a violent revolution, but that would be false, that would be a distortion, because taking the program as a whole, it is clear that we want to gain a majority of the people to our ideas, and from that it follows that we want to gain power peacefully.
 

Reactionaries Will Instigate Violence Against Majority
Will there be struggle at the time the majority decides to establish socialism? I told you before that in this society struggle is an unalterable law. At times the struggle is on a political plane, at times it is on an economic plane. Workers join together, create a union, try to get a raise in wages or an improvement in conditions, and struggle follows.
And sometimes that struggle is accompanied by violence. That is true not only of a strike of truck drivers in Minneapolis. Read the history of the labor struggles in the United States, of great strikes in Colorado, in southern Illinois, in Ohio and elsewhere, and you will convince yourselves that violence is not something that occurs in strikes led by Trotskyists. In 1877, at a time when socialists were never heard of outside, perhaps, of New York City, there were great railroad strikes, and violence resulted. What caused the violence? The agitation of some people? No. The bitter struggle between exploited workers and greedy employers.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to say that in all probability the social revolution will be accompanied by violence. Do we therefore advocate violence? No. We want a peaceful transformation.
There have been civil wars in history. History does not know of a single case where a ruling group, controlling economic and political power, has peacefully surrendered that power to a majority. Perhaps we have entered a period when the ruling class will realize that it is useless to struggle and will surrender its power without violence. We hope so; we hope that the ruling class in this country, when confronted by a majority determined to establish a new social order, will see the advisability of giving in peacefully. But we do not want to create that illusion; and that is what we mean in our Declaration of Principles when we say it is an illusion that socialism can be introduced through parliamentary means. It simply means that we believe that after we gain a majority of the people to our ideas, the ruling group will not surrender peacefully.
 
Our Rights Were Won by Struggle
Theoretically, the existence of political democracy offers a chance to achieve socialism in a peaceful manner. But even the democratic rights that we have now have not been gained without struggle.
Do you think that everyone had a right to vote in the early stages of the republic? No, there were property qualifications. A struggle began to abolish these qualifications. Mass agitations, mass demonstrations were utilized in that struggle. People were jailed in that struggle, but finally they won the passage of laws granting the right of suffrage to every person without any property qualifications. But go down into the South and you will find that the Negroes still do not have the right to vote.
Take the principle of compulsory free education. Do you think that was gained without tremendous agitation that lasted for years and decades? Read the history of our country and you will see differently. Nothing, nothing of value that mankind possesses has been achieved without sacrifice, without struggle.
The prosecutors point to our literature which speaks about mass demonstrations and mass agitation. We do not deny that we believe in the effectiveness of mass demonstrations. The prosecutors must have forgotten that in the history of this country many things have been won by mass demonstrations.
We are now in a period when the people should have economic democracy in addition to political democracy, and a struggle will be necessary in order to achieve that. It will be waged on the political field; it will be waged in strikes against employers; it will be waged in debates, mass demonstrations, in the courtrooms, and people will be jailed.
 
We Shall Try to Avoid Violence
On the basis of their analysis of history and social conditions, Marxists predict the future. Will we be right? No one knows. I hope, and I am certain that every one of my co-defendants do, that our prediction with reference to violence accompanying the social revolution will not be fulfilled.
We want to take over the means of production peacefully, but we predict that the minority will use violence to prevent the majority from achieving a peaceful transformation, and it is necessary to be ready for the violence of that minority.
We are not able to predict with great exactness. A social scientist cannot predict with the exactitude of a physical scientist. What we can say now, however, is that as the ideas of socialism gain ground, as more and more people become convinced that socialism is the only possible solution, the fascists will also gain strength. In Germany the fascists were financed by the big industrialists. The capitalists in this country will do the same. They will finance the fascists to destroy the labor movement. The only real possibility of avoiding violence is for the working masses and the farmers to organize so strongly that the minority of capitalists will not attempt the use of violence.
The fact that we support the formation of a Labor Party is an indication that we shall try our best to exhaust all possibilities for a peaceful change. To Mr. Anderson our support of a Labor Party if evidence of a plot. To him it means that we would like to see a Labor Party so that the dupes in that party will participate in elections while we, behind the scenes, plot to overthrow the government by violence. What utter nonsense!
Mr. Cannon said on the witness stand that, as serious political people, expecting the masses to accept our ideas, we cannot conceal those ideas. We cannot say or do one thing and expect that the masses will be able to read our minds and follow us in doing something else. According to Mr. Anderson, we organized a Union Defense Guard in order to overthrow the government by force and violence. Bur he never proved, because he never could prove, that we ever told that to the members of the Union Defense Guard. Presumably, then, we would call together the Union Defense Guard one fine morning and reveal the startling secret to them that they are expected to overthrow the government by force and violence. Is it not absurd to think that we expect people to follow us in an attempt to overthrow the government when we have never told them that that was their duty?
Our task is to inform the masses of our ideas. We cannot possibly be conspirators, because we want to educate the majority of the people to accept our ideas. There is a section in our Declaration of Principles which says specifically that our task is to convince the masses that our ideas and our solution to the problems of mankind are correct and that it is impossible to use force against the masses. We can only use the power of persuasion and no other power.
Through a Labor Party we attempt to educate the masses to act independently on the political field and also to exhaust all possibilities of a peaceful change. We do not claim that the creation of a Labor Party will assure a peaceful change. We are against creating illusions because even if a labor party is created, the probability of the capitalists organizing a minority to prevent a peaceful change remains the same. And we are not afraid to tell the masses exactly that, and it is not against the law to say so. It is against the law to incite and urge people to overthrow the government by force and violence, but it is not against the law to predict that violence will be used by the minority to thwart the will of the majority. And this is the crux of the question, ladies and gentlemen:
On the basis of the evidence you can find only that, basing ourselves on an analysis of history, on an analysis of the social forces operating in present society, we declare that the probability is overwhelming that the social revolution will be accompanied by violence – the violence of the minority determined to guard its rights, its powers, its privileges.
I think – I am certain – that the court will instruct you that if, in considering all of the evidence in the case, you conclude that the evidence may just as well be consistent with the innocence of the defendants as with the guilt of the defendants, you are under an obligation to accept the hypothesis of innocence. That is the law.
Let us assume that after listening to all of the evidence and all the arguments in this case, and after reading all of the exhibits, you say to yourselves that the evidence can be interpreted in two ways: one, that the defendants advocated the violent overthrow of the government, and the other that the defendants predicted that there will be violence. Then you must accept the latter hypothesis and find us not guilty.
 

Historic Examples of Violence by Reactionaries
Mr. Cannon pointed out under cross examination by Mr. Schweinhaut some historical examples where the majority won the power peacefully, but where the ruling minority initiated violence and began a counter revolution. One example is our own Civil War where, after Lincoln was elected by the people, the southern slaveholders began the revolt. The slaveholders refused to give up their privilege of owning chattel slaves and fought to extend slavery. Violence began, but it came from the South, from the minority, and it was not until the majority of the people residing in the North assembled all their forces that they were able to put down the slaveholders’ revolt.
Who was responsible for the violence? A minority of slaveholders determined to hold on to their property rights against the majority of the people.
I presume there were many people who, prior to the Civil War, predicted that violence would accompany the abolition of slavery. Were they responsible, then, for the Civil War? Is the Civil War not a clear example of a peaceful accession to power and the use of violence by a minority to overthrow the majority?
In Spain we have another example. The Loyalist government had the support of the vast majority of the people and came to power because of the support of the people. The fascists thereupon organized their minority, and with the aid of Germany and Italy, began a violent counter-revolution and succeeded in defeating the majority.
On the basis of these historic examples and many others, on the basis of the present day struggles in industry, where the employers do not hesitate to use violence to prevent workers from organizing unions and improve their working conditions, we predict that the social revolution, which will have as its aim to take away the wealth and the power and the privileges of a small minority, will be resisted by that minority to the death.
The more we emphasize that possibility, the more the people understand that possibility and prepare for it, the less will be the violence. But if violence does come, will we be responsible? Is the weatherman responsible for predicting a hurricane? Is the physician responsible when he predicts death for the patient? Is the astronomer responsible when he predicts the coming of an eclipse? Are we, predicting a great social storm at the time of the social revolution, responsible for the violence that may ensue?
 
What Is a Revolutionary Situation?
A great deal has been made by the prosecution of the fact that in our writings appears the statement that we intend to take advantage of a revolutionary situation. What is that revolutionary situation? The only government witness who attempted to explain it, Bartlett, went way beyond his depth. He may be a shrewd union business agent, but he is hardly capable of explaining the theoretical problems connected with socialism.
The prerequisites for a revolutionary situation have been summed up by Marxists to be the following: first and foremost is the decline of the social system when the forces of production can no longer function effectively; second, the inability of the ruling class to solve the problems it is confronted with; third, great suffering of the masses; fourth, the desire and determination of the masses to change the social system; fifth and final, existence of a party trained to understand the operation of social forces, able to predict the direction in which society moves, and determined not to permit a minority from thwarting the will of the majority.
Mr. Cannon correctly explained to you that these conditions do not as yet exist in the United States. Much has been said here by the prosecution to the effect that the defendants believe that the war will create a revolutionary situation. Perhaps it will, ladies and gentlemen, but are we responsible for the war? And if the war does create a revolutionary situation, can we be held responsible for the revolutionary situation? Perhaps the prosecution – and by the prosecution I do not mean Mr. Schweinhaut or Mr. Anderson, but Washington – should busy itself with passing a law preventing the war from creating a revolutionary situation. Or might I suggest that in order to prevent the possibility of a revolutionary situation, the present administration refrain from going to war.
THE COURT: We will take our afternoon recess now.
(AFTERNOON RECESS)
 
Advocacy of Violence – or Prediction?
THE COURT: You may proceed.
MR. GOLDMAN: The distinction between prediction and advocacy should by this time be perfectly clear. But that does not seem to be the case as far as government counsel are concerned. They introduced into evidence my pamphlet What is Socialism and read an excerpt from it beginning with Page 33. This is the pamphlet that I handed out to you at the beginning of the trial and if you have read it, you probably saw that it was written in very simple language because it consists of a series of lectures delivered to workers. It is under such conditions that the clearest exposition of our thought is necessary because when one speaks to workers he is compelled to reduce his ideas into the simplest terms. On Page 33 I asked the following question:
“What methods will the workers be compelled to use in order to destroy the political power of the capitalists and to establish their own power?”
And I went on:
“In countries, such as Germany and Italy, where the fascists have destroyed every right that the workers ever had, it is perfectly clear that the workers will be compelled to use violence in order to get rid of their fascist oppressors. But how about the United States, England or France?” – the pamphlet was written in 1938 before the Vichy government took control – “In these countries the workers have the right to vote. Why is it not possible for them to elect a majority of socialists in Congress or in Parliament and establish socialism by law?”
“A peaceful change,” I wrote, “is an ideal most desirable. Everyone, especially the revolutionary socialists, will subscribe to that idea” – I say a peaceful change, I do not say a violent one – ‘‘the question, however, is not whether it is desirable but whether it is possible. On the statute books of most of the states there are ‘criminal syndicalism’ laws” – and the Smith Law, upon which the second count of this indictment is based, is a criminal syndicalism law – “providing long prison sentences for anyone who advocates the overthrow of the government by violence. Such laws will be as effective as laws against the occurrence of earthquakes. For revolutions cannot be prevented by any law. Like convulsions in nature, they are the result of the evolution of forces beyond the power of man to stop.”
Then here comes the significant section, the section that should settle all doubts concerning the question –
“On the basis of history and of theory, we are justified in predicting that the capitalist class will not surrender power to the working class without a violent struggle. History knows no example of the peaceful surrender of an exploiting minority to an oppressed majority. The actual conduct of the capitalist class at the present time, the violence which it uses against the workers when they strike for an improvement in their conditions, confirm the historical lesson, and justify the prediction that they, who will lose their wealth and power, will utilize all forms of violence against the overwhelming majority.”
What possible interpretation can anyone who is free of prejudice place upon that paragraph other than that I predict, but I do not advocate, the use of violence. I concluded:
“The form of government in the United States practically guarantees the ruling class its domination against the will of the majority of the people. To introduce socialism by law would require an amendment to the Constitution and for that, a two-thirds majority of both houses of Congress and a majority in three-fourths of the state legislatures is required. Thirteen small and backward states could prevent any Amendment to the Constitution. Revolutionary socialists all favor a peaceful transformation of the present order to the socialist order” – we favor it, we want it, we desire it, then how, I ask, can we advocate the contrary – “but he is insane who thinks that millions of workers will consent to starve because a minority of exploiters will threaten to, and will actually use violence against them.”
I continue reading:
“If there is any one thing that will prevent the capitalists from using violence, it will be the strong organizations of the working class. The greater the strength of the working class organizations, the less violence will there be.”
If, after reading this section of my pamphlet and after reading my column published in The Militant of March 29, 1941, the prosecution still insists in pressing this case, it must be that Washington wants a conviction regardless of the evidence. Possibly the prosecution missed this section of my pamphlet and missed the column which I wrote, but they know about them now and have known about them for several weeks; and for the prosecution to continue this case can mean nothing else but a determination to get a conviction regardless of the evidence.
 

Why We Are Revolutionary Socialists
If you consider what motives have led the defendants into the socialist movement you can realize how absurd it is to accuse them of advocating violence. You have seen enough of the defendants and heard enough about their theories to convince you, I am certain, that it was not for personal gain that the defendants have become socialists. We are in a small minority and can therefore expect for a long time to come to meet only with hatred and scoffing, with persecution and prosecution. You can realize that we are in the socialist movement because we are devoted to its ideas and ideals.
If there is any one thing that impelled us to join the socialist movement, it is a hatred of the violence that exists in society – not only the physical violence but spiritual and moral violence – the violence which condemns children to starvation or semi-starvation because of the poverty of the parents, the violence which condemns children to go to work long before they have received an adequate education. Everywhere in society there is violence of one sort or another, culminating in the dreadful violence which sacrifices millions of human beings upon the altar of war. It is this violence which we hate that drives us into a movement which has as its ideal the creation of a world free from violence, where human beings will cooperate in the ‘production of goods to satisfy their needs, where peace and security will prevail.
We are, of course, not pacifists. We do not believe with Ghandi [sic!] that it is wrong for three hundred million people in India to use violence to drive out the British oppressors who claim to be fighting a war for democracy. As much as we hate the violence that exists in society, we see no alternative to the necessity of destroying the violence of the minority with the violence of the majority. But to accuse us of wanting and advocating violence is to accuse us of something that is revolting to our very nature.
Perhaps it would be fitting to close this section of my argument by quoting some people who are not in the ranks of the defendants and who can hardly be accused of being against the government.
”This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people who inhabit it. Whenever they shall grow weary of the existing government, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending it, or their revolutionary right to dismember or overthrow it.”
None other than Abraham Lincoln said this in his first inaugural address.
“I hold a little revolution now and then as necessary in the political world as storms in the physical.”
The man who uttered this sentiment is not on trial. It was Thomas Jefferson.
 
Our Position on the War
It would stand to reason that, once having settled the central question of the case, whether or not we advocate or predict violence, there should not be much more to say. But you will excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, if I continue the argument on matters that in my opinion are subsidiary but which the prosecution has emphasized over and over again.
There is always the danger that Mr. Anderson will claim that something is undenied and uncontradicted and perhaps it will be said, if I refrain from discussing other matters in the case, that I was afraid to do so.
The government follows a simple principle. It first assumes that the defendants are guilty of conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence and then it introduces evidence of our position and policies on various questions in order to prove that all of our activities are based on one motive and that is to further the conspiracy. If the defendants oppose the war, that shows that they are guilty of the central conspiracy; if they are active in the trade unions, that proves the same thing, and thus with all the activities of the defendants.
There are many people in this country opposed to our entry into the war, but since they are not members of the Socialist Workers Party they have the right to do so, but we who are members of the Socialist Workers Party have no such right.
The government of course did not have to introduce any evidence with reference to our opposition to the war; we would gladly have stipulated that we are guilty of that. As a matter of fact, the government could have shortened the case by at least two weeks if it had come to us and asked us to stipulate the facts on a great many questions which it laboriously attempted to prove. We could have stipulated that we oppose the war, that we visited Leon Trotsky and that we sent men to guard him, that we advocate the creation of Workers Defense Guards, etc. These things are found in our principles. Ninety per cent of what the government tried to prove, we would have stipulated to and we could then have gone to the heart of the question as to whether or not we conspired to advocate the overthrow of the government by force. But since the government took all this trouble to prove things that we admit, it is necessary for me to explain those policies and analyze them.
The government accuses us of two things with reference to the war, one, that we oppose it, and two, that we intend to take advantage of a revolutionary situation which we expect the war to create.
While it is true that we hold wars to be inevitable under the capitalist system, it is also true that we would like to avoid them. War is the greatest destructive force in modern society. If this war should last for years, it may well be that all the resources of society will be exhausted and not even a social revolution could solve the problems of mankind. With the exhaustion of all the material and spiritual forces of society, the possibility of creating a new social system is very slim. We would then have to wait until the material and spiritual resources of mankind are resuscitated.
It is our duty to prevent war if possible and to shorten the war if war is declared in spite of our efforts. We shall try to convince the masses that in order to live and in order to permit their children and their children’s children to live, they are under an obligation to end the war and create a socialist order.
 

Our Anti-War Opinions Are Being Prosecuted
There is at present no law making it a crime to oppose the war. But I am safe in saying that our opposition to the war is one of the most important, if not the most important, factor in explaining this prosecution. The rules of evidence do not permit me, as I indicated before, to go into the motives for the prosecution; but I would say that the address of Mr. Anderson yesterday and the emphasis which the prosecution has placed throughout the course of the trial on the party’s position with reference to the war and with reference to our policy on military training, justifies the conclusion that to a large extent it is our opposition to the war that explains this prosecution.
To justify the introduction of our position on the war into evidence, the government contends that our opposition to the entry of the United States into the war, and our statement that we will continue to oppose the war even after the United States declares war, is evidence that we are conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence. A far-fetched and an unreasonable contention! There are pacifists, conscientious objectors and others opposed to the war who are not interested in establishing socialism or overthrowing the government. There are socialists of a type that support the war. Only we revolutionary socialists who oppose the war are prosecuted.
As I indicated, there is no law preventing us from opposing the war. Nor is there a law which prohibits people from saying that they will continue to oppose the war even after war is declared. Of course when war will be declared, the Espionage Act will-come into effect, making certain statements about the war unlawful, but thus far war has not been declared and I am certain that no one could be convicted simply for a statement that he intends to oppose the war even after it will be declared.
 
Where We Stand on the War
Our reasons for our opposition to the war have been sufficiently clarified by the testimony of the defense and I need not go into detail. We consider the war, on the part of England, of Germany, of France, of Italy, of Japan and of the United States as imperialist in character. We do not hesitate to admit that. We have written and said it thousands of times.
What do we mean by characterizing the war on the part of these countries as imperialist? We mean that the ruling classes which are responsible for the war and which lead the masses into the war are fighting to protect or to acquire markets, colonies, sources of raw material and spheres of influence. Germany wants the colonies that England has. England came upon the scene first, grabbed off most of the rich colonies in the world, and now Germany is trying to get some of these colonies away from England. The United
States has not very many colonies in the strict sense of the word, but it has billions of dollars invested in Latin America and in other parts of the world and it wants markets in China, in the Far East.
One of the government witnesses, Mr. Harris I believe, was a member of the Marine Corps and he testified that he was stationed in China some time ago and Mr. Anderson praised him to the sky for serving his country in China. We do not conceal our belief that the marines in China are not there to protect the interests of the people of the United States but the interests of the Standard Oil Company and other big companies who have investments in China. The capitalists of this country are not interested in the development of China; they are interested in China because it furnishes them a market for the sale of their goods and a field for the investment of their capital.
The same thing is true with reference to Latin America. Roosevelt, representing the interests of the American capitalists, is not interested in the welfare of the people of Latin America. The claim that the present administration is interested in fighting for democracy can be disproved by the fact that when Franco was fighting the Loyalist government in Spain, the present administration declared its neutrality. It was not interested in defending democracy so long as there was no threat to the economic interests of the American capitalist class.
 

Our Attitude Toward Imperialist War
When we state that this is an imperialist war, it follows that we cannot possibly support the administration in its war efforts. You may not agree with us – some of you undoubtedly think that we are wrong – but I hope that in considering the evidence in this case, your opinion as to the correctness or incorrectness of our attitude on the war should not sway in the least your decision.
Mr. Cannon explained in his testimony for the defense that opposition to the war means non-support in a political sense. If any member of our party were a member of Congress, he would not vote for a declaration of war, nor would he vote for the war budget. No matter how much we may antagonize any jury, we must say that because it is the truth.
Certain expressions found in some of the literature introduced by the government have been emphasized by the prosecution, especially the expression, “Turn imperialist war into civil war”. This expression is not found in our Declaration of Principles. I never used it either in my pamphlet or in any of the columns I wrote for The Militant. But it has been used, and by great socialists, and at times it has been repeated by some of our members. If you should take this expression into consideration, you must take it in connection with our general program which says that we must win over a majority of the people. The expression is correctly interpreted as follows: If, in the midst of the war or at the end of the war, a majority of the people, tired and weary and driven by the agony and suffering to which they will be subjected by the war, will accept our ideas and decide to take power, then if the minority will resist, the result will be that the imperialist war will be turned into a civil war. That is the only correct way to interpret that expression in the light of our Declaration of Principles which says that we must win a majority of the people over to our ideas.
We say now and we shall continue to say it as long as we are permitted, that war is a result of the conflict between imperialist nations.
 
We Predicted This War
The exhibits introduced by the government show that long before the war began we predicted that it would come. Were we then responsible for it when we predicted its coming? Who is responsible for the war? In the last analysis, not even Hitler who fired the first shot, is responsible. As far as we are concerned, the responsibility for this war is primarily upon the system that creates the imperialist rivalries. On the basis of the present system Leagues of Nations, Kellogg Peace Pacts and all the good intentions in the world cannot preserve peace.
Most of you are old enough to remember the statements that were made during the last war, that it was a war for democracy and it was a war to end wars. And the results of the last war are visible to everyone – fascism and now another war. Who was right? Socialists like Lenin who said that without socialist revolutions all over the world , there will be more imperialist wars, or the people who proclaimed that the first World War was the last war? We can predict with absolute certainty the same thing that Lenin predicted in the first World War: if socialism does not come, more wars will follow.
 
Fascism Must Be Destroyed – How?
The vast majority of the people of this country are terribly afraid of Hitler and justifiably so. I don’t think the isolationists are correct when they say that we do not have to fear an invasion of this country by Hitler. It is not a question of invasion; it is a question of imperialist rivalries and Hitler is no doubt the greatest potential enemy of the ruling group in this country and above all he is the greatest potential enemy of the American masses. The destruction of Hitler – and I am using Hitler as a symbol of fascism – is a task which should be undertaken by everyone who values freedom and culture. No nation is sure of liberty so long as fascism exists anywhere in the world.
But the question is: What method should be used in exterminating the fascist danger? We contend that this war is not a war against Hitlerism. I he British ruling class is not hostile to fascism. It can be taken as an elementary proposition that the British ruling class is not interested in preserving democracy.
The people of Great Britain and the people of this country are interested in democracy and want to fight for it, but in our opinion to fight under the leadership of the Churchill government or under the leadership of any other capitalist government is to fight not for democracy but for the financiers and industrialists.
 

Fascism Is the Product of Decaying Capitalism
Even assuming that Hitler should be defeated, fascism will not be destroyed because fascism is not a product of Hitler but it is a product of a decaying capitalist system. Dislocation of economy is bound to follow this war; millions of men will be thrown out of work, misery and suffering will be their lot and in such a situation fascism is bound to flourish. It is in such a situation that the fascist demagogues of Germany succeeded in gaining power. The German people, crushed and humiliated by the Versailles peace, not given a chance to work and live, were thrown into the arms of Hitler. Should capitalism continue to exist after this war, fascism is inevitable unless the masses of people take their fate into their own hands and create a socialist order.
Should war last a long time, the possibility of a peace between the imperialist nations is very great. The British ruling class and the American ruling class can easily come to terms with Hitler if they cannot defeat him, but not so the working masses; they must fight Hitler to the very death – especially the socialists who know the fate that awaits them if Hitler is victorious.
The prosecution statement that in a war between the United States and Germany the defendants will prefer a victory of Germany is made either because of complete ignorance of our position or because of a malicious intention to falsify our position. Mr. Anderson said that in his opening statement. At that time, he did not perhaps know our position with reference to this question. Let no one dare, however, to stand up before you now after the exhibits have been introduced and say that we want a Hitler victory.
 
Our Program to Defeat Fascism
We say that to defeat Hitlerism it is necessary for the masses to assume leadership in that struggle.
What is the fundamental reason for Hitler’s victories? Is it simply because he has been preparing for a longer time? How could he win his victories if a large section of the German people did not support him? To say that the German people, a great and cultured people, willingly accept the violent regime of Hitler is to insult the Germans. They are, however, given no alternative; it is either supporting Hitler or suffering a crushing defeat at the hands of the British imperialists and they fear that more than they fear a Hitler victory.
Hitler can come to the German people and say truthfully: The British ruling class has a monopoly on the wealth of this world; we ought to have our share of it. When he attacks Churchill and the British ruling class, he is speaking the truth – at least 90 per cent of the time; when he talks about his own intentions, he speaks nothing but lies. The same is true of Churchill who tells the truth only when he is attacking Hitler.
The situation would be entirely changed if in England the workers would establish their own socialist government and if in the United States a Workers’ and Farmers’ Government would displace the present capitalist government.
Socialist governments in England and the United States would proclaim to the German people: “We have nothing against you; all we want is that you join us in creating a cooperative commonwealth throughout the whole world. We have no ambitions against your territory and we shall not do anything to deprive you of your liberty; revolt against Hitler and establish your own Socialist government.” Hitler could not last one week after such an appeal. He would be destroyed by his own people.
This is our solution to the problem of Hitlerism. Unfortunately we are as yet too small a group really to influence the thought of the masses. It is not we who will create difficulties for the ruling class in this country; it is the war that will create those difficulties. Let us assume a war which will last five or even more years; the cost of living will be going up; over 50 per cent of our productive efforts will go for war purposes; the people in this country will be suffering as well as the people in England and in Germany and in Italy; and we hope that the day will come when all the peoples of the various countries will fraternize and put an end to the conflict which is now being fought to guard the interests of the ruling cliques.
 
The Class Struggle Will Intensify
It is nonsense to think that a small party like ours can, by its agitation, create dissatisfaction. What will create dissatisfaction is the war and we are not responsible for that.
The class struggle will go on during the war whether we agitate for it or not. We have very little influence in the labor movement but the struggle goes on right now. With the cost of living going up, the workers are bound to strike for higher wages and he is indeed foolish who thinks that, by putting us behind bars, strikes will cease. Neither will a revolutionary situation be prevented by putting us behind bars. It would be necessary to put the whole working class behind bars in order to assure the capitalists the kind of peace that they want. Hitler thinks that by his methods of force he can bring to an end the class struggle and this trial is an indication that the same methods will be used in this country. The spectre of fascism haunts this trial – a mass trial that is characteristic of trials in Italy and in Germany.
I do not mean to say that fascism is here; we still have a chance to argue before a jury, but the very fact that a large number of people can be dragged into court because of their ideas and writings is an indication that the monster of fascism is coming ever closer to us.
“Revolutionary defeatism” is another expression that the prosecution points to as something terrible to contemplate. I expressly defined that phrase in the column that I referred to before, published in The Militant of March 29, 1941. It simply means that we continue to advocate the class struggle during the war. By that is meant that if the workers have any grievances, they should demand the settlement of those grievances and if no settlement is made, they should go on strike. Will that interfere with the military effort? The responsibility is not that of the workers but of the employers who refuse to settle the grievances.
 
What Political Opposition Means
In that same article I state that we want to carry on our agitation and gain a majority even during the war. But so long as we have no majority, there is nothing for us to do except to submit to the majority. “To submit to the majority’’, ladies and gentlemen, that phrase is found several times in my column. Do the prosecutors expect us to change our ideas because there is a war? Do they want us to stop thinking? Yes, we want to convince workers and soldiers that our ideas are correct and until we convince the majority, we are willing to submit to the decisions of the majority. For any government to demand anything more than that means practically introducing fascism.
In that article I expressly state that our party opposes sabotage, opposes any individual or group action which would obstruct the conduct of the war. If the prosecutors were fair and had the power to dismiss this case, they would do so without hesitation the moment their attention was brought to this column. He who would contend, after reading that article, that we are in favor of a victory of Hitler or that we would practice sabotage, does not want to read correctly.
Of course, under Mr. Anderson’s theory, to teach socialism constitutes, in and of itself, sabotage. He stated that, but he does not claim that we would try to sabotage the army by doing something to the rifles or to the planes or cannons so that they could not be used properly. The prosecutors simply claim that, if the soldiers listen to our theories, they will not fight for the government. In other words, socialism is sabotage to the prosecutors regardless of the fact that we say over and over again that so long as we are not in a majority, we can do nothing but what we are told to do.
THE COURT: We will adjourn now.
MORNING SESSION
Friday, November 28, 1941
THE COURT: You may proceed.
MR. GOLDMAN: Once more I beg your indulgence for taking so much of your time. Last night I went through my notes and I cut out enough to shorten my argument by about four hours. If, in your deliberations, someone asks why did not Goldman touch upon this matter and that matter, then the answer is that I had to refrain from discussing many questions because of lack of time.
Yesterday, in discussing the question of whether or not we advocate or predict violence, I forgot to mention the fact that in the majority of instances where violence is mentioned in the exhibits, it refers to defense against the fascists. This is an important point which I ask you to consider in your deliberations.
 

The Proletarian Military Policy of Our Party
The indictment, charges us with conspiring to create insurrection and disobedience in the armed forces of the United States. It is important to discuss our so-called military policy. The government depends upon that policy, I think, in its attempt to convince you that we are guilty of that section of the indictment.
When the question of compulsory military service was first taken up in Congress and a discussion upon it began in the country, our party felt it necessary to take a position on that question.
As you know, there are people in this country who are pacifists and conscientious objectors who, under no circumstances, would fight in the armed forces or even allow themselves to be drafted for military service, There are many socialists who take a similar stand.
We, on the other hand, considered the situation from its fundamental aspect, namely, that in this epoch when fascism has come upon the scene with its horrible violence, it is futile not to recognize the fact that all important questions will be settled by military means. Not only futile, but extremely dangerous! Of all groups in society, we are most vehemently opposed to war but so long as war exists in the world and so long as there are fascists ready to use violence against the working class, every worker has the duty of training to defend himself. Young people will have to go to war whether they like it or not and since that is the case, we are in favor of having our youth trained in the arts of war. Modern warfare requires great technical skill and he is foolish who does not understand that it is necessary to acquire that skill.
We cannot tell the young generation to oppose military training when we know that it will be dragged into war. And it is on the basis of this fundamental proposition that we say to the young men: Do not resist compulsory military training; go into the army and do your best to get the training necessary to defend yourselves against the enemy from without and – we also added – against the enemy from within. In a world where fascism and violence and war dominates the scene, it is necessary for you to accept military training in order to defend yourselves.
Naturally, we would like our members, wherever they are, in the factory or in a union or in the army, to propagate our ideas, but we understand that the army is not a place where one can speak as freely as outside of the army. We don’t like it but we are realistic enough to understand that in the army it is necessary to be cautious. Just as a trade unionist in an open shop must be careful in propagating his ideas for trade unionism, so must a soldier in the army be careful in propagating ideas frowned upon by the generals. In the army, of course, it is far more dangerous to propagate socialism than it is to propagate trade unionism in an open shop. The greatest open shop institution in this country is the United States Army.
Conditions in our army are not so bad now as they were fifty or a hundred years ago. There was a time when it was impossible for a human being who was not brutalized to remain in the army. That has been changed and not without a struggle.
 
For Equal Rights in the Army
At present we advocate the idea that soldiers in the army should be on terms of equality with the officers. We consider the private soldiers equal in every way, except from the point of view of technical training, to the officers and we insist that they be treated in the same way as officers are treated. We advocate legislation compelling the officers to treat privates with respect and to change the rules which permit officers in charge of a military tribunal to inflict inhuman punishment for some minor infraction of the Military Code.
The government has introduced evidence that we urge the soldiers to kick about their food. I do not know whether there have been complaints about food in the army. If the food is not good, then the soldiers, including members of our party who are drafted, should kick about the food. If the prosecution is interested in preventing such complaints about the food, then let it see to it that the soldiers are provided with good food. Are we in a situation where soldiers must eat rotten food without complaining? That seems to be the theory of the prosecution.
 
Why Workers Follow Us
Here I want to point out to you the absurdity of the accusation levelled against us to the effect that we send our members into the army in order to kick about food and create insubordination, Do you think we could win any influence in that way, and after all, that is our main aim – to win
people over to our ideas, and thus gain influence. How do you think Vincent Dunne and Farrell Dobbs and Miles Dunne and Carl Skoglund and all the other leaders of Local 544 succeeded in gaining influence over the truck drivers? Simply by kicking?
And certainly not by proclaiming themselves to be Trotskyists. You can readily assume that the 6,000 truck drivers do not follow their leadership because it is composed of Socialist Workers Party members. The vast majority of the truck drivers is composed of Republicans, Democrats and Farmer-Laborites. But these people also voted for Farrell Dobbs and Vincent and Miles Dunne as their union leaders. Why? Because they saw in them men who have served their interests. The truck drivers may not even like the fact that those defendants who are leaders of Local 544 are socialists; but still they vote for them because they see in the defendants men who guard the interests of the workers. Our party members in Local 544 did not win influence among the truck drivers because they taught socialism, but because they improved the conditions under which the truck driver’s worked.
The same thing holds with reference to any of our members who may be in the army. They did not gain influence by teaching the abstract doctrine of socialism, but by taking care of the soldiers’ interests. It is true that we take advantage of every opportunity to teach the ideas of socialism. But we feel the socialist ideas will take root, not at present, when the vast majority of the people is satisfied with its conditions, but in the future when the masses will be driven to accept new ideas because of their suffering and privations. Human beings are very slow to change their ideas. The human mind is surrounded by a crust of all the ideas it has absorbed from childhood, and not until events destroy that crust is it ready to accept new ideas. It is because we want to get the confidence of the workers and the soldiers that we defend their immediate interests, and do not merely teach them the abstract doctrine of socialism.
 

Military Training Under Trade Union Control
We have put forth the idea of military training under trade union control. As Mr. Cannon testified, a training camp was operated in Plattsburg, New York, for the purpose of training businessmen and professional men as officers, and the government furnished the necessary funds. Why not have training camps where the trade unions could train their men both as soldiers and as officers?
In our opinion the great majority of generals and higher officers in the army are hostile to the laboring class. The higher officers are raised and trained in an environment which makes them hostile to the workers. They are not interested in democracy or in fighting for democracy. Have not the events in France confirmed our opinion in that respect? The American and British generals are not any different from the French generals. Who surrendered to Germany? Not the rank and file, but Petain and Weygand and the other generals in command of the French army. Who permitted the Germans to enter Norway? Not the rank and file soldiers, but the fascists in the upper ranks. We say plainly that we do not trust the generals and higher officers to fight for democracy.
Because of that we propose that the trade unions train their own officers – officers in whom the workers can have confidence and whom they can control. And you must remember, when you consider this point, that the trade unions are not under the control of the Socialist Workers Party, but under the control of men who are, from our viewpoint, very conservative, and even reactionary. Still, rather than have officers trained at West Point, we prefer to have them trained under trade union control because the trade unions are organizations of workers. Furthermore, you must remember that our program of military training under trade union control is a legislative program. We want Congress to pass legislation making such training possible by appropriating funds for that purpose.
Of course, as with all other activities and policies of the Socialist Workers Party, our idea of military training under trade union control is evidence, as far as the prosecution is concerned, of a conspiracy to overthrow the government by force. No matter what we do, it is taken by the government as evidence of this conspiracy. If we opposed military training, that would constitute evidence of a conspiracy; when we are for military training, that is brought in as evidence of a conspiracy!
 
Why We Want Workers’ Defense Guards
Another policy of ours which the government introduced as evidence of a conspiracy is our proposal of establishing Workers’ Defense Guards. We have no hesitation to admit that we would like to see the workers create such defense guards. I shall even admit – and let the government make the most of it – that if Workers’ Defense Guards should be created, they would defend the revolution of the majority against the violence of the minority. We shall do our utmost to create Workers’ Defense Guards so that when the majority of the people take power, it will be able to put down any revolt by the minority.
The charge that is levelled against us, you must remember, is that we are conspiring to overthrow and to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. The government must first prove that charge beyond a reasonable doubt, and it cannot prove it by introducing evidence that we advise the establishment of Workers’ Defense Guards or a Union Defense Guard. If the jury agrees with me that we do not advocate the use of violence, but predict that the minority will use violence against the majority, then everything else is immaterial. It is perfectly proper for us to propose to workers the idea of creating defense guards to protect them against fascist violence, and mind you, we are not advocating a policy of creating defense guards of our own members. We want the workers to -build these defense guards.
Unfortunately, they have not as yet followed our proposals. The fascist danger is not so evident to the workers as it is to us, and they have not acted in accordance with our proposals. This is a fine example of the idea that it is not agitation that can bring certain things into existence. If conditions, are not ripe for it, then we can talk from now until doomsday and the workers will not follow our advice. There is not a single Workers’ Defense Guard in the United States today.
MR SCHWEINHAUT (Prosecutor): That statement, that there is not a single defense guard in the United States today, is not brought out by the evidence. The contrary has been established. As a matter of fact, in March of this year the Union Defense Guard was in existence in Minneapolis.
MR. GOLDMAN: I still contend on the basis of the evidence that there does not exist a single defense guard in the United States at the present time.
THE COURT: Well, the jury will remember what the evidence was on that particular question.
(To be continued next week)
 




MORNING SESSION
Thursday, November 27, 1941
THE COURT: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
MR. GOLDMAN: May it please your Honor, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
I think that the prediction made in my opening statement, that this would be a case remarkable in many respects, has been confirmed.
In this courtroom there were presented before a jury ideas – social, political and economic – that have never, to my knowledge, been presented in any Federal Court prior to this case.
Never before, in the history of a Federal Court, has a jury been confronted with the necessity of listening to the social, political and economic ideas and ideals of defendants, formulated in hundreds of articles and pamphlets, for the purpose of determining whether or not the defendants are guilty as charged in an indictment.
To a certain extent the jury in this case is confronted with the most arduous task of deciding whether ideas propounded by men living in the past and accepted by the defendants are correct or not. I say to a certain extent because obviously neither the government nor the defense formally demands that you decide whether these ideas are correct of not, but you cannot possibly escape from this necessity, and it is this factor which makes the case unique.
 
A Trial of Heretics
Often, as I sat through this trial, listening to Mr. Anderson reading excerpts, and especially yesterday as I heard Mr. Anderson deliver his argument, my thoughts drifted far afield. What are we on trial for? I asked myself. Some men wrote books many years ago, and we are on trial because those men had ideas and wrote about those ideas. We are on trial because a man by the name of Marx spent most of his lifetime in the library of the British Museum, digging into statistics, statistics concerned with economics and with politics. We are on trial because this man, after reading the mass of statistics, wrote several books in which, taking those statistics as the basis, and analyzing them, formulated general laws – laws that he thought, and laws that we think, operate in the social system.
We are on trial because a man by the name of Engels and a man by the name of Lenin and a man by the name of Trotsky wrote books, books that have been published and read by tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of people in this country, and certainly throughout the world.
As I thought about this matter, my mind wandered back into the Middle Ages, and I saw before me inquisitors, prosecutors – their names not Mr. Anderson, I suppose, but Mr. Anderson could very well have been there – with a heretic standing before them, and these inquisitors were stern and merciless. Lifting up a finger of accusation, the prosecutor said, “He does not believe our doctrine. He does not believe what we have taught for many generations. I accuse him of heresy.” And the examination of the heretic began, and perhaps he recanted, as was the case with the great scientist Galileo, for many feared the punishment of slow torture and painful death.
I do not say, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that this case is exactly like the cases brought before the inquisition in the Middle Ages. After all, we face only 16 years of imprisonment, while the heretic in the Middle Ages faced torture and death; but essentially the situations are the same. The defendants here are charged with being guilty of heresy. They are guilty because they do not accept the ideas that prevail in society at the present time – Mr. Anderson’s ideas. They are guilty because they advocate new ideas which – to use Mr. Anderson’s phrase – are capable even of corrupting a saint, should a saint happen to read the literature published by the defendants.
My mind went even farther back, into the days of Greece, when an ugly little man, full of wisdom in his head and of gentleness in his heart – Socrates – was accused of corrupting the youth by his ideas and was compelled to take a cup of hemlock.
 

A Warning on the Dangers of Prejudice
I think that in essence this trial follows the tradition of the trials of heretics throughout the ages, the trials of people who advocate new ideas, and it is because of this factor, ladies and gentlemen, that I ask you to be doubly and triply careful. When the Court examined you prior to accepting you as jurors, you stated, and I believe with absolute sincerity, that you could and would give us an impartial trial. I have perfect faith that your intentions were and are of the best, ladies and gentlemen, but prejudice is not something that can be put on and taken off at will.
We are here dealing with ideas that are capable of arousing tremendous passion, as you witnessed yesterday when Mr. Anderson spoke; capable also of arousing tremendous zeal in their favor, ideas that actually did arouse millions of men to rise against what they deemed to be injustice; ideas which millions of men thought to be capable of liberating mankind from the ills that confront it. Yes, these ideas can grouse not only zeal and fanaticism, but also tremendous hatred, and they do arouse hatred, because to some people, such as Mr. Anderson, they appear to threaten the very foundations of everything that they hold sacred. I remember that Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, said that the defendants were conspiring to destroy “organized society”. Obviously, what Mr. Anderson designates as organized society, the defendants deem to be completely unorganized, completely chaotic, capable only of destruction and death.
In the indictment the defendants are charged with conspiring to accumulate and, in fact, the indictment charges that the defendants did accumulate, weapons and explosives. No evidence whatever of course, was brought to prove that charge in the indictment, unless one considers that the ideas which the defendants have are dynamite. Tyrants of all ages feared the explosive nature of ideas, because ideas are capable of shattering the crust that surrounds the mind of man and of presenting the possibility of a new road, a new life, a new social existence. Ideas, therefore, constitute an explosive far more powerful than TNT, and it is the only explosive that we deal with, the only explosive that the Government is capable of proving that we have accumulated.
And I say, ladies and gentlemen, that a human being, no matter how conscientious he may be, no matter how hard he may try to be impartial, must guard himself against prejudices, because prejudices most frequently lie deep in the subconscious mind of a person, and their existence is unknown, even to the person himself.
All of us are obviously born without any prejudices whatever. Have you ever seen a child of one or two or three years of age who knew anything about racial or religious hatreds? I have never seen one, and I know you have never seen one. But as the child becomes an adult, as he absorbs the poisons that exist in modern society, he becomes prejudiced. Every important judgment that a human being makes is determined by the ideas and by the prejudices that he has acquired in his early youth – in school, in church, at home.
The human being cannot get away from his environment. He is chained to it by chains that are not breakable, and most frequently he is chained to the prejudices created by the environment. In a case like this, it is therefore essential to ask yourselves at every step, “Am I permitting my judgment to be colored by my dislike of the ideas of the defendants?” There perhaps is no human being on earth who can get rid of his prejudices completely, but once he is conscious of the fact that he has prejudices, then he can be on guard against them, and being on guard against them, he is more likely, When confronted by new and strange and therefore hateful ideas, to arrive at a fair decision.
 
I Must Discuss Our Ideas
It is, of course, impossible for me to give an exhaustive explanation of all the ideas involved in this trial. Thousands of books have been written about them. Perhaps I should have brought some 500 of them into Court and asked the judge to permit me to read and discuss all of these books; and at the end of a year or two, the jurors could feel themselves more able to decide whether the ideas involved in the
case are correct or not. And then, if the jurors did not think that they are correct, they could send the defendants to jail. Of course it is impossible to take that much time. But try as I might, I cannot avoid at least discussing some of our ideas.
I am not here to try to convince you of the correctness of our ideas. I am not here to try to show you that those ideas are the only ideas that will solve the problems of mankind. I believe so. My friends, the other defendants, believe so. I am here, however, primarily to explain those ideas sufficiently well so that the issue in this case will become clear to you.
We are charged with conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence. We are also charged with conspiracy to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. In order to show you that there is no basis whatever for these two charges, I cannot avoid discussing certain fundamental concepts of ours, concepts brought in by the evidence for the prosecution.
I know that some of you, many of you, have businesses to attend to, and every day is an additional burden. I feel, however, that I have a certain moral right to speak at length because I did not take such a long time to present the case for the defendants; but still I know that it is very difficult for men and women, away from home for four and a half weeks, deprived of their liberty to a certain extent, to sit and listen to an exposition of ideas.
Mind you, there are 23 defendants in this case. In an ordinary criminal case, an hour’s final argument for the defendant, threatened with deprivation of his liberty for many years, would certainly not be too much. Don’t be scared, ladies and gentlemen, I am not multiplying one hour by 23 defendants. I do not intend to take so much time.
Over 150 exhibits, possibly, have been introduced by the prosecution. I have a right, and perhaps I have the duty, to take every exhibit and comment on it. I shall not do so, not only because it would lake too long a time, but because, as I shall explain later, the exhibits will not be of any great aid to the jury in determining its verdict.
Above all, it is the importance of the case that justifies lengthy argument. Everyone knows that it is an important case. No matter what your verdict will be, it will go down in history. This will go down in history as one of the greatest trials, not only in the Federal Court of this country, but in the courts of any country.
 

The Issues in This Case Are Crystal Clear
I think that by this time the issues of the case are clear. In the first count of the indictment, the charge is that the defendants conspired to overthrow the government by force, and to oppose its authority by force. I do not remember any evidence that was introduced on that second clause. So that, as to the first count, the jury should concentrate its attention on the question of whether or not we conspired to overthrow the government by force.
The second count has five sections to it. There is a section charging us with conspiring to create insubordination in the armed forces. There is. a section charging us with conspiring to distribute written and printed matter that urges insubordination. There is a section charging us with conspiracy to advocate, advise and teach the duty, necessity, desirability and propriety of overthrowing and destroying the government of the United States by force and violence. There is a fourth section charging us with conspiracy to publish and distribute literature advocating the overthrow of the government of the United States by force and violence. And there is a fifth section charging us with conspiracy to organize societies and groups to advocate the overthrow of the government of the United States by force and violence.
But I think all of us will agree, including counsel for the prosecution, that we can confine our attention to three major charges: in the first count, the charge of conspiring to overthrow, and in the second count the charges of conspiring to advocate the overthrow and to create insubordination in the armed forces.
Immediately upon reading the indictment, the question arises: What is the difference between conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence and conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence; or what is the difference between those two, and conspiracy to create insubordination?
Let me try, in a few words, to give you my idea of the difference.
It is possible to conspire to advocate to overthrow the government by force and violence without conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence.
Let me give you an example: One of the persons conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government may say: “When shall we accomplish our conspiracy?” And someone may answer him, “That is something for the future. In the first place we must advocate, and when we get ready, we’ll actually start thinking about overthrowing. That may be in five or ten or fifteen years. For the present we have the task only of advocating.” It is, of course, possible to conspire to do both – to advocate and to overthrow – but you can see that it is possible to separate the two.
Conspiring to create insubordination in the armed forces is obviously different from the other two conspiracies. We can assume certain persons disliking the general staff of the army and wanting to create insubordination in order to get rid of that general staff. These persons might not at all be interested in overthrowing the government by force and violence.
I think, then, that the difference between the first count and the second count is clear.
 
Is Our Party a Conspiracy?
At all stages in your deliberations you must ask yourselves the following questions: What charges have the government made against the defendants? What evidence has the government promised in the opening statement of Mr. Anderson to prove those charges? What evidence has it actually produced?
In the first place, it is necessary for you to consider whether or not the defendants are actually guilty of any conspiracy. As Mr. Anderson told you yesterday, if you find that there was no conspiracy, then there is nothing further for you to do. You vote “not guilty”, and you are through.
As the prosecution produced its witnesses and introduced its exhibits, two theories appeared to be in the minds of the prosecutors: one, that the Socialist Workers Party is in itself a conspiracy; and two, that the conspiracy was something outside of the party, and the party was only a means for the accomplishment of the conspiracy. According to Mr. Anderson’s opening statement, the very purpose of the party, the very plan of the party, the very program of the party and the very activities of the party constituted a violation of the statutes. It would seem, therefore, that the Socialist Workers Party is in itself a conspiracy. That seems to me to be a monstrous proposition. I presume that there are Democrats now in power who think that the Republican party is a conspiracy to take power away from the Democrats. To say that the Socialist Workers Party is in and of itself a conspiracy would mean the beginning of the process of destroying every opposition to those who are in office.
On the other hand, there is the possibility that the government has the theory that the defendants conspired independently of the Socialist Workers Party, that they came to some understanding, in some way or other, independently of the party, to create a party for the purpose of advocating to overthrow, or of overthrowing by force and violence, the Government of the United States. Is there any credible evidence of such a conspiracy?
It will be necessary for you to choose which theory of the prosecution to proceed on.
 
A Conspiratorial Atmosphere
Now obviously the term “conspiracy” is altogether inapplicable to this case. I am now thinking of the term, not in the technical, legal sense, but in its generally accepted meaning. A conspiracy is considered to be something secretive, hatched in the darkness of night, with the conspirators fearful lest it should become public. Mr. Anderson tried hard to create that conspiratorial atmosphere in this case. He introduced a floor plan of the party’s headquarters. How could it possibly help you to arrive at a conclusion as to whether or not we conspired to overthrow the government by force and violence? But in the mind of Mr. Anderson a conspiracy demands a floor plan, maybe some secret chambers, perhaps some secret buttons. How could if be a conspiracy without a floor plan, without a Sherlock Holmes coming in to study the floor plan?
. The prosecution produced evidence that the meetings of the party were held on Thursday nights, and that a membership card was demanded for admission. I presume some of you may belong to organizations that meet on Thursday nights and where only members are allowed to attend. There must be at least 10,000 organizations that permit only members to attend their meetings. Had Mr. Anderson requested it, we would have told him without any hesitation that our membership meetings took place on Thursday nights and that only members were allowed. But had Mr. Anderson done that, it would have destroyed the conspiratorial atmosphere that he has tried to create.
In furtherance of Mr. Anderson’s contention that there was a conspiracy, he introduced evidence that our members were known by numbers. It came out during the evidence, however, that the numbers were not given to the members, but were marked on each card. I don’t know how many organizations have membership cards with numbers, but there must be plenty of them. But Mr. Anderson wanted to make a conspiracy out of this case, and so he had to transfer the numbers from the cards to the members.
 
We Protect Party Members
Now then, we come to the final evidence of a real conspiracy! The members were told to destroy the cards. Doesn’t that show, asks Mr. Anderson seriously, that these people are conspirators? We admit that the members were told to destroy their cards. This occurred in the Minneapolis branch and did not occur in any other branch throughout the country. The leaders of the Minneapolis branch rightly wanted to protect the rank and file from the kind of persecution that the defendants in this case are subjected to. I admit that Vincent Dunne and Oscar Coover and other leaders of the branch thought seriously of the problem about how to protect the rank and file members – not themselves, because they did not conceal their membership. Vincent Dunne testified and told you that he was a member.
There was no attempt by any of the leaders of the party to conceal their membership in the party. Their names were on the editorial staff, or they were openly advertised as speakers for the party. There was, however, a serious attempt to protect the rank and file from being victimized. Does not this case prove that this was correct? We would have been derelict in our duty had we not attempted to prevent victimization of the rank and file members of the party.
The government, by instituting this prosecution, has more than justified this precautionary measure taken by the leaders of the Minneapolis branch. Let the government say that membership in the party is not illegal; let it not indict people who are innocent; and the membership cards will then not be destroyed. But so long as there is the slightest chance that a member of ours will be victimized, so long shall I and other responsible members of the party attempt to protect the rank and file of our party.
Did James P. Cannon or Vincent Dunne or Farrell Dobbs or Grace Carlson deny their membership in the party? They want everybody to know that they are members of the party, because they want everybody to accept the principles of the party, but they want also to protect the rank and file members of the party.
In his opening statement, Mr. Anderson claimed that there was no provision in the party’s constitution for the withdrawal of a member. My, how terrible this sounds! Once a member, always a member, and one dare not withdraw from membership. But from the testimony of the government’s own witnesses you could see that people joined the party and left the party on a purely voluntary basis. Why all this rigamarole about no provision for withdrawal of membership? Because Mr. Anderson wants to create the atmosphere of a conspiracy – a conspiracy that never existed and never will exist.
 
Don’t Call Us Conspirators!
Every prosecution witness, and Mr. Anderson himself, showed you that instead of being conspirators, we are men and women anxious to proclaim our ideas from the housetops, men and women devoted to our ideas, and extremely interested in getting other people to come to our meetings and to discuss at those meetings. What kind of a conspiracy is it when we publish a weekly newspaper and a monthly magazine, when we ask people to come to our meetings, to listen to us and to join our party? Our conspiracy is indeed peculiar; it is a conspiracy that attempts to get the vast majority of the people of the United States to become members of it. We want to convince the majority of the people that they should become as guilty as we are. Open headquarters, open mass meetings, open distribution of literature! Is this characteristic of a conspiracy?
Political propagandists, yes, but don’t dare to call us conspirators. Tell the truth, Mr. Anderson, and say that you want us in jail because our ideas are distasteful to you. Tell the truth and say that you want to still our voices, close our headquarters, prevent us from distributing our literature. Don’t call us criminal conspirators!
Did we attempt to conceal the organization of the party at the Founding Conference in December 1937? We would gladly have seen the news of it published in every paper. We published five or ten thousand copies of the party’s Declaration of Principles. Alas, that we could not publish five million. We got out a weekly paper, a monthly magazine; we issued innumerable pamphlets and participated in political campaigns. You may call it a conspiracy in legal phraseology, but please remember that it is a conspiracy only in that sense.
You may be convinced that we are guilty of a conspiracy in that technical, legal sense, and it is therefore necessary for me to go on and deal with the object of this alleged conspiracy. You can find that there is a conspiracy, and yet you can easily conclude that we are not guilty if you see that the object of the conspiracy is nothing that is illegal.
 

Documents versus Verbal Testimony
Here we must stop a moment to consider the types of evidence introduced by the prosecution. One type is documentary evidence, consisting of articles, excerpts from articles, pamphlets, excerpts from pamphlets, resolutions and excerpts from resolutions: you can read them, study them, analyze them.
Then there is the second type, consisting of statements alleged to have been made by the defendants and testified to by witnesses for the prosecution.
You must keep the distinction between these two types of evidence clearly before you, because it is an exceedingly important distinction, and a great deal depends upon it.
One generalization that almost all people will agree to is that memory is a very treacherous thing. It is the almost universal experience of all lawyers and of all judges that you can hardly ever get ten people who see the same event to testify to exactly the same thing. It is almost a universal rule that, if all ten witnesses tell the same story, they have undoubtedly been coached. If ten witnesses, testifying about a certain speech alleged to have been made a year or two before the testimony, repeat certain statements of the speech in the same way, then it is almost a sure sign that they are falsifying.
It would be horrible to think that a jury would actually find defendants guilty on the basis of evidence of certain statements alleged by witnesses to have been made by the defendants a year or two or three before the trial.
Ladies’ and gentlemen, do you need any more proof of that than the fact that the attorneys for the government and the attorneys for the defense disagreed as to what was said an hour after a certain statement was made by a witness? Several times we squabbled about what a witness was supposed to have said the day before. Did I mean to say, when I disagreed with Mr. Anderson, that he was a liar, or did Mr. Anderson mean to say that I was a liar? Not at all. One of us simply did not remember what was said. We always had to go to the record.
But when Mr. Anderson states that he bases his case primarily on the testimony of witnesses who testified to hearing some of the defendants make certain statements a year or two or three years ago, then, I am justified in concluding that Mr. Anderson is not dealing fairly with the defendants. Consider the tremendous and terrible possibilities of such a situation. An enemy of yours goes to Mr. Anderson and says: I heard him say he wants to overthrow the government by force and violence. And Mr. Anderson thereupon hauls you before a jury. All that you can say is that you did not make the statement, and the jury may or may not believe you. Can you not see the terrible possibilities in such a case?
I shall show you later that the testimony of the government witnesses is absolutely worthless. It is not only worthless, but most of it consists of downright perjury. But leave that out of consideration. I repeat: even if you were convinced that the government’s witnesses meant to be honest, you should not pay any attention to their testimony of verbal statements alleged to have been made years ago.
THE COURT: We will have our morning recess at this time.
* * *
THE COURT: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
MR. GOLDMAN: So that, as between documentary evidence and statements alleged to have been made by the defendants and testified to by the government witnesses, it is my opinion that fairness and justice demand that you should exclude the verbal statements.
 
Which Documents Are Important?
Which of the documents that have been introduced should you consider most important?
Counsel for prosecution will undoubtedly say all documents are important and of equal weight but, ladies and gentlemen, here you must take your experiences of life into consideration and base your judgment on those experiences. A mass of about 150 exhibits have been introduced. Articles written by the defendants, pamphlets written by the defendants, articles and pamphlets written by people who are not among the defendants and whom you do not know have been admitted under the rules of evidence as construed by
the Court. Then there is the Declaration of Principles and there are many official resolutions – all are in evidence.
You have excerpts from pamphlets that were written three or four years ago by persons whom you do not know, have never seen and who are not in the ranks of the defendants. You have articles written in the Socialist Appeal and in The Militant, in the New International and the Fourth International, written by people who are not among the defendants.
The question immediately presents itself: Should you give equal weight to all these documents? Should you, for instance, give as much weight to an official declaration of the party as to an article written by someone who is not among the defendants? It would be absurd not to make a distinction between an official resolution of the party, representing the thought of the most responsible party leaders, and a casual article written by someone whom you do not know and who obviously is not a leader of the party. If he were, he would be here amongst the defendants. Four of us were bought here from New York to cover up the fact that this case is essentially a prosecution against the leadership of Local 544-CIO – to cover up the real motives of the prosecution.
Then there are other documents in evidence – such as resolutions of the Fourth International. Mr. Cannon testified that we accept them insofar as they are applicable to this country and you should take that testimony into consideration.
It is clear that we didn’t keep a staff of lawyers scrutinizing carefully every article that was published in our press with the idea of keeping out anything and everything that might conceivably be used by some federal prosecutor.
Young men, new in the movement, may have formulated certain ideas in a careless manner and not in exact agreement with our Declaration of Principles and the prosecution wants to hold the defendants responsible for that, wants to put the defendants in jail because some party members whom you do not know wrote something that might be given a certain interpretation hostile to us. Of course all these articles are in evidence and from a strictly legal viewpoint you must consider them. But I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, is my request that you should give greater weight to documentary evidence which can be considered as official documents, than to articles written by unknown people, anything but fair and just?
I say therefore that as far as the documents introduced in evidence are concerned you should give greatest weight of all to the Declaration of Principles and the official resolutions of the party. Next in importance come articles written by responsible leaders of the party.
 

Prosecution Emphasizes Certain Pamphlets
The prosecution has used and will use certain pamphlets for the purpose of trying to get you to bring in a verdict of guilty. Especially is the prosecution interested in having you concentrate your attention on the pamphlet Are We for War by Draper and the mimeographed pamphlet, What Is Trotskyism by Weber. But I want to point out to you that they were not official declarations of the party. The Draper pamphlet was not even published by the party. The pamphlet What Is Trotskyism was mimeographed – not printed – and it is obvious that this pamphlet was not for popular distribution.
I would be justified in asking you to judge me only by my own writings and not to condemn the other defendants on the basis of my writings. If there is any rule of law which has been emphasized in Anglo-Saxon tradition, it is that a person must be held responsible for his own acts and not for the acts of others.
It is true that in a conspiracy case the rules of evidence are relaxed and testimony is permitted which is not permitted in other cases but even in a conspiracy case, as fair-minded individuals, you should try to uphold that tradition of Anglo-Saxon law.
I am willing to be judged by my own writings and by the official declarations of the party and by the writings of other responsible leaders, insofar as I agree with them. I do not think that others should be judged by my writings. I am not stating that as a legal proposition applicable in a conspiracy case; I am stating it as a proposition of fairness and justice and not always does the law coincide with fairness and justice. I can see Mr. Anderson trembling at that statement but no one with any experience in the law courts can deny that it is the truth.
It would be the greatest travesty of justice if you were to convict people here in Minneapolis on the basis of articles written by persons who are not even defendants and who obviously do not play a leading role in the party.
We didn’t sit day in and day out and try to figure out what Mr. Anderson and Mr. Schweinhaut were going to pick up from pamphlets, from The Militant or the Fourth International and present as evidence before the jury. We permitted many people to express their own ideas in their own ways. And everyone who knows anything about editing a paper understands that in the rush of getting copy and sending it to the printer certain expressions are always overlooked.
Take into consideration all of the documents but in all fairness to the defendants, give first place to the official documents – to the Declaration of Principles and official resolutions – and second place to the articles and pamphlets written by the responsible leaders.
The attorneys for the government have read excerpts – an excerpt here and an excerpt there. I could have read excerpts also. How far would it have aided you in coming to your decision? What I shall try to do and in my opinion what you should try to do, is to get as complete a picture
as possible of our full program, not an excerpt here or an excerpts there. I shall attempt to give you, by taking the Declaration of Principles, Cannon’s speeches and my articles and pamphlets and the article of Farrell Dobbs on trade unionism, an analysis of our program. That is all I can do and all I shall try to do. I cannot stop to discuss every excerpt. If an excerpt is read to you by the prosecution, all I can say is: take it into consideration but remember that it is part of a program. You cannot judge us by an excerpt. You must judge us by the whole program.
I shall skip over lightly and briefly those items in the program which are not very material and immediately proceed to the heart of the questions that have been raised by the prosecution.
 
We Aspire to Bring Socialism
In the first place it is necessary to get an idea as to the fundamental object of the conspiracy charged against the defendants. What is the aim of this great conspiracy? If there is any conspiracy at all, its fundamental object is to get a majority of the people of this country to establish socialism. That is the sum and substance of the conspiracy. If you are interested in finding out the general outlines of what we consider to be a socialist society, you can do so by reading our Declaration of Principles and my pamphlet What Is Socialism.
The fundamental feature of a socialist society will be that all the means of production – the railroads, the mines, the factories – will be owned by the people and the goods that will be produced will be produced for use. Under the present system, which we call capitalist, the means of production are owned by private persons or corporations and although some owners may be very good and charitable gentlemen, they operate their industries not because people need the goods that they produce but because they want to make a profit.
Under socialism the people will decide how many pairs of shoes, how many garments, how many hats, how much coal, how many houses will be needed to satisfy the needs of the people and these things will be produced. The productive wealth of society – not goods for consumption such as a coat, or a shirt, or a radio or an automobile – but the productive wealth of society – machinery, factories, mines – will be owned in common by the people and goods will be produced for the use of the people.
There will be no classes under socialism – that is, there will be no class that owns the wealth and no class that is exploited. Today a worker only has his labor power and he sells that to someone who owns machinery and he gets a wage in return and the man who owns the machinery makes a profit out of the labor power. This is what socialists term exploitation of labor.
Individuals under socialism will, of course, have different capacities. But no one will be permitted to own any productive wealth and thus exploit labor.
 

What Socialism Can Do for Humanity
In the final stage of socialism, which some theoreticians designate as communism, the productive forces of society will be so greatly developed and the education of the people will be such as to enable society to follow the principle: From each according to his ability; to each according to his need.
If anyone of you raises the objection that human nature makes that impossible, I simply ask you to go to that section of my pamphlet What Is Socialism which deals with the problem of human nature. Under socialism people will be educated not to think of profit but of service to society. Great scientists even now do not work in their laboratories because they expect to make millions of dollars; they work because they are interested in science.
It will of course be necessary to educate the new generation and it may take time, but given new social conditions it is absolutely certain that it can be done. Given a society that produces enough to satisfy the needs of all human beings, the struggle between human beings for the means of life will be abolished. If 12 people have 5,000 apples between them and in addition know that they can get as many apples as they can possibly eat, there will be no quarrel amongst them for apples. A society that will produce enough to satisfy the reasonable needs of people will do away with all the brutal struggles characterizing present day society.
To establish a new social order it will be necessary in the first place to create a new government which we call by the name of Workers’ and Farmers’ Government. You can see that I am only touching on essentials. I haven’t the time to do any more. What will be the duty of that government? To take over the means of production now owned by capitalists and begin operating them for the benefit of the people; and also to begin the education of a new generation to transform the human being from what he is under capitalism into what he should be under socialism.
 
The Workers’ and Farmers’ Government
That Workers’ and Farmers’ Government is technically called a dictatorship of the proletariat. When that phrase is uttered by Mr. Anderson or Mr. Schweinhaut it sounds terrible. The defendants are in favor of dictatorship! Of course it is nothing but a technical term indicating simply that the government representing the workers and farmers will take the productive wealth away from those who own it today, from the Sixty Families and their satellites. To that extent it will be a dictatorship. A dictatorship of the vast majority against the very small minority.
Will this “dictatorship of the proletariat” be a democracy or a dictatorship in the usually accepted term? Read page 8 of Exhibit 1 – our Declaration of Principles, and you can see that the term “dictatorship” as commonly used is not applicable to the dictatorship of the proletariat. That section reads as follows:
“While the workers’ state will necessarily reserve to itself the indispensable right to take all requisite measures to deal with violence and armed attacks against the revolutionary regime, it will at the same time assure adequate civil rights to opposition individuals, groups, and political parties and will guarantee the opportunity for the expression of opposition through the allotment of press, radio and assembly facilities in accordance with the real strength among the people of the opposition groups or parties.”
That goes far beyond the democracy that exists at present. A Workers’ and Farmers’ Government will not only permit free speech and free press, and free assembly in the abstract but will see to it that a minority will have the means to exercise that freedom. Democracy to a certain extent exists under the present regime. But consider the essence of the question: A few workers have the constitutional right to publish a paper but they lack the funds with which to publish a paper. Their right is an abstract one. On the other hand one individual publishes a chain of papers because he has the money, and his right is a real one.
The rights under capitalist society granted by the government representing capitalist interests are, by and large, abstract rights. A famous French writer, Anatole France, expressed this idea as follows: “Under capitalism rich and poor are equal. They both have the right to starve in the streets.” The difference is that only the poor man exercises that right to starve.
When the term dictatorship of the proletariat is mentioned, you must not think of it as a dictatorship of Hitler or Stalin. Trotsky began a struggle against Stalin because of the very fact that Stalin transformed the dictatorship of the proletariat into a personal or a clique dictatorship. Under the dictatorship of the proletariat there will be far, far greater democracy than has ever existed on the face of the earth.
 

Our Aim Is to Establish a Socialist Society
We come now to the heart of the question, the question of whether or not we are guilty of conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence. As the evidence shows, the main object of our so-called conspiracy is to establish a socialist society. How do we intend to do that? That is the main question at issue.
As I shall attempt to show you, all other questions – such as our attitude on war, on trade unionism, our military policy – are subsidiary. The question of guilt or innocence must be determined on the main issue and not on the subsidiary issues. But it is impossible to decide the main issue without considering certain fundamental concepts of socialism.
In the first place, let us get clear what is meant by the term government. Let us not be awed by an abstraction. Men and women elected or appointed to office and having prerogatives constitute this thing we call government. These men and women are not any more gifted than you or I. They have certain authority. Sometimes they abuse that authority – very frequently they do so. Place a man in a position of power and the chances are that he will take advantage of his position and exercise his authority at any and all opportunities. Some people in authority remain courteous; others are corrupted by it.
 
Do We Advocate Violence?
The phrase, destruction or overthrow of the government, raises in most minds a terrible picture of the use of weapons and violence. But you can see that to abolish or destroy or overthrow a government can mean and usually does mean, replacing certain individuals, organized in a certain way, basing themselves on certain concepts, replacing them with other individuals, organized in a different way. and basing themselves on different concepts.
“Whenever any form of government becomes destructive to these ends the people have a right to alter or abolish it and institute a new government in a form most likely to effect their safety and happiness.”
The writers of the Declaration of Independence who formulated the horrible idea that the people have a right to abolish a form of government are not amongst the defendants. The words “overthrow, abolish, destroy” do not necessarily connote violence. They simply mean that the people using those words want to change the government so that it will be based on entirely new principles.
We use the term “capitalist government” – a terrible phrase to some people – does it mean that all those who are elected to congress or to any executive or judicial office are themselves financiers and capitalists? No, it simply means that the government which we call capitalist bases itself upon the rights of private property in the means of production and does everything in its power to protect those rights. Essentially a capitalist government is a government which has as its main function the protection of the existing property relationships.
There are different types of capitalist governments – some conservative, some liberal. As you, know, Roosevelt and some people in his government have been called communists. That, of course, is absurd but it proves that if one does not like a person or does not agree with his policies, it is a good idea to call him communist. Though some people call the Roosevelt administration communist, we designate it by the term capitalist. It is a capitalist government by virtue of the fact that private property in the means of production exists and the government protects the rights of private property in the means of production.
You must remember that what we are interested in primarily, as is shown by the evidence, is not to change the government, but the social system upon which the government is based. We call the present social system capitalist because men are permitted to own productive wealth and to hire and exploit wage labor.
We want a socialist society where all the productive wealth is owned in common and there is no exploitation. What type of government do we want? That is a question of secondary importance. If, for instance, socialism could be introduced under the present form of government – with the two Houses of Congress, the Executive; the Judiciary – we would, not hesitate to do so.
 
Our Form of Government
In our Declaration of Principles you will find proposals for occupational representation. Instead of having representatives from certain territories, we think it is best for the workers and farmers to elect their representatives directly from factories and from the farms. We believe in the principle of occupational representation because we think that anyone elected by his fellow-workers or fellow-physicians or fellow-scientists, is far more likely to represent the real interests of his group. There will be no representation of lawyers under socialism because lawyers are a plague that will no longer exist in a socialist society.
Under a Workers’ and Farmers’ Government there will be one House of Congress instead of two. Our present form of government operates on the principle of checks and balances. The Senate checks the House of Representatives, the President checks both Houses of Congress and then the Judiciary has a check on both the executive and the legislative branches. This, in our opinion, is far from democratic and was instituted primarily to prevent the masses of people from exercising their will in the matter of legislation.
Originally the senators were elected, not by a direct vote of the people but by the legislators of the different states, thus enabling the wealthier citizens to get into the Senate of the United States. Later on, by an amendment to the Constitution, the senators had to be elected by the people. We, on the other hand, want a complete revolution, in the form of government. We want a government organized in such a way that it can best serve the interests of the producers. I know that the term “revolution” sends shivers down the back of Mr. Anderson and he hopes that the same shivers will run down the backs of the jurors. But remember that the term “revolution” does not necessarily imply violence.
I think the Court will define that term, for you – a definition as is found in Webster’s dictionary. It simply means a radical change and social revolution means a radical change in society. Do we not speak of a revolution in science, a revolution in transportation? We even speak of a revolution in women’s dresses.
We want a social revolution; that is undeniable. By that we mean that our aim is to transfer the economic and political power from the class we call capitalists to the workers and farmers. When that happens, a social revolution will have occurred.
The French revolution, as Mr. Cannon correctly testified, was a social revolution because the merchant and capitalist dass displaced the feudal class. The power to rule society was transferred from the landowning feudal nobility to the merchants and industrialists.
There may be political revolutions that are not social revolutions. The revolutions that occur frequently in Latin America are political revolutions because they do not change the social system.
A social revolution may or may not be accompanied by violence. No one knows exactly how it will occur in the future.
 

What Is the Marxist Conception of Social Laws?
Marxists are of the opinion that society operates on the basis of certain laws. It is important for you to understand that basic idea. I do not ask you to agree with our concept of society, but I do ask you to understand what our concept is. For if you realize that we believe that certain laws operate in society, independent of our will and of your will and of Mr. Anderson’s will, you will see that it would be impossible for us to conspire to overthrow the government by force and violence. The responsibility for a revolution lies not upon us but upon the very nature of the social system in which we live.
Some of you might have heard or seen in print the phrase, ‘“economic determinism”. It is not the theory of socialism, but it does give you an idea that socialists consider the economic factor the determining factor in the development of society.
The primary concern of human beings has always been to feed, clothe and shelter themselves. As human beings lived together, certain necessities drove them to invent certain machines and with the invention of these machines production could increase and with the increase in production changes occurred in the economic and social system.
Struggles arose between groups and the victors made slaves out of the vanquished. A system of slavery arose and the forces of production continued to develop.
More machines were invented; the forces of production increased; society developed further and ever further and class struggles arose; slaves revolted against masters; the social system based on slavery could no longer function effectively and that social system was displaced by a new system.
 
Pre-Capitalist Class Struggles
What is known as feudalism came into existence. He who owned the land had the right to exploit the man who worked on the land and this man who worked on the land was called a serf. In comparison with the chattel slave, he was a free man but nevertheless he could not leave the land.
But society continued to develop; the discovery of America gave a tremendous impetus to the development of industry; new markets came into being; new machinery was invented; the forces of production grew and with it a new and powerful class came into being – the merchant class of the middle ages – and it is this merchant class that constituted the beginning of the modern capitalist class. We call that class the “bourgeoisie” and this class began a struggle against the feudal nobility and finally conquered and became the dominant class in society.
Thus you see that, in our opinion, a class struggle has existed since time immemorial. The chattel slaves struggled against the masters, the plebeians struggled against the patricians, the serf against the feudal nobility; and today we have
the fundamental struggle between the capitalists who own the: wealth and the wage workers who create the wealth. And is this struggle a result of man’s will or desire? No, it is a struggle that is due fundamentally to the development of economic forces. A social system is born, develops, decays and is displaced by a new social system – all this by virtue of laws that operate independently of the will of human beings.
A new social system gives birth to new ideas, to new moral concepts. Under the feudal system in the Middle Ages, for instance, the church prohibited the lending of money on interest. To lend money on interest was considered usury. But with the development of the merchant class and the capitalist system, the lending of money became an absolute necessity and obviously people would not lend money unless they could make a profit out of it. The rule of the church against usury was abolished and interest up to a certain point was sanctified.
Man’s ideas, man’s morals, man’s philosophies are determined fundamentally by the economic structure of society and not vice versa. The history of man is determined not by his will nor by his consciousness nor by what he thinks is right or wrong but by inexorable economic forces operating on the basis of certain laws.
This idea was first introduced by Karl Marx, and the defendants, considering themselves Marxists, accept that idea and accepting that idea you can see that the factors which they consider primary in the creating of a social revolution are economic factors. All that we can possibly do is to indicate that the economic forces of society are moving in a certain direction and that the masses of the people must also move in that direction.
Society cannot be changed by the mere desire of a small group to change it. It must, in the first instance, be ripe for a change and in the second instance the masses of men must understand the necessity for a change.
We have now reached that point in the development of society where mankind must take control of social forces and determine the operation of those social forces. Up to now, man has been subjected to social forces that he did not understand and could not cope with. What man must do now is to become master of his own destiny. If man does not do so, then fascism, barbarism, the destruction of all liberties and of all culture will inevitably follow.
 

The Class Struggle in Society Today
I mentioned before the existence of the class struggle in society. Look at our social system and you can see for yourselves how this struggle operates. The tenant farmer struggles against the landlord, the sharecropper against the southern plantation owner, the worker against his employer, farmers and workers together against Wall Street. Why is our society subjected to these struggles? Because each social group wants a larger share of the income that society produces.
Of all the struggles existing in modern society, the one between the industrial wage worker and those who own the industries is the bitterest and most virulent. It is the fundamental struggle of our epoch.
That is not our responsibility, ladies and gentlemen. In comparison to the number of wage workers, our party constitutes a small group; the class struggle goes on without us.
Unfortunately we have not as yet achieved an influence which can permit us to play a decisive role in that struggle. Mr. Anderson is anxious to prevent us from achieving that influence and that is why he asks you for a verdict of guilty. But I can assure Mr. Anderson that the class struggle will go on even if we should be in jail. The coal miners are on strike now. We have nothing to do with it. We had something to do with Local 544 in Minneapolis and that is why we are defendants in this court room. But the struggle between the teamsters and the Minneapolis employers is only a tiny section of the class struggle that goes on constantly throughout the United States. That struggle goes on whether Mr. Anderson and Mr. Schweinhaut like it or don’t like it.
The struggle between the worker on the one hand, anxious to get a higher wage, and the employer on the other hand, anxious to make more profit, is a struggle that will go on regardless of the desire or the intention of any man. There are some employers who are willing to give higher wages but they are prevented by the law of competition under capitalism. By and large the employers are anxious to make more and more profits and, because of that, the class struggle must necessarily continue.
THE COURT: We will have our noon recess at this time.
* * *
THE COURT: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
 
When Men Can Be Good
MR. GOLDMAN: Throughout history there have been men who dreamed of changing society. They saw the poverty, the oppression, the persecution and hatred that prevailed in the world and concluded that the only way by which these evils could be abolished was to have men accept the right kind of beliefs. The prophets of old, Christ, the philosophers of the Middle Ages thought they could change society by teaching men to be good. If only people actually practiced the Commandments!
Then came Karl Marx who presented the startling proposition that to change man, you must change the social system. It is impossible to have a society where love between men and men prevails, unless you have a society where the struggle for economic existence is done away with. Under the present social system, mean, petty and violent struggles prevail in all classes. Way up on top there are struggles for colonies and spheres of influence; then there are struggles in the form of bitter competition between business men; there are struggles between the small business men and the chain stores; there are struggles between workers. Everywhere in society struggle prevails.
There are some people who claim that the human being is essentially bad and no attempt to change his nature can succeed. But when one considers that in spite of the meanness and violence that prevails in society, there are millions of decent human beings, one must come to the conclusion that the human being is essentially good.
Marx concluded that before man can develop to a point where the relationship between one human being and another will be on a decent basis, society will have to be altered. Under the present social system all moral codes and all ethical concepts are accepted, by and large, only in words. People believe in religion, believe in the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man and yet they are ready to kill one another by the millions.
Marx formulated the following proposition: That the ideas, the philosophies, the religions and the morals of a certain epoch are determined fundamentally by the prevailing social system; change the social system and the ethical codes and philosophies will also change.
 

Capitalism in Decline Throughout the World
There are certain diseases in youth which are latent and not until old age sets in does the individual become aware of their existence. The human body has powers of resistance which decrease with old age. Germs which have no ill effect in early age become very dangerous in later stages in life.
Thus it is with the capitalist system. During its youth the contradictions existing within it were easily overcome. In this country, for instance, there were vast stretches of land available for agriculture and settlement; factories could be and were built; railroads were developed. But as the land was occupied and more and more factories were built, it became more difficult for the capitalist system to function. The economic crises which were easily overcome in the early stages of the capitalist system, of this country became more serious until in 1929 a crisis came that shook the very foundations of the country.
Throughout the world the capitalist system is in a stage of decline. Old age has set in and the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system have become acute. Unemployment, fascism, catastrophic wars – these are the diseases that afflict capitalist society in its days of decline. Are the defendants responsible for that? Not in the least!
This country is capable of producing tremendous quantities of goods to satisfy beyond all imagination, the needs of the people. But the industries cannot function for peace, for life – they function only for death. They are now creating planes and bombs and submarines and dreadnaughts but the industries were shut down which people needed for clothing and food and shelter.
And in this period of capitalist decline people are dissatisfied and fascism appears on the scene and takes advantage of their dissatisfaction. The fascists, claiming to create a new order, are actually throwing the world back toward barbarism. Everything that man has produced that is worthwhile is destroyed by this monster. The existence of this monster, however, is not to be attributed to Hitler or Mussolini – to the ill will of one or two or a dozen men – it is to be attributed to the decline of the capitalist system. Capitalism has reached a point where mankind must take control of the productive forces and begin producing goods for the use of the people – and this means socialism – or else it will be hurled into the abyss of fascism and destruction. This is our belief and this is what we teach.
But how will this change from capitalism to socialism come about? Here we come to the heart of the case.
Do we advocate the idea that people should take up arms and destroy the government and thereby bring a change in the social system? By the destruction of the government is necessarily meant, according to Mr. Anderson, the destruction of the people who represent the government and the army and the navy.
 
Socialism Requires a Majority
From the very beginning of the socialist movement there have been struggles around the question as to the best method of changing the social order. Marx fought vehemently against the anarchists, who declared that no government at all is necessary and that every form of government is hostile to the masses.
Then there was a controversy between Marx and a Frenchman by the name of Blanqui, who insisted that a social revolution required only a courageous, armed small group. Marx declared that the liberation of the people is the task of the people themselves and not the task of a few agitators, no matter how determined and courageous. The majority of the people must understand what is necessary and must be willing to struggle to achieve their liberation.
In the Communist Manifesto, written by Marx and his collaborator Engels, the fundamental ideas of socialism were first formulated. That book was introduced into evidence by the government against the defendants. In that book there is found the following statement:
“All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority in the interest of the immense majority.”
Marx therefore accepted two fundamental principles: one, the necessity of convincing the majority of the people of the ideas of socialism, and two, the necessity of establishing a government that will begin building the socialist society.
* * *
Next week’s Militant will carry another section of Albert Goldman’s final summary to the jury. Be sure to follow this stirring appeal by the counsel for defense, who is himself one of those tried and convicted.
 






Below are excerpts from Defense Attorney Albert Goldman’s opening statement to the jury, delivered Tuesday afternoon and Wednesday morning, Oct. 28 and 29. following the opening statement by the prosecution.



* * *
MR. GOLDMAN: Your Honor, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I speak now on behalf of all the defendants with the exception of the defendant Nick Wagner, who is represented by Mr. Dolf. When I say I speak on behalf of all the defendants, I do not thereby admit Mr. Anderson’s contention that they are all members of the Socialist Workers Party. Some were and dropped out of the party; some, I understand, never were members of the party.
When I refer to the defendants and their beliefs, as I shall in the course of this statement, please remember that I mean those defendants who will without any hesitation whatever admit membership in the party.
I do not know whether you will ever sit on such an important case again, not because merely twenty-eight persons are involved in their liberties, but because great principles are involved, the principles of freedom of speech and of the press and of assembly; not only that, but great social theories are involved. Never before, I venture to state, in the history of this court room have the walls re-echoed with such contentions as made by Mr. Anderson (the prosecutor).
Marxism, the theories of Lenin and Trotsky, have been brought into this case by Mr. Anderson. I do not believe, ladies and gentlemen, that in this court room there has ever been an analysis on questions of more vital importance to mankind.
 
A Political Movement on Trial
In the first place the defendants will prove that, if this is a conspiracy at all, it is a very, very peculiar “conspiracy”. It is a “conspiracy” of the most peculiar nature ever entered into between human beings. It is a conspiracy where all of us defendants proclaim to the world what we want, never attempting at any time to conceal our purposes, but, on the contrary, begging people to read what our ideas are.
It is a political movement that is on trial here.
It is a movement that is based on certain ideas, maybe strange to you, and maybe strange to Mr. Anderson and everybody else connected with the prosecution – maybe ideas that you do not agree with and that you will not agree with subsequent to our explanation of them; but it is not a conspiracy
hatched in the darkness of night in some cellar. It is a movement basing itself on philosophy, proclaiming to the world that this philosophy must be accepted by mankind or else the destruction of civilization is inevitable.
Call that a conspiracy if you wish, but know – know the difference between this political movement and a conspiracy hatched in the darkness of night for the purpose of committing a crime.
* * *
We shall show you – and this is one of the most important things and I want you to bear with me if I illuminate it a little extensively – we shall show to you, by the very evidence introduced by the prosecution, that the Socialist Workers’ Party and all the defendants who are members of that party understand that the aim, the objective of that party was to win a majority of the people for its ideas. I repeat: The objective and the aim of the party was to win through education and through propaganda a majority of the people of the United States, and Mr. Anderson will have to convince you that that is criminal.
We shall continue through propaganda, through education, to get everybody in the United States – at least a majority of the people – to accept our ideas, and thereafter to institute a social system which we call by the name of Socialism, a system which we believe will solve all of the ills of mankind, which we believe will abolish war and the destruction that is now raging throughout the universe, because under socialism there will be no countries controlled by a minority of financiers and big industrialists for their profit throwing all the people into useless wars.
We shall introduce such evidence and we shall let the jury decide whether we have a right to our beliefs and our opinions. If Mr. Anderson wants it, we shall gladly go into all the theories of Marxism, and if the jurors do not agree with those theories and they want to put us in jail merely because they do not agree, that is your privilege. But we think that we have a right to our ideas. We have a right to say that the ills of mankind, unemployment, Fascism, destruction, war – that all these ills of mankind require a solution, and that thus far the only solution is the ideas we represent, the ideas of socialism.
 
Our Influence on the Trade Union Movement
The evidence will show that we were very, very interested in the question of trade unionism. We will not deny it! that the Socialist Workers Party adopted resolutions dealing with the question of trade unionism; that it instructed its members to be active in all organizations, particularly trade unions – but in all organizations, social, unemployed, farmers – where people congregate, there should we be. That is what the evidence will show; yes, that we propagate our ideas, to show the majority of the people that they, in order to solve their problems, must accept those ideas. There is no other solution possible.
The evidence will show that some of our members were exceedingly active right here in Minneapolis; that they were responsible, beginning with 1934, for organizing Local 544, General Drivers’ Union, and that subsequently they played a very important role in making a union city out of Minneapolis.
The evidence will not show, contrary to the claims made by the prosecution, that the Socialist Workers Party attempted to impose its control on the unions. The evidence will show that in the union where our members were active, specifically in Local 544, the best kind of democracy prevailed; that truck drivers and members of that union not only were permitted but actually were in opposition to the leadership; that they had a chance to criticise the leadership; that they had a chance to vote against the leadership and put up their own candidates; that at no time did anybody prevent any members in the union from getting freedom of expression.
 
Genuine Democracy in Local 544
The evidence will prove conclusively to you jurors that if there ever was in the history of this country, in the history of the trade union movement in this country, a union democratic to the core, with a leadership that was absolutely honest, incorruptible, fighting for their ideals, fighting for the interests of the workers, and that was free from gangsterism and racketeering, it was Local 544; and the evidence will show you, will convince you, that it was after Local 544 began a fight for democracy against the President of the International Teamsters, Daniel Tobin, who wanted to put his dictatorial hand on the union – after that, when Local 544 had to leave the American Federation of Labor, this indictment resulted.
* * *
The defense will prove Mr. Anderson’s contention that we are opposed to this war, and the evidence will further prove Mr. Anderson’s contention that the defendants consider this war on the part of England and Germany and Italy and the United States as an imperialistic war, fought for the economic interests of the small group of financiers and capitalists who control the destinies of this country, of England, of Germany, of Italy, and of Japan.
The evidence will show that we are opposed to the involvement of this country in the war. There will be no question about that, that we consider this war an imperialistic war upon the part of those countries that I mentioned.
Those are ideas of ours with which the jurors may agree or not, but the evidence will show that every statement made by Mr. Anderson to the effect that we believe in sabotage is absolutely false, the evidence will show that, although we will not give support to any war on the part of the United States Government because we consider it to be an imperialist war, a war for profit, a war for markets, a war for spheres of influence, a war for colonies, still the evidence will show that so long as we are in a minority, so long as we cannot convince the majority of the people that our ideas are correct, we shall submit and we have nothing else to do but to submit to the government.
We shall show that the Socialist Workers Party opposes sabotage. We shall show that Mr. Anderson’s claim is absolutely wrong and based on no foundation whatever to the effect that we prefer the enemy, the imperialistic enemy of the United States, to defeat our government. It is absolutely false. What we want, as the evidence will show, is to have the workers and farmers establish their own government, and then to continue a real war against Fascism. The evidence will show that we do not believe that England and the United States, as constituted at the present, are fighting against Fascism for Democracy, but are actually fighting to protect the interests of this small group of financiers and bankers.
The evidence will show that we have never advocated the idea of insubordination in the army. The evidence will show that, just as we believe – and Mr. Anderson stated it correctly and he quoted, I believe, from my pamphlet on What Is Socialism – just as we believe you can no more stop a revolution than you can stop an earthquake, so after years of suffering and war and privation, the men who are doing the fighting and dying will themselves oppose the war and will look for a solution where they can get peace.
Peace, peace, they will cry and neither I nor anyone else will have to agitate them, and neither Mr. Anderson nor anybody else by putting us in jail will stop them.
The prosecution in the indictment and Mr. Anderson in his opening statement charged that our party was in favor of controlling the militia by the trade unions. Mr. Anderson did not explain that correctly.
 
Military Training Under Trade Union Control
Our policy is summed up in the following phrase, the evidence will show: “Military training of every worker under the control of the trade unions.” Now, if Mr. Anderson thinks that is criminal, that is his privilege. The evidence will show why we adopted that policy. We contend that the evidence will show that the present army of the United States is controlled by officers and especially by generals completely hostile to the interests of the great masses. The evidence will show that I wrote an article after France capitulated, in which I pointed out that the reason for the defeat of the French Army was because the generals and the bankers who controlled that army were the real “Fifth-Columnists” and that they were the ones who were responsible for the defeat. And the evidence will show that I argued that we cannot trust the American generals and the American higher officers to fight Fascism because in essence they are Fascists themselves, most of them. They are autocrats, arrogant, they utilize every opportunity to teach obedience and discipline in a disgusting manner, and that by and large they are people like that General “Yoo-hoo” Lear who made the soldiers walk fifteen or twenty miles because they yoo-hooed some girls.
The evidence will show that we believe that the trade unions should take control of the training of union members as officers, not for the purpose, as Mr. Anderson suggests, of overthrowing the government by force and violence, but for the purpose of protecting the interests of the soldier masses. We may be wrong. You may not agree with us, but the evidence will show that we sincerely believe, and will produce facts in the attempt to prove, that the soldiers are suffering under reactionary discipline, that they ought to have greater democracy, and that the higher officers of the army cannot be trusted because they are in essence defenders of the present day social system, which crushes the liberty and the initiative of the soldier masses.
 
We Are Internationalists
Perhaps some of you have interpreted some of my remarks as indicating that I hold Mr. Anderson personally responsible for the prosecution. I certainly do not. This prosecution comes from Washington. Mr. Anderson, as the District Attorney, must of course take orders from Washington; and even Mr. Schweinhaut, who is from Washington, also is subject to orders. I do not hold them personally responsible.
The case here, I think the evidence will show, involves big political questions and big political maneuvering that took place in Washington, not in Minneapolis.
Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, accused us of being internationalists. All of us who are members of the Socialist Workers Party are internationalists. But Mr. Anderson seems to think that it is a crime, or a part of a conspiracy, and I must answer.
We are internationalists because we really take seriously the doctrine that all men are created equal. That they must have an equal opportunity, and that they are equally good; that there is no difference between German and English and American and Chinese and Negroes; that whatever differences crop up, upon maturity, are the result of their environment, and not of their birth. So the doctrine that all men arc created equal is full of meaning to us. We live by it. We have no prejudices, and we detest all forms of racial, religious and national prejudice.
Now I come to a point which I presume should be one of the principal questions at issue, a point concerning which perhaps more evidence will be introduced than on any other point. It is no longer a question involving theory. It is a question which you, ladies and gentlemen, even though you are not acquainted with Marxism and social theory, are perfectly capable of deciding without any help from experts or would-be experts. That is the question of the Union Defense Guard.
We shall introduce evidence to show that in the year 1938, some members of Local 544 got together and decided to organize a Union Defense Guard; that those members did that because at that very time there was an organization, national in scope, and active particularly in Minneapolis, known as the Silver Shirts, an organization fascist in character, with the objective of destroying all the rights of labor, and all the democratic rights of all the people, a fascist organization.
 
Union Defense Against Fascists
The evidence will show that those members of 544 learned that the Silver Shirt organization was supported by some labor-hating employers in Minneapolis, and was to attempt the destruction, not only of Local 544, but of all unionism in Minneapolis, to destroy the halls, to attack the meetings, to destroy the property of the unions; that those union men thereupon decided to organize a Defense Guard for the purpose of defending the union halls, the union property, and union meetings against any possible attacks by these Silver Shirt members. Our evidence will prove all this, and if there is one thing that we will not deny, it is this, that the members of our party and the members of the union who were not members of the party – and every American with any red blood in his veins, would do exactly the same thing – prepared themselves to resist any attempt on the part of the fascists to destroy the rights of labor and the democratic rights of the people.
Now, I do not think that any juror will deny any American citizen, or any trade union member, the right to organize a Union Defense Guard. If the prosecution persists in its attempt to make this Union Defense Guard out to be a subversive organization, dedicated to the task of destroying the United States Government, all I can say is that this whole case is nothing but a frame-up on the part of the prosecution, because the evidence will show conclusively that the purpose of this Union Defense Guard was nothing except to defend the rights of the union members, not only of Local 544, but all union men.
 
We Are Disciples of Marx, Lenin and Trotsky
Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, charged us with being Marxists, and I am afraid that we will have to admit that Karl Marx formulated the basic doctrines of our movement back in 1848.
Now, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the evidence will show that Karl Marx wrote many books, and that you can get them in all the libraries in the United States; that you can buy them in most book stores; that, together with other writers, Karl Marx is considered now by people who disagree with his writings, as one of the greatest social thinkers of the age; that he had certain theories with which we agree. We do not agree with all the theories that Karl Marx formulated, but with his basic theories undoubtedly we agree. What we do agree with is found in our Declaration of Principles.
Mr. Anderson also charged us, and the indictment charges us, with believing the theories of Lenin. Some of you, in your answers to the questions put to prospective jurors, said that you had heard about those theories; some of you had read something about those theories and about the Soviet government. The evidence will show, and I hope will convince you, that some of your ideas are not correct about the Soviet Union and the Soviet government. The Soviet Union is one thing, and the Soviet government is another. We, of course, opposed the Stalin government very, very seriously, but we think that the fundamental basis of the Soviet Union is correct, that is, the fact that all property, productive property, is owned by the people. That we believe in, but the fact that the Stalin government has subjected the people to a terrorist dictatorship, that we have fought from the very beginning, and we shall continue to fight.
 
Affirm Ideas of Lenin and Trotsky
So far as the principles of Lenin are concerned, again the evidence will show that insofar as we agree with them, they are found in our literature, and especially in the Declaration of Principles. We do not claim to agree with everything that Lenin said. But with his fundamental theories we agree, and we put them into our Declaration of Principles.
The indictment mentions, and the prosecutor was very, very careful to bring to your attention, that Leon Trotsky was a man whose principles constitute the basis of our party. Here again I admit it. We do not deny that we did everything possible to defend Trotsky against that horrible organization of Stalin, the GPU, and that for thirteen years we succeeded in keeping him alive, and finally one of Stalin’s agents succeeded in murdering him. We will not deny that we did all in our power to defend Leon Trotsky, not merely because we liked him as a man but because we think that his ideas represent the hope of mankind.
As Mr. Anderson indicated, Trotsky has written many articles and, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, if you find us guilty of conspiracy on the basis of the fact that we circulated and published some of the things that Trotsky had written, you will have to find Liberty Magazine guilty; you will have to find Life Magazine guilty; you will have to find almost every important magazine and every important publisher in the United States guilty, because every important magazine and newspaper in this country has published articles by Leon Trotsky, and his books have been published by some of the most important publishers in this country.
 
Approve Workers Revolution of 1917
No, we do not deny for one moment that we considered Leon Trotsky to be a leader of our movement, and that we were willing to expend every effort to defend him against the OGPU. One of our members was shot and killed in Mexico in an attempt to defend him. His secretaries were killed, four of them, in the attempt to defend him. His sons and daughters were murdered, but he went on with his work. He had an idea. He wanted to save mankind from the destruction with which it is threatened, and his books and writings are very precious to us.
Again, the evidence will show that we do not believe everything that he said was correct. We do not hold any human being to be infallible. He was human, and therefore he made mistakes, but the fundamental doctrines that he taught are those doctrines which we believe will ultimately save mankind, and if not accepted, will lead to the destruction of all civilization.
We also will not deny, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that we approve of the Russian Revolution of October 1917. We consider it to be the greatest step forward in the history of mankind, because for the first time in history the people, the masses who were subjected to the tyrants’ regime, the masses who were subjected to all the poverty, who were made dogs by the czarist regime; the masses of peasants and workers arose and said to themselves, “We shall take into our possession the wealth of Russia, and try to produce for our own welfare.” That is why we think it is the greatest revolution in history.
 
We Desire Peaceful Transition to Socialism
Now we come to the very heart of this case. I want to beg your pardon, ladies and gentlemen, if I went into theories and ideas that seemed to be unnecessary so far as this case is concerned, but you will certainly admit that I had to answer Mr. Anderson’s opening statement, because he brought in Marx and Lenin and Trotsky and our ideas about trade unionism. I had to answer.
Essentially – and I am sure the Court will instruct you – essentially, the question boils itself down to this: Did we advocate the overthrow of the Government by force and violence? That is the heart of the question; because obviously, ladies and gentlemen, suppose you did not agree with our theories about trade unionism; suppose you did not agree with our theories about the war, our opposition to the war; supposing you did not agree with our designating the governments of England and United States and Germany and Italy as imperialistic; you would not convict us because of that. You said – and I believe every one of you – that you believed in the right of free speech, free press, free assembly, and it would be impossible to imagine a jury composed of American citizens, convicting individuals because they did not agree with the opinions of those individuals.
MR. SCHWEINHAUT (prosecution): I submit that that is clearly argument, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I agree with you, Mr. Schweinhaut. I think counsel should adhere to the line of proof, in answer to the statements of the Government, and not argue the merits of his position as such.
 
Believe in the Class Struggle
MR. GOLDMAN: This is a question of advocacy, the question of whether or not we advocate the violent overthrow of the Government, and the question of whether we conspired to overthrow the Government by force and violence. Those are the two counts in the indictment, conspiracy to overthrow and conspiracy to advocate violence. Those are the important questions.
We shall prove that the defendants believe in the theory of the class struggle: that in our present society there are two major classes; on the one hand the class that owns the productive wealth of society; on the other hand, the class of workers, and by the term “workers”, we mean the farmers, laborers, industrial workers, all those who work by hand or brain, and that this class is exploited by the financier and big capitalists; and between those classes there is a constant struggle going on. We do not have to advocate that struggle in order that it should exist. It existed before we were in existence, before you were born, before I was born, before Karl Marx was born. It is a fact in society, and this struggle between those classes goes on in society, regardless of our wishes and desires. The American workers and farmers, the majority of whom as yet know nothing of our theories, continue to struggle against the imperialists and against the Wall Street bankers, even though they know nothing about our theories.
Then the evidence will show that we believe that at a certain moment in history this class struggle will become more and more serious, and might lead to a violent war. Again, the evidence will show that it is not a question of whether we desire it and advocate it, but that the class struggle exists and will develop regardless of our wishes and our desires, and regardless of your intentions and desires, and regardless of the prosecution’s intentions and desires.
The evidence will further show, as Mr. Anderson has himself indicated, that we prefer a peaceful transition to socialism; but that we analyze all the conditions in society, we analyze history, and on the basis of this analysis we predict, we predict, that after the majority of the people in the United States will want socialism established, that the minority, organized by the financiers and by the capitalists, will use violence to prevent the establishment of socialism. That is what we predict.
 
Predict Overthrows of Capitalism
Now the jurors will be instructed by the Court, I am sure, to be, again, very careful about this point, the question of advocacy, as against prediction, and the evidence will show that I wrote a pamphlet called What is Socialism, in which I deal with that question very, very simply, and I think, very, very clearly. We prefer a peaceful transition, but we predict that the minority will not permit the majority its right to establish socialism. This is the heart of the question.
And the evidence will show that we were constantly insisting from the very beginning of the existence of the Socialist Workers Party, that we had a constitutional and a legal right to say what we said and to do what we did, and that in insisting upon that right we did everything openly. Our headquarters are still open. The evidence will show that. The evidence will show that we still continue our meetings, that we still publish and distribute our papers. It is a peculiar kind of criminals that you have, who insist on their rights to do what they are doing and to say what they are saying.
MR. ANDERSON: Your Honor, it seems to us that whether or not they insist on their rights is not a question for this jury at all.
THE COURT: I do not think it is, nor do I think that the matter to which counsel has referred, with reference to the prediction, is a proper matter for an opening statement.
MR. GOLDMAN: I said that the evidence will show that instead of advocating and inciting to violent overthrow, that the defendants merely predict. It is their prediction.
THE COURT: You say the defendants predict it?
MR. GOLDMAN: Yes, the defendants predict it.
THE COURT: I think you should devote yourself to a fact statement, what you propose to prove. That is not what you have been referring to in this part of your recital.
MR. GOLDMAN: The evidence will so show. We expect to prove it.
THE COURT: Just tell the jury what you expect to prove.
MR. GOLDMAN: We expect to prove that the defendants never advocated, never incited to violence, but simply predicted the violence of the reactionary minority. We say that the defendants had a right to say, under the constitution, what they said, and to do what they did. We rely on the jurors who swore to be fair and impartial to us, who swore to uphold the First Amendment guaranteeing free speech and free press, that they will give us that right, even if they do not agree with us. Thank you.
 




Why We Defend the Soviet Union
Since many various and contradictory interpretations are being given to the recently signed Soviet-Japanese pact, it offers another opportunity to point out that our defense of the Soviet Union depends neither upon what Stalin does nor upon the significance which we attach to any agreement entered into by the Kremlin murderer.
It will be remembered that when Stalin openly proclaimed to the world in August 1939 that he would henceforth play ball with Hitler rather than with the democratic imperialists, a number of people within the ranks of our own party (who subsequently split away and formed their own organization), decided that they could no longer defend the Soviet Union. By their decision they in effect stated that they were willing to defend the Soviet Union only if Stalin would fight alongside the democracies but would not defend it if Stalin fought on the side of Hitler.
On our part, we insisted that our policy of defending the Soviet Union was based on the existence in that country of those property relations which had been established by the October Revolution and which had not yet been destroyed by the Stalinist bureaucracy. Defending the Soviet Union means defending these property relations, and not Stalin, whose policies we invariably condemned, including his pact with Hitler and his invasion of Finland.
We interpreted the pact and all Stalin’s subsequent acts as indicating a fear on his part of being involved in a major conflict, a desire to avoid such a conflict and at the same time to get military-strategic advantages to guard against a future attack on the part of Hitler. The minority in our ranks, as well as the Social-Democrats and most bourgeois democrats, interpreted the pact as evidence of a close partnership between Hitler and Stalin for the purpose of conquering and dividing the world, at least the British Empire. By this time the latter interpretation has become so ridiculous that even the minority which left us has dropped it. (I don’t see any references now to the “Moscow-Berlin Axis” in their paper.)
The point that it is essential to make, however, is that it is possible for us to make a mistake in interpreting the causes and the significance of an agreement made by Stalin, without its having any effect on our policy of defending the Soviet Union. Many questions have, for instance, arisen with reference to the signing of the Soviet Japanese pact. Did Stalin sign the pact because it gives him a free hand against Hitler? That is hardly plausible for the simple reason that he is not foolish enough to trust the Japanese imperialists in case of a war between the Soviet Union and Germany.
 

Hitler’s Pressure Behind Pact with Japan
The most plausible explanation of the pact is that it was entered into under pressure from Hitler. The pact creates the impression that Japan is now ready to send its military and naval forces towards the Malayan Peninsula and the Dutch Indies. Such a move on the part of Japan, or even the threat of such a move, Hitler hopes, will prevent the United States from involving itself too deeply in the war in Europe. It does not seem likely that Japan will make any actual attack in the southern Pacific until it appears that Hitler is fairly certain of winning the war. The pact therefore can be taken as having been signed under the pressure of Hitler, a pressure which became all the greater with his decisive victory in the Balkans.
There are other questions about the pact which are difficult to answer. Does it mean that Stalin has made a deal with the Mikado with reference to China? Will Stalin continue to send aid to the Chinese in their struggle against Japan? The Stalinists are trying hard to create the impression that such aid will continue, but it is hardly probable that a pact between the Soviet Union and Japan should be sighed without taking into consideration such an important question.
 

Pact Is a Blow at China
It is impossible for anyone to be absolutely definite in answering such questions. Marxism offers no key to solving the riddle of Stalin’s intentions and purposes at any particular time or in any signing any particular agreement. Whether Stalin will attack Hitler or refrain from attacking him; whether he will help Turkey against Hitler or divide Turkey with Hitler; whether he will cease or continue giving aid to Chiang Kai-shek, are all questions subject to a great deal of speculation. Basing ourselves on all the relevant facts we can indicate the most probable course that Stalin will follow.
Marxism does offer us a method of analyzing the nature of the Stalinist bureaucracy and the nature of the state over which Stalin has control. Marxism also enables us to predict with certainty that Stalin will be unable to solve the problems confronting the Soviet Union and consequently we can predict with certainty the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy by the Soviet workers.
We do not have to speculate on certain questions involving the Soviet-Japanese pact, just as we did not have to speculate on certain questions involving the Stalin-Hitler pact. We are absolutely certain that the mere signing of the pact is a blow at the Chinese people who are exerting every ounce of energy to expel the Japanese imperialists. We may be wrong in thinking that Stalin will cease sending military aid to China but we are not and cannot be wrong in indicating the adverse effect that the treaty must have upon the struggle of the Chinese people.
And as we have pointed out on innumerable occasions the signing of these pacts reacts against the Soviet Union because the millions of workers and peasants who are not trained to make the distinction between Stalin and the Soviet Union can no longer, by virtue of their resentment at the pacts, be relied on to defend the Soviet Union.
Stalin’s politics – domestic as well as foreign – weaken the Soviet Union but thus far have not changed the essential property relations in the Soviet Union. And it is always necessary to remember that we defend only the Soviet Union and not Stalin.
 




The Battle of Yugoslavia
It is quite natural for workers to get ascertain feeling of satisfaction at seeing Hitler bump into an obstacle – even a minor one. Since his invasion of Poland the arch enemy of the working class has had easy sailing, riding rough-shod over Europe, and was stopped only by the English channel and the British imperialist navy and air force.
After Hitler knocked France out of the war, one after another of the small Balkan nations capitulated to him. Rumania was easy pickings and Bulgaria was still easier. It cost Hitler nothing to take over these countries. Yugoslavia was to be next and Hitler was satisfied With the course of events until the revolt of the officer caste of the Yugoslav army upset his calculations. He was compelled to use something more than the war of nerves and diplomacy to achieve his ends in Yugoslavia.
Possessed of a certain tradition as fighters for independence the Serbian officer caste was unwilling to surrender to Hitler without putting up some kind of a struggle. The ease with which the Serbian officers succeeded in getting rid of the Cvetkovitch government, when that government signed a treaty putting Yugoslavia under Hitler’s control, leads some observers to believe that the palace revolution was staged with the knowledge and connivance of the Cvetkovitch government, and with the British playing the leading role in the whole affair.
The theory sounds plausible but whether it is true or not is unimportant. The fact remains that whereas Hitler and the world in general thought that he had Yugoslavia in the bag, he found himself confronted with the necessity of conquering that country by force of arms.
 

Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea
The very revolt of the Serbian officers shows how the workers and peasants of the small nations are given the dreadful choice by their governments of either submitting to German imperialism or fighting and dying for British and American imperialism.
How easy it is to recognize the difference between the nationalism of the upper class and the nationalism of the workers and poor peasants! For the upper class Serbian nationalism is a means to guarantee their exclusive right to exploit their own people and to rule over minority peoples such as the Croats and Slovenes. The nationalism of the workers and peasants is based on their legitimate opposition to any foreign exploiter and constitutes no danger whatever to the workers and peasants of another country.
Under present conditions the justifiable nationalistic feeling of the workers and peasants and their hatred and fear of Hitler are utilized by the landlords and capitalists of Yugoslavia primarily for protecting their property interests. The Yugoslav army, composed mainly of peasants, will be fighting and dying to assure the preservation of a system that furnishes them less than a bare subsistence.
In Yugoslavia as well as in Greece the champions of capitalist democracy can look the country over with a microscope and find no traces of the democracy for which they are fighting. The thousands of workers buried in the Greek concentration camps because they fought against their own tyrannical government are sure to answer with a shrug of their shoulders if the favorite question is put to them whether capitalist democracy is not better than fascism. But that after all is immaterial to these champions; they are not at all averse to using dictatorships for the purpose of saving their own hides and their own somewhat democratic and comfortable existence.
Assuming even that the Yugoslavs and Greeks come out victorious in the war against Hitler and Mussolini, the workers and poor peasants can look forward to nothing but a return of the back-breaking toil which characterizes their lot under the regime of their capitalists and landlords. They cannot even look forward to a victory of their own imperialism because in reality their nations are fighting the battles of British and American imperialisms!
If there is anything that is symbolic of the hopelessness of the position of the small European nations, in a world dominated by a few great imperialist powers it is the suicide of Teleki the Hungarian premier. In the hope of saving a slight degree of independence for the cruel and vicious ruling class of Hungary, Teleki decided to play ball with Hitler. But when the latter demanded the right to send troops against Yugoslavia by way of Hungary, thus involving that country in the war, the brave Premier decided to defy Hitler – and committed suicide. Thus did he proclaim to the world that the ruling classes of the small European nations, caught in the struggle between imperialist giants, are completely helpless.
 

For Revolutionary War Against Fascism
To the workers and peasants of the small European nations, Hitler looms as their great enemy. The “New Order” which he has proclaimed as his aim represents a new slavery for them – or better, an old slavery under a new master. But to fight that enemy effectively, so that he will be completely destroyed without the possibility of being revived, a palace revolution on the part of nationalistic officers favoring Great Britain is useless. The workers and peasants of Yugoslavia, of Rumania, of Greece and of all the Balkan nations can free themselves of the slavery which will be their lot under Hitler in one way and in one way only – by uniting their efforts for a struggle for a Socialist United States of Europe. This cannot be done by fighting under the leadership of Simovitch, who represents the interests of capitalists and landlords hoping to achieve a degree of independence for themselves by a victory of Great Britain and the United States. It can be done only by a government representing the Soviets of Workers and Peasants of the Balkan nations, appealing for help to the workers and peasants of Germany and France and other European countries. For the advanced workers and peasants of the small Balkan nations the task is clear: the organization of a party of the Fourth International, a party that will turn the struggle against Hitler into its proper channels. To fight for the independence of their nations, to fight for their social liberation the workers and peasants of Europe must fight for a Socialist United States of Europe.
 




For the Independence of Ethiopia
With the expulsion of the Italian imperialist army from Ethiopia, the people of that country should lose no time in demanding the immediate retirement of all British troops and complete independence. And, what is more important, they should prepare their forces to conduct a serious struggle to win those demands.
One can be absolutely certain that British imperialism will hold on to Ethiopia as long as it possibly can and will not grant independence to the Ethiopian people unless it is compelled to do so.
When in 1935 Mussolini sent an army to subjugate the Ethiopians, the Trotskyist movement unhesitatingly came out in favor of the Ethiopian people against the Italian imperialists.
Some people were surprised at the fact that we took such a position. How could a revolutionary party representing everything that constitutes progress defend a backward country like Ethiopia? It was asserted, and the truth of the assertion could not be challenged, that feudalism and slavery characterized Ethiopian society and that Haile Selassie, the “Lion of Judah,” was nothing but a cruel slave-driver.
There were those who argued further that the conquest of Ethiopia by an advanced capitalist country would be progressive because its backwardness would thereby be destroyed. Others, recognizing the imperialist aims of Italy, were unwilling to take sides in the struggle, also offering the backwardness of Ethiopia and the cruelty of its ruler as justification for their attitude of neutrality.
Revolutionary Marxists brushed away all these arguments as superficial and presented the basic Marxist contention: that in the modern world imperialism constitutes the most reactionary force because it is imperialism that prevents the growth and further development of the productive forces. Consequently the struggle of any group, even though living in a backward country, against any section of the imperialist world is progressive in character and must be supported.
We did not support Ethiopia against Italian imperialism because we preferred the Ethiopian backward economy to the capitalist economy of Italy but because a victory of the Ethiopian people would have been a blow at the whole system of imperialism.
There was of course, and there can be, no danger whatever that a victory of the Ethiopians might lead to the supplanting of capitalist economy by the feudal and slave-owning economy of Ethiopia. Capitalist economy can be replaced only by a socialist economy and a defeat of Italian imperialism at the hands of the Ethiopians would advance the interests of the future socialist economy.
At the time of the invasion of Ethiopia by Italy, British imperialism was willing to permit the subjugation of the Ethiopian people by a rival imperialism. The British imperialists were not exactly overjoyed at the spectacle but still did not consider Mussolini’s venture of such danger to themselves as to justify going to war about it. Under the leadership of Eden a small section of the British ruling class favored taking drastic measures to teach Mussolini a lesson, but Eden was overruled. The loss of independence of the Ethiopians was a matter that did not disturb the British imperialists. All they did was to give the “Lion of Judah” asylum in London, no doubt thinking that he might come in handy in the future. Sure enough Churchill and Eden had a chance to dust off the Lion of Judah. When the British imperialists found themselves at war with Mussolini they shipped Haile Selassie back to mobilize the Ethiopians against the Italian army.
The Ethiopian tribesmen, not belonging to the leftist sects that plague the revolutionary movement of the advanced capitalist countries, but being practical people, decided that it was perfectly proper to accept guns from the British imperialists and use them against the Italian imperialists. The main enemy were the robbers who had actual possession of the house and. it was necessary to utilize all means to kick them out.
 

The Fight Against British Imperialism
And now that the Italian exploiters have been compelled to get out, the Ethiopians should turn their attention to the British who helped the Ethiopians not out of any altruistic motives but because it served British imperialist interests to do so.
The leaders of British imperialism have already announced that they will take the Ethiopians under their tutelage and grant them independence only after a period of preparatory training.
That the Ethiopian people require help to develop their country is something, that cannot be denied. But that the Ethiopian people require training by the British imperialists in order to be independent is disproved by the fact that they have been independent for centuries without the aid pf the British imperialists.
It would be perfectly possible for Great Britain to help the Ethiopians develop their country industrially without subjecting them to any period of tutelage. But that ife but of the question for the British ruling class which is not interested in the progress and independence of the Ethiopians. It is interested only in exploiting the Ethiopians.
Only a socialist regime in England would grant independence to Ethiopia and at the same time help the Ethiopians develop their country industrially. Under a socialist regime it would be to the advantage of the English people to see to it that all industrially backward countries received their help. Under socialism the standard of living in one country rises to the extent that all countries are fully developed. That is why the colonial and semi-colonial peoples must join the revolutionary proletariat of the advanced countries in the struggle against imperialism.
Whereas the Lion of Judah can come to some agreement with the British Lion and thus obtain some crumbs for himself, the Ethiopian people have no other recourse than to demand complete independence from the British imperialists and to struggle for it with all weapons at their disposal.
 




The Stalinist “Peace” Movement
If there is anything that is more difficult to struggle against than confusion it is consciously-created confusion. To argue with a. person who says that peace is something attainable by men of good will is a task requiring the utmost patience, at times leading to complete nervous exhaustion. But to argue with people who consciously confuse issues in order to conceal their real designs and to confuse the innocent is well-nigh impossible.
And conscious confusion constitutes the essence of the program for peace promulgated by the Stalinist-led American Peace Mobilization.
The Stalinists are far from being pacifists but they understand that many in the ranks of those who are anti-war are pacifists and they are perfectly willing to give a pacifist tinge to their anti-war program in order to gain support from innocent pacifists. The A.P.M. program has a strong isolationist tinge. The people who drafted that program are not isolationists but they know that much of the anti-war sentiment is based on isolationism and they do not hesitate to give an isolationist color to their anti-war program. Nowhere and at, no time has a movement based itself on so much deceit as the Stalinist movement.
It must be understood that we are not talking about the thousands of sincere people who believe in the program of the A.P.M., but of those who consciously pull the strings and are the prime movers in the formulation of the program. Sincere pacifists could write a program which would be nothing but confusion; the same is true of sincere isolationists. But only Stalinist bureaucrats are capable of writing an anti-war program designed to confuse.
* * *
“We must secure a foreign policy freed from imperialist aims” is part of the A.P.M. “plan to get out of the war.” Is there any indication as to what kind of a government will follow a policy freed from imperialist aims or how such a government can be secured? That is a matter left to the imagination of the reader.
It is only those who have read Lenin’s pamphlet on Imperialism who understand that imperialism is not a policy followed by a government composed of bad people. It is a stage in the development of capitalism and every government of an imperialist country necessarily follows an imperialist policy.
For a government to follow a non-imperialist policy, it must be a government placed in power by the working masses for the purpose of destroying the capitalist system which is the basis of imperialism.
It is only those who have read and follow Lenin and those who are interested in telling the truth to workers who would make clear the necessity of destroying the capitalist system in order “to secure a foreign policy freed from imperialist aims.”
 

Ignores the Nature of Capitalist War
What is true of this particular aspect of the APM program is true of the whole program. There is not a single suggestion in it that the war now raging is a product of the capitalist system and that to fight against the war it is necessary to mobilize the working masses for the purpose of destroying that system. The program is pacifist, that is, it is not based on the concept of carrying on a revolutionary struggle against war.
In and by themselves the proposals advanced in the program may be perfectly acceptable. To get out and stay out of the world war; to defend and improve the American standard of living; to regain and strengthen our constitutional liberties etc., are not objectionable demands. But the program definitely creates the impression that all that is necessary for the American people to do is to ignore the war that is going on, stick to our own country and everything will turn out for the best. A strictly isolationist position with a pacifist tinge. Surely Norman Thomas should be invited to become president of the organization. But Norman Thomas is a pacifist who knows that the Stalinists are not pacifists. He is not an innocent, and the Stalinists, must have real innocents who, because they are fooled, thereby are in a better position to fool others. The Rev. John Thompson, national chairman of the A.P.M. is a better person to head the organization than Norman Thomas.
 

Not A Word About Fascism!
In the program itself, as printed in the Daily Worker of April 7, there is nothing to indicate that fascism exists in the world and constitutes a danger to the workers everywhere. Is that because the Stalinists are still following the policy of the early period of the war when they left Hitler alone and concentrated their attacks on British imperialism? That cannot be because in their press and manifestoes the Stalinists now openly attack both imperialist camps, indicating thereby Stalin’s fear of Hitler and the possibility of a shift to the democratic imperialist camp.
The real reason seems to be that the Stalinists are at the present moment, because Stalin is not yet ready to throw in his lot with the democratic imperialist, unable to give a proper answer to the problem raised by every thinking worker as to how to fight the danger represented by Hitler. There are only two ways of fighting Hitler. Either one accepts the idea of fighting him under the leadership of Churchill and Roosevelt representing the imperialist interests of the capitalist class, or of turning the war into a real struggle against fascism by the workers taking power. The Stalinists are not yet ready to accept the leadership of the democratic imperialists and they are certainly fearful of a revolutionary solution to the problem of the struggle against Hitler.
Thus does the Peoples Front continue to sow confusion in the ranks of the workers. For it must be remembered that the Peoples Front still exists. It has simply changed its policies. Whereas before Stalin’s pact with Hitler it advocated the policy of uniting the democracies with the Soviet Union for war against Hitler, it now advocates a policy of uniting with the Soviet Union for a “people’s peace.” Stalin is anxious for peace. If Hitler will not give it to him we shall witness another change of policy on the part of the Peoples Front.
 



Judging by remarks made by some of our sympathizers, the decision of the New York Local of our party to give critical support to Eugene P. Connolly, running for Congress on the American Labor Party ticket, is not very well understood. Subjected to any Marxist analysis the decision ot the New York Local is completely justified.
To support or not to support another workers’ party in an election is not at all a question of principle. There are no general rules which can be followed in determining when and whether a should give critical support to a party. The only general rule that can be followed is that a decision to give critical support to a Labor party or any party of workers should further the interests of the working class and consequently of the revolutionary party.
It can be seen that a rule so general cannot alone aid us in determining our derision in a, specific situation. There is no way to avoid an analysis of all the factors to determine whether supporting or not supporting another working-class party furthers the party at a particular time.
 
We Are For an Independent Labor Party
In the first place, it must be remembered that our party favors the building of a Labor party, that is, of a party organized and controlled by the trade unions or a substantial portion of them. Under conditions where the vast majority of the workers support capitalist parties, the creation of an independent Labor party would constitute a tremendous step forward. We must therefore do everything in our power to further the building of such a party.
It would be absurd for us to wait until a Labor party is created on a national scale before supporting a local Labor party. Whenever and wherever there is a local Labor party which has substantial support from organized labor we should support it against capitalist parties unless there are valid reasons for not doing so. To pile up as many votes as possible for a local Labor party helps build one on a national scale.
Are we in a position to get on the ballot and run our independent candidate? is the party that we are thinking of supporting a real Labor party or only one on paper? Even though it is a small party will our support help build a larger Labor party? Will running our own candidate help elect to office a reactionary candidate? All these and other questions must be analyzed before a decision is taken either way.
A reason that would justify support of another party at one time would not justify supporting it at a different time and under different circumstances.
And what has been said with reference to supporting a Labor party is also true with reference to the question of giving critical support to the candidates of a workers’ party that is not strictly a Labor party, such as the Socialist or Communist parties. If in any country or in any locality of this country there is no Labor party but there is a strong Socialist or Communist party we are not at all in principle committed to the idea of refusing to give critical support to the candidates of such a party. Our decision will always be determined by the particular factors that prevail.
 
The ALP Has Real Trade Union Support
It is enough to state that a substantial number of important trade unions constitute the backbone of the American Labor party to realize that it is not paper Labor party. It has not as many unions as we would like to see it have. The pro-Roosevelt and pro-war right wing withdrew its support and thus reduced the number of trade unions supporting the Labor party but enough important trade unions are left in the party to justify the statement that it is a real Labor party and that its growth will help build a Labor party on the American scene. From the point of view of our general program of helping build a Labor party, giving critical support to Connolly was the only justifiable tactic.
A factor of importance in our decision to support the ALP candidate was the anti-war program of that party. It is of course out of the question for us to support a Republican or Democratic candidate even though for one reason or another such a candidate happens to come out against war. All the reformists of the district where the election is taking place are supporting the pro-war Democratic candidate. We could not support a Labor party candidate who is in favor of entry into the imperialist war or of any measures, such as the lease-lend bill, which constitute steps towards entry.
I can hear sectarians shout that Connolly is not really against the imperialist war; his program is an isolationist and pacifist program. To that we answer that the workers supporting Connolly think that he actually will be a fighter against the imperialist war. We don’t like the program and we have not hesitated to say so. But the fact remains that the ALP is considered by the workers as an anti-war party. The program of a party to which we give critical support will never be completely to our liking. If it were we would immediately offer to merge with it and not simply give it critical support.
 
Yes, We’ll Fight Side by Side with Stalinists
Many well-meaning people are horrified at the idea that we are supporting a Stalinist-controlled party. But we must not forget that this Stalinist-controlled party is backed by Stalinist-controlled unions and we have at no time and we shall never at any time oppose workers’ organizations simply because they arc Stalinist-led. We want to remind our critics that we support the Soviet Union against any imperialist attack and the Soviet Union is led by Stalin himself.
We can even whisper to our critics that if we deemed it advisable and of benefit to our party give critical support to Browder running on the Communist party ticket. We are now defending Browder and Bridges against the repressive attacks of the government.
Our politics are not determined by hate or a desire for revenge but solely by what we think furthers the interests of the revolutionary movement, It is unfortunate, but it is a fact that we can not ignore, that there are many thousands of militant workers that are in the ranks of the Communist Party and many more thousands support it. It is also an unfortunate fact that these workers do not agree with our criticisms of the Stalinist leadership. They do not believe what is obvious to us, that the GPU, for instance, is a murder machine directed against the interests of the revolution.
 
The Effect of Our Support to the ALP
It is in reality these militant workers that we support and not the Stalinist bureaucrats. To the rank and file we say: You do not agree with our program and our criticism of your leadership; you think that your party is really a revolutionary party. We do not agree with you but nevertheless we shall fight with you against the capitalist class. We shall show you in real life that everything the Stalinist leaders tell you about us are lies and nothing but lies.
Our support of Connolly does not mean that we give up our program. Not for one minute. We continue fighting the Stalinist bureaucrats, criticising their program and trying to convince the rank and file that we are correct. In the last analysis the tactic of giving critical support to the American Labor party is a tactic which is best suited to destroy the influence of the Stalinist leaders on the militant rank and file and to convince them of the correctness of our program.
 




James Maxton, leader of the Independent Labor Party of Great Britain, is satisfied with himself. He and his party have made the proper move and now, he says, it is up to the German workers to make their move.
It is incredible that he should say it, but the facts are before us. In a speech which Maxton made at a meeting in Glasgow, Scotland, he said (the quotation is from the Feb. 15 Glasgow Forward, a paper close to Maxton):
“I think that the move lies now with the German people rather than the people of Great Britain. I think that it is up to the German people now to make some indication that the world can see or hear that they are not all the mere tools of the fascist regime... we have made our sign in this country ... And I am asking the German people now to give some response.
“If they can give us an indication that they are ready to make their protest against German imperialism, we can go on to give further signs of our antagonism to British imperialism.”
Maxton evidently considers the whole anti-war effort some kind of a game. We first give some sign of opposition; then we must wait until the German workers respond. And if they don’t respond what shall we do then, keep quiet and blame it on the German workers?
“The main enemy is at home” – not in the sense that we want our capitalist class beaten by the capitalist class of another country, but that we must concentrate all our efforts all of the time to organize the working masses to take power away from the capitalist class of their own country. If the English workers succeed in establishing their own government the German workers will really be incited to revolt against Hitler.
* * *

Shachtman’s Latest Critique
The value of a stupid criticism lies in the fact that, at times, it offers one an opportunity to clarify an idea. Thus Shachtman’s article on the Cannonites and the United Front presents me with a chance to. explain the difference between the united front tactic and the tactic of supporting a candidate of another political party. Shachtman’s article has absolutely no other value.
The difference between a revolutionary Marxist and a reformist party is tremendous, but since both parties have a working class base is possible, and from the point of view of the interests of the working class it is highly desirable, for the two parties to get together in the day-to-day struggle on particular issues against the capitalist class. The united front as a tactic has real value if the parties making a united front have large mass following. Nevertheless the tactic is possible of application on a smaller scale, particularly for defense purposes and in the struggle against reactionaries in trade unions.
Before the united front tactic is actually applied there must be negotiations between the parties or groups involved in the united front and there must be agreement as to the program of the united front and the methods of fighting for the program.
Generally speaking, to achieve a united front between a revolutionary and a reformist organization for election purposes is the most difficult and therefore not very many united fronts of such a nature can be expected. For the simple reason that a revolutionary party in an election campaign is under an obligation to educate the workers in the program of the party and it is therefore necessary for such a party to conduct its own campaign.
But the necessity for a revolutionary party to present its basic program in an election campaign does not at all interfere with the tactic of giving critical support .to another working-class party. Whereas in the united front there is the necessity of arriving at an agreement for immediate objectives, there is no such necessity in case of the tactic of offering critical support.
For instance, if we should want to organize a united demonstration with the Stalinists, to demand the release of Browder, it would be necessary to negotiate and come to some agreement on time, place, speakers, leaflets, etc. But if an offer on our part to the Stalinists for such a united front would be refused, as it certainly would, then we might decide to support critically any demonstration organized by the Stalinists. In the latter case there would be no united front and our action would not at all depend upon the willingness or unwillingness of the Stalinists to permit us to support their demonstration.
One feels a trifle embarrassed to speak about such a simple subject, but when Shachtman mixes up with the united front tactic our tactic of giving critical support to the ALP, it is necessary to descend to the ABC’s. One can argue against the use of the united front tactic in a particular case; one can argue against the policy of offering critical support to any other working-class party at a particular time. But one must understand the difference between these two tactics.
Shachtman did not attempt in his article to enter into a discussion on the merits of the policy of giving critical support to the ALP at this particular time and under the particular circumstances. Anxious to offer some adverse criticism he simply mentions two points that are entirely insignificant and have no real bearing on the question.
The argument that ho devotes most space to is the contention that we concealed the Stalinist character of the ALP. That, he tries to show, is an indication that we are opportunists and defenders of the Stalinists. Unfortunately for Shachtman my article explaining the reasons for our adopting the policy of giving critical support to the ALP appeared in the issue of The Militant before his criticism appeared. There could be no question that my article was written before reading Shachtman’s criticism. And my article clearly mentioned the fact that the ALP was Stalinist in character and explained how that factor was taken into consideration in determining our attitude.
We can inform Shachtman that judging by one fact alone – obtaining valuable contacts through our campaign – the correctness of our policy has been amply confirmed.
 



QUESTION: When you say that this is an imperialist war both on the side of Britain and Germany do you mean to say that you don’t care who wins and that you contemplate a victory of Hitler without being disturbed by it?
ANSWER: It means nothing of the kind. When we characterize the war as imperialist, and say that all of the imperialist countries involved ar fighting for their imperialist interests and not for or against democracy, we thereby simply indicate that it is impermissible for us as revolutionists to support either side.
QUESTION: But then it means, does it not, that yon are willing to sit back and permit Hitler to conquer Britain and the United States?
ANSWER: No, it does not. It simply means that our task in this war is different from the task of the imperialists. They want to defeat their rival to protect their imperialist interests. We cannot and to organize the working class for the purpose of taking over power and transforming this war into a real war for democracy.
QUESTION: But you claim to be revolutionary defeatists and that means that you want your country defeated by Hitler, isn’t that so?
ANSWER: Not at all. Any one who says so either does not understand what revolutionary defeatism is or he is simply a vicious slanderer. We are more interested in defeating Hitler than is Churchill or Roosevelt. Both of these representatives of the capitalist rulers of their country can easily come to terms with Hitler.
QUESTION: But are you not helping Hitler win by not supporting the war?
ANSWER: Not in the least. All that we are doing now is educating the workers to our point of view. We are telling them the truth as to the character of the war and what to do to win the war against all the capitalists. Both our members and the workers whom we influence must go to war and do what they are told by the rulers of this country. So long as we do not have a majority behind us we are in no position to do anything except obey orders. It is true that we do not assume responsibility for this war in any way whatever, but to draw from that fact the conclusion that we thereby help Hitler win, lacks logic and common sense. The conduct of the war against Hitler is in the hands of Roosevelt and Churchill representing the American and British capitalists. That is unfortunate, and we arc trying to convince the majority of the working class that they should take the power of government and the conduct of the war into their own hands, but we defy anybody to show that we are doing a single thing that helps Hitler, the greatest enemy of the working class.
QUESTION: But I am given to understand that, if the U.S. went to war against Hitler or against Japan, your party would try to prevent war materials from being shipped for the purpose of fighting the Japanese or the German armed forces.
ANSWER: I don’t know who gave you to understand such a nonsensical idea, but I can tell you that there is absolutely nothing to it. We do not believe in individual action nor in the action of small groups. As I said before, until we gain a majority to our ideas there is nothing for us to do but to educate workers until we get a majority.
QUESTION: Then there is nothing to the idea that your policy of revolutionary defeatism has anything to do with sabotage?
ANSWER: Absolutely nothing. Reactionary red-baiters and those who know nothing about our program try to connect us with sabotage. Revolutionary defeatism to us is a political concept. It simply indicates that we do not support the war and that we carry on the class struggle at home regardless of the fact that it might have some effect on the front.
QUESTION: Doesn’t that mean, then, that you would do certain things which interfere with the conduct of the war?
ANSWER: It means that we advise the workers to continue their struggle against the bosses at home, and if that affects the conduct of the war the blame is entirely on the bosses and their government. Why should the workers not take advantage of the increase in production due to war orders in order to organize themselves and better their conditions? The bosses are making huge profits; the cost of living is going up. It would be extremely foolish for the workers to be influenced by the propaganda of the bosses and refrain from demanding better conditions because such demands interfere with the conduct of the war. Let the capitalists grant the demands and then there will be no interference.
QUESTION: But then, if you will succeed in getting a majority of the workers behind you and try to take over the government, the capitalists will resist and will that not give Hitler a chance to win the war?
ANSWER: I don’t think so, hut if we have a majority of the workers behind us, we must take that chance, Because if the workers take over power, Hitler is sure to be defeated, while if we let the capitalist stay in power. Hitler’s chances of a victory are much greater. Look what happened to France, The capitalists were in control. And they led. the war in a miserable manner and capitulated in a miserable manner. Why? Because important sections of the French capitalist class sympathized with Hitler and other sections were afraid that a French victory would lead to a workers’ revolution. In general, the capitalist class cannot inspire the masses with the confidence and the determination, to fight to the death against fascism, A workers’ government has a thousand times better chance to win the war against Hitler. If the capitalists resist the attempt of the working class to take over power they will, to that extent, interfere with our struggle against Hitler; but it is far better for us to take that risk than to let the capitalist class continue to rule. For if the workers let the capitalists rule we will be conquered by fascism – either by a victory of Hitler or of the fascists in our own country.
 



It is not at all surprising that Roosevelt, when asked whether his newly-appointed ambassador to Great Britain, John G. Winant, would take over proposals regarding lasting peace after the war, replied that the first thing was to win the war. “Peace proposals and an outline for the basis of peace must come after the victory,” is what the New York Times reports as Roosevelt’s sentiments.
How can the big capitalist politicians possibly reveal clearly and without any glittering generalities their war aims? Has British imperialism not committed itself by secret treaties to benefit the nations that are helping her at the expense of the nations that have willingly surrendered to the Axis powers? Is there any one foolish enough to imagine that the Polish ruling class has not demanded that Great Britain turn over to it every bit of territory that it had by virtue of the Versailles treaty, and more to boot, perhaps? And did not the representatives of British imperialism promise the same thing to the Czechs?
And how will these promises be kept without creating the same difficulties that followed the Versailles treaty?
It must be taken for granted that Roosevelt knows all about these secret arrangements and that he will not rock Churchill’s boat or his own by springing some proposals that are directly contrary to the secret treaties.
 
Their Plans for Germany
What do Churchill and Roosevelt propose to do with Germany if and when Hitler is defeated? The refugees of Hitler’s terror are pleading for a statement of war aims which will show the German people that the British imperialists are interested only in freeing the Germans of Hitler and his crowd and that Germany will be permitted to exist as an independent nation. But alas for the liberals and refugees, British imperialists want it distinctly understood that the German people are the ones to blame for permitting Hitler to take power and that the German people are all more or less of Hitler’s pattern and that therefore they will have to suffer the consequences of defeat.
The commitments in secret treaties are, however, not the most important factor in preventing Churchill and Roosevelt from indicating what their war aims really are. The truth is that they would be more than glad to be able to present a plan which would do two things: one, to assure their supremacy and two to obtain permanent peace. But no one has and no one can present such a plan. The liberals and the refugees have done nothing but lament the fact that Churchill has not taken them into his confidence, but outside of the “Union Now” plan, which is nothing but a plan for American and British imperialism to join forces and control the world, no one has presented anything that can even be discussed.
The truth is that capitalist statesmen find themselves utterly helpless. On the basis of the capitalist system they can find no plan which will guarantee peace. Hitler, in that respect, is in a far better position than the representatives of the democratic capitalist countries. For he is not compelled to conceal his motives behind democratic camouflage. His “New Order” is plainly a plan where German capitalism organizes Europe and the world for its own benefit.
 
The “Democrats” Must Be Hypocrites
Neither Great Britain nor the United States is in a position to state openly that this is exactly what their capitalists would like to do. Part of Hitler’s strength is due to the fact that the situation permits him to be less of a hypocrite than the representatives of democratic capitalism. How easy it is to poke fun at the chains of the British democrats who refuse to grant India freedom! How easy it is to point out that both Britain and the United States gained their empires by force and violence!
Together with his victories Hitler’s hypocrisies must increase. He will find it more and more difficult to poke fun at the democratic capitalists in view of his own acts. Nor is he in a position to do what the democratic capitalists are unable to accomplish, that is, bring peace to Europe and the world by subjecting all the nations to German capitalism. Neither Hitler by destroying the independent life of European nations nor Great Britain by granting certain nations concessions and playing off one against the other are able to bring peace to Europe.
In beseeching Churchill and Roosevelt for a clear statement of war aims, the liberals reflect the uneasiness of the masses who are slaving and sweating, fighting and dying. What are they sacrificing for? To defeat Hitler? Fine, but what is to follow? Another Versailles, another impotent League of Nations, another uncertain period of peace followed by a still more horrible war?
And it is exactly at this point that we of the SWP must appear on the scene with our explanations and with our plan. We have no objection to anyone demanding a statement of war aims from Churchill or Roosevelt. Such a demand at least places them on the spot. If they refuse to formulate a concrete plan we can utilize that fact as evidence of their hypocrisy in their claims of fighting for democracy. If under pressure they are compelled to formulate some plan, either the inadequacy of the plan or their failure subsequently to abide by it can be made a point of attack. But it would be folly for any intelligent worker to be satisfied with demanding that Churchill and Roosevelt formulate war aims. For us it is as clear as daylight that their war aims are nothing but to defend and strengthen their own imperialist interests. We must educate the workers not to give the slightest credence to any plan formulated by the imperialists for permanent peace.
We know and we shall continue to repeat that under capitalism no permanent peace is possible. No plans for such a peace can be effective.
Our fundamental task remains to convince the workers who are fearful of fascism that to destroy fascism they must take power into their own hands and destroy the capitalist system, breeder of fascism and wars.
 




The General Staff of the Red Army
The magnificent resistance offered by the Soviet army to the Nazi attack is correctly attributed to the morale of the soldiers in the Red Army.
The Stalinist leaders try to use this fact as proof that all that Stalin did before the war was justified – especially the arrest and execution of Tukachevsky and thousands of other leading officers of the Red Army.
Politicians and journalists in the service of the “democratic” imperialists are also now singing the praises of Stalin. While they do not say that the execution of the leading officers was justified, they claim that the way the Soviet soldiers are fighting proves that the execution did no harm to the Red Army.
What a shameless misuse of the courage and sacrifice of the Soviet soldiers!
The fact remains that the Red Army has suffered serious defeats and has been compelled to relinquish huge and economically important slices of territory. It may be that by its fighting capacity the Red Army will succeed in stemming the advance of the Nazi army, and even of defeating it, if the German losses are great enough. But if that happens, it surely will not be because of Stalin and his general staff. In a long war the economic superiority of Germany would be the decisive factor. But in the early stages of any war that factor is not decisive. The decisive factors at the beginning of a war are the number of men, the equipment, training and morale of the army, and the quality of the staff work.
Numerically the Red Army is larger than the German army. In equipment, both quantitatively and qualitatively, the Red Army is at least equal to the German army. In morale it is superior.
Why, then, should the Red Army be retreating? Why shouldn’t the Red Army be on German soil rather than vice versa? Why should an army composed of such valiant fighters be losing so many battles?
The only answer possible is the inferior staff work of the Red Army command. Every other military factor favors the Red Army. The explanation for the defeats lies, therefore, in the lack of staff work and the lack of staff work is due to the execution of the leading army officers. That should be as plain as day to everyone not a Stalinist or a pro-war journalist interested in covering up the real defects of the Red Army.
 

Why the “Democrats” Are Pleased
Why are all the politicians and journalists, serving the interests of the “democratic” imperialists, so elated at the showing of the Soviet Army? Why are they so enthusiastic about the “successful” defense of the Soviet Union?
It is because their standards are altogether different from the standards of those sincerely devoted to the interests of the Soviet Union. The servants of the “democratic” imperialists are interested in the resistance of the Soviet Army to the Nazi imperialist army only insofar as that resistance is of aid to the “democratic” imperialists. Their hope is that the Soviet Army will exhaust the Nazi army and assure victory for the “democracies.” At the same time they hope that the Soviet Army will itself become exhausted so as to leave the Soviet Union at the mercy of the “democracies.”
To the “democratic” imperialists every week that the Soviet Army continues to fight means that much more time in which they can prepare and it means more losses for the Nazy army. What do the “democrats” care about the territory that the Soviet Union loses? What do they care about the enormous sacrifices which the Soviet people must undergo?
To the “democratic” imperialists the destruction of the Soviet Union would be welcome if only it does not take six weeks but sixteen weeks – better still if it takes a year and involves a winter campaign for the Nazi army.
 

The Stalinists Fall In with This
And the miserable Stalinists fall in with that attitude! They who boasted about the invincibility of the Red Army, they who proclaimed that the Red Army would be in Berlin before the Nazi army would take Moscow, are now proclaiming as victories the constant retreat of the Red Army.
And they dare to justify the murder of the leading officers! They forget to mention, of course, that it was Tukachevsky and his associates who mechanized the Red Army and who built the so-called Stalin line of fortifications.
The Red Army would in all probability be invincible, had not the Stalinist bureaucracy chopped its head off and left it in the hands of tenth-raters. One of the reasons that Hitler ordered the attack on the Soviet Union was that he knew how weakened the Red Army was by the acts of Stalin. The fascist imperialists, like the “democratic” ones, did not count on the spirit of the Red Army but, alas, they were right in counting on the weakness and incapacity of the Red Army staff.
The magnificent morale of the Red Army may yet prove the rock upon which Hitler will break his head. Hitler may be beaten ultimately because of the enormous losses suffered by his army in the campaign against the Soviet Union. Or it may even be that the Soviet Army, after exhausting the Nazi army, may actually drive the Nazi army back.
If that happens the Stalinists will boast that it was due to the execution of the leading officers. But the Soviet soldiers know better – they know that they are compelled to make such enormous sacrifices because of Stalin. They surely know that they are compelled to retreat now, in spite of their resistance, because of Stalin.
 




Stalinist “Revolutionary” Propaganda
We can expect to receive a demand from some naive Stalinist sympathizer that we apologize to the Kremlin because of our charge that the bureaucrats: who rule within that magnificent edifice have failed to appeal to the masses in Germany to rise and overthrow the Nazi regime. For the Daily Worker of August 21 presents evidence which will surely be accepted by many gullible Stalinist followers as a real attempt to undermine the morale of the Nazi soldiers by appeals to them to overthrow Hitler.
On the front page of that issue of the Daily Worker there is prominently displayed a dispatch from Moscow, which gives the text of an open letter written by four German army officers captured in the fighting. This letter is designated as a “moving appeal to the German army” to bring an end to “the suicidal war against the Soviet Union.”
It is quite possible that the letter was forged by the GPU for the purpose of anti-Hitler propaganda. The GPU is certainly capable of doing such a thing. The nature of the contents of the letter shows that it could have been written by any four reactionary German officers captured by the English and that the democratic imperialists could easily use such a letter. It is peculiar that only officers captured by the Soviet army should have thought of writing an open letter of this nature. But whether it is a forgery or an authentic letter is really immaterial. The contents of the letter, authentic or forged, reveal the attitude of those who published it.
As a piece of reactionary propaganda, although aimed at Hitler, it is difficult to imagine anything that could surpass this open letter and far from having the effect of arousing the common people of Germany against the Nazi regime, it would probably tend to encourage them in supporting that regime.
 

Noble Officers Look Down on Rabble
“Tramps without kin or race” – thus are the Nazis referred to in this open letter. The four officers, authors of the letter, are evidently men of noble blood and gnash their teeth at the thought of being compelled to take orders from men who cannot trace their ancestry to some nobleman of old. “It was the sons of noble families who entered the army when the old German spirit still reigned,” say these four officers, and we can imagine their chagrin when Hitler permitted some Nazi coming from the lower classes to defile the army of the nobility.
Can anyone imagine the common people of Germany being filled with hatred for Hitler because of the terrible crime attributed to him in the letter? It is possible that all noble officers would be moved by such an appeal but hardly probable that the masses would rise against Hitler to protect the nobility in their privileged position in the army.
And the officers are fierce in their condemnation of Hitler for murdering Generals von Schleicher and von Bredow and for keeping the cleric Niemoeller who was a submarine commander during the first World War under arrest. Rise, German proletarians, to avenge these noble Generals!
Not a word about the tens of thousands of workers slaughtered or put into concentration camps. Hitler’s torture and murder of defenseless people are mentioned but only because Germany’s reputation thereby suffers.
“Our German Fatherland is endangered,” lament the officers, by Hitler’s adventurist policies. It follows that if Hitler should win the war, these officers will humbly beg his pardon for then the “German Fatherland” would be greatly strengthened. And the war against the Soviet Union is severely criticized on the ground that “it is sheer madness to fight on two fronts.” It can be presumed that these officers would have been perfectly satisfied had Hitler first conquered England and then proceeded to attack the Soviet Union.
 

Officer Caste Will Not Overthrow Hitler
But why, naive Stalinist sympathizers will ask us, should the Soviet Union not utilize the appeal of reactionary officers to overthrow Hitler? No matter who appeals for Hitler’s overthrow, they say, we should support such an appeal because if he is overthrown it will constitute a victory for the Soviet Union.
At best the open letter can have an effect only upon the officer caste. Is it possible that this caste, even if it wanted to, could remove Hitler from power by a palace revolution ? The same hope was entertained by many reactionaries and many guillible people in England and elsewhere. How many times have wishful thinkers hoped to solve the problem of Hitlerism through a conspiratorial uprising of the army officers! But no such conspiracy developed for the simple reason that the Nazi bureaucracy is too powerful to be overthrown by a clique of reactionary officers. Only a people’s uprising can hope to destroy the Hitler regime.
And even if the officer caste did succeed in getting rid of Hitler and his chief lieutenants, the Soviet Union would not be the beneficiary. The officers would then decide to fight a war on one front. They would make peace with England and the United States and confine their efforts to annihilating the Soviet Union.
It has been the invariable theme of Churchill that peace cannot be made with the Nazis, implying thereby that if the Nazis were overthrown by the old-time reactionaries, peace could be achieved in short order. It can of course be taken as absolutely for granted that Churchill and Roosevelt would not make peace with a workers’ government that came to power in Germany as a result of a workers’ revolution.
The letter of the four officers is a piece of propaganda that the democratic imperialists can scatter over Germany. That the Stalinists are utilizing such a letter shows how far removed they are from the revolutionary Marxist idea of appealing to the German masses to overthrow Hitler and unite with the Soviet Union to create a Socialist United States of Europe.
 




To some people all violence is hateful. The violence of the master against the slave is to be condemned – and also the violence of the slave who attempts to free himself from the master. When British imperialism uses violence in India to keep millions of people in subjection, the moralists who are above the social conflict in society protest. They would also protest if the Indian masses should use force to drive the British rulers out of India.
People who argue that way have some abstract standard of good and evil, a standard that ignores classes and class struggles.
The Marxist never evaluates the activities of classes and nations from some abstract moral standard but the needs of classes and nations to achieve their freedom. Are all invasions bad? The Marxist answer to that question is in the negative. He replies: who is doing the invading and who is being invaded; what are the circumstances of the invasion; does it further the interests of the revolutionary working masses?
The Soviet Union invades Iran and British imperialism invades Iran. Middle-class moralists who think every invasion, no matter by whom or against whom or under what circumstances, is an imperialist act, rise in their righteous indignation, to condemn both.
The Marxist says: the Soviet Union is a workers’ state, although a degenerated one. It is fighting for its existence against German imperialism; it is under an obligation to take every measure necessary for its defense provided it does not conflict with the interests of the world revolution.
 
Lenin and Trotsky on Invasion
The Soviet Government issued a statement in connection with its invasion of Iran justifying the act on the ground that Article 6 of the Soviet-Iranian treaty or 1921 gives it the right to march troops into Iranian territory in order to take necessary military measures whenever he Iranian government is unable to prevent an attack or a threatened attack on the Soviet Union through Iran.
The treaty with Iran was made under the regime of Lenin and Trotsky and is significant of the attitude the leaders of the Russian Revolution took to the possibility of marching troops into a territory that did not constitute part of the Soviet Union. In the interests of defending the Soviet Union they demanded and obtained the right to send their armed forces into an adjacent country. The treaty does not require the Soviet Union to obtain permission from Iran before sending troops.
It can be taken for granted that Lenin and Trotsky would have sent troops into neighboring territory even without permission, and even without a treaty, if the interests of the Soviet Union and the world revolution demanded such action.
It is quite true that British imperialism was the enemy that the Soviet Government had in mind, at the time of the treaty, but the fact that German imperialism is the enemy that now threatens the Soviet Union makes not a particle of difference. And neither is the fact that, because of a particular military situation, the British imperialists are invading Iran iat the same time that the Soviet Union is doing so, of the slightest importance insofar as determining the right of the Soviet Government to send its troops into Iran. But did we not condemn the Stalinist government for invading Poland, Finland and; the Baltic countries? Yes, we did, but only because under the circumstances the damage done to the Soviet Union, because the act of invasion alienated the sympathies of millions of people, was greater than any benefits that could be derived from the compulsory annexation of the territories invaded.
Lenin and Trotsky would have been compelled to weigh advantages and disadvantages in undertaking an act like invading another country. They would have made the necessity for such an invasion clear to the workers of the world. And above, all, the masses would have had complete confidence in their motives and in their promises.
No one can deny that Stalin’s act in invading Iran is viewed with great suspicion. That is because the policies that he has been and is following have justifiably created suspicion as to his motives and very few people believe in his promises.
All his explanations and excuses for invading Poland and Finland were of no avail. To the vast masses those invasions appeared in the same light as Nazi invasions. Stalin’s crime consisted of exactly this – that he made the Soviet Union appear to be in the same category as Nazi Germany.
Although we Trotskyists knew that Stalin had annexed part of Poland and the Baltic countries and part of Finland for military-strategic reasons, to prepare against an attack by Hitler, still we condemned the invasions because the loss of faith in the Soviet Union on the part of millions of people outweighed by far the possible military advantages.
We are not over-confident that Stalin will abide by his promise to withdraw the Red Army from Iran when the necessity for its occupation will have disappeared. That is something to be settled in the future. At present, as far as the Soviet Union is concerned, the class-conscious workers and peasants, including those of Iran, will not permit anything to interfere with the defense of the Soviet Union.
 




Hitler’s Motives in Attacking Soviet Union
The Stalinists are very anxious to prove that Hitler is not telling the truth when he claims that the German armies have attacked the Soviet Union in order to wipe communism from the face of the earth. Their anxiety springs from the justifiable suspicion that the Soviet Union is far from being considered as an ally of the imperialist democracies with equal rights and privileges of all other allies. While the dominant section of the ruling classes of Great Britain and the United States consider fascist Germany, at the present time, to be the main enemy of the imperialist democracies, there are powerful forces in both countries, especially in the United States, that would gladly come to some understanding with Hitler and permit him to do almost anything he wants with the Soviet Union.
It is not very difficult to prove that Hitler, in attacking the Soviet Union, did not do so merely because he is the champion crusader against communism; his claim to be fighting communism is primarily for the purpose of rallying the sympathies of all the reactionaries in the imperialist democracies and thus dividing his opponents. Both Churchill and Roosevelt see through his scheme and are not taken in by it. As realistic politicians they are willing to accept the help of anybody against their most dangerous immediate enemy.
What Hitler, representing German imperialist interests is after, is the resources of the Soviet Union. But these resources can not be obtained without first destroying the foundations of socialism laid by the October Revolution. Hitler is not fighting communism in the abstract, but he is fighting the proletarian revolution as embodied in the nationalized property of the Soviet Union. While German capitalism is interested in destroying all possible opposition, whether it comes from the Soviet Union or from Great Britain, in the case of the Soviet Union there is the added incentive of destroying a state that prevents the return of capitalism. Whatever Hitler’s motives may be, however, the results of his possible victory would be to destroy everything that remains of the October Revolution.
From the premise that Hitler misrepresents his real motives in attacking the Soviet Union, the Stalinists draw the fanciful conclusion that the Trotskyists who contend that the Soviet Union should conduct this war in the interests of socialism are helping Hitler. In the article by Milton Howard in the Daily Worker of August 16, where he urges the government to change the character of the indictment against the Minneapolis defendants, he presents the following gem: “They (the Trotskyists) play with words about defending the Soviet Union on the ground that the present war is a war for world communism. This is how they try to carry on in their own way Goebbels’ propaganda in this country that Hitler is conducting a war against Communism and should therefore be supported by all who are not for Communism.” We could point out to the Stalinists that from their viewpoint the Trotskyists are really helping the Soviet Union. Since the Trotskyists, according to Howard, are attacking Stalin for not waging a “war for Communism,” it follows that they help Stalin convince the capitalist world of that very fact. Our attack on Stalin should then be welcomed by, the Stalinists. The fact that the Stalinists consider us their main enemies shows that we are not doing what they say we are but that we are criticizing Stalin’s method of conducting this war from a different and a really effective approach.
Are we asking that the Soviet Union conduct a war for communism? That would indicate that the Soviet Union should do on its side what the Nazis are doing on their side, that is, compel the various peoples and nations of the world, by force and violence, to adopt the system which they stand for. The Nazis are claiming to fight for a “new order.” Aside from the fact that in reality they are fighting to establish the dominant position of German capitalism all over the world, they are trying to shove this new order of theirs down the throats of all the peoples. It is on record that the Trotskyists have always opposed any attempt to compel any nation to adopt the principles of socialism. It is on record that whereas the Stalinists defended the invasions of, Poland and Finland partly on the ground that they subsequently nationalized property in those countries, the Trotskyists condemned those invasions.
What we say is that on the part of the Soviet Union the war should be waged in such a manner as to get the greatest sympathy and support from the masses the world over. It should be conducted in the interests of socialism because only in that way, can there be an assurance that the Soviet Union will be defended successfully.
 

Real Crime of Stalinists
If Hitler can proclaim that he is fighting for a new order to be thrust upon the people by force, why cannot the Soviet Government proclaim that it favors a new order based on socialism and on the right of all peoples all over the world to self determination ?
If Churchill and Roosevelt have the right to present peace aims based on the acceptance of the capitalist order, why cannot the Soviet Government openly declare what kind of an order it believes in? And add that it excludes the use of force for the purpose of compelling any nation to accept that order?
Perhaps it may not be advisable at a certain moment for the Soviet government to proclaim that the eight points formulated by Roosevelt and Churchill are a snare and a delusion. But it is certainly not necessary to do what the Stalinist press has done – go into raptures over these eight points and create the illusion that their authors are sincere and honest men and that the problem of peace is now solved.
The crime of the Stalinist bureaucracy is not in its unwillingness to “fight for world communism” or in the fact that it makes practical agreements with or offers practical concessions to that section of he imperialist world which happens to be on the same side of the fence as the Soviet Union, its crime consists in the fact that it creates illusions amongst the masses and that it has used its power to suppress the class struggle in those imperialist countries that are more or less allied with it in a military way.
 




Youth Opposes Training for War
American youth does not want to go to war; it does not even want to train and prepare for a possible war. This is the inevitable conclusion to be drawn from the fact that the Roosevelt administration could muster only a majority of one vote in the House of Representatives for such an important measure as the bill providing for an extension of eighteen months in the period of service of drafted men.
There is no argument necessary to convince one of the importance of this measure from the point of view of the imperialist interests of the American capitalists. In spite of this, however, almost a majority of the representatives of capitalism voted against the bill. This astounding fact can be explained only on the assumption that the overwhelming majority of the people was against the measure and the pressure from the voters back home was too great to permit the average democratic Congressman to vote for the bill.
Obviously the greatest opposition to the bill came from the men who had been drafted and who would be compelled to serve in the army another eighteen months. They have already served almost a year; they are sick and tired of it and they want to go home. This is confirmed from every source. An article in the magazine Life, a magazine which can hardly be called isolationist, plainly states the bitter hostility of the soldiers to the idea of serving another eighteen months in the army.
What conclusions can be drawn from the unwillingness of the youth to serve in the army and how should revolutionary Marxists utilize those conclusions?
 

Capitalist Class Unable to Furnish Ideal
One thing is certain. The attempt of the war-like “democrats” to convince the people that this is a war for democracy against fascism and that the United States must be prepared to enter the war to save democracy from destruction at the hands of Hitler has failed to a very large extent. It is hard to believe that American youth would not be willing to sacrifice several years of their lives in training if they were convinced that this war vitally affects their interests and is really a war for democracy against fascism. To the extent therefore that American youth has not been taken in by the propaganda of the interventionists, it is all to the good.
Only the isolationists and pacifists, however, can stop at this point. Revolutionary Marxists must proceed from this point and attempt to convince the American working-class youth that there is a grave danger of a fascist victory not only by virtue of Hitler’s armies but also through the activities of the fascists within our own country. To ignore the fascist danger because the pro-war democrats are making the false claim that this war is a war for democracy against fascism, is to fall into the trap set by fascists. In the first place, therefore, it is essential for advanced workers to convince the American working youth that there is a real danger of fascism, not so much from Hitler as from the economic and social conditions that gave rise to Hitler in Germany and will give rise to fascism in this country. It is absolutely essential to prepare to fight fascism, but the only effective method is to prepare to substitute a socialist government for a capitalist government.
That the capitalist democracies are at a tremendous disadvantage in the struggle against the fascist powers where the vast majority is compelled by brute force alone to do the bidding of the fascist masters is evident from the fact that the American ruling class has not succeeded in creating the necessary idealism required for a victorious struggle against the fascists. The youth will gladly prepare to fight fascism and to sacrifice their lives in the fight only after they are convinced that they are fighting for a new world which will give them the opportunity to live as they want to live. Only a socialist regime inspiring the youth with the greatest idealism can succeed in forging an invincible army that will smash any fascist power.
 

Our Military Policy Applicable
And in this connection also it is necessary to bring before the workers our military policy. It must be understood that the unwillingness of the working-class youth to remain in the army is due not only to the fact that they have not been furnished with an ideal in which they believe and for which they are being trained. The incompetency of the officers, the severe and stupid discipline, the lack of democracy in the army make service hateful to the youth. Even if they were not convinced that this is a war for democracy, they understand well enough that they will have to fight whether they like to or not, and their common sense would tell them that it is better to be adequately trained. Modern war requires great skill and much training. The soldiers know it and are anxious to get the necessary training. But the regime in the army is so hateful to them that they are beset by only one idea and that is to get out as quickly as possible.
But the fact is that training is necessary and for any advanced worker not to realize that and to fail to convince his fellow-workers of that is to commit a serious error. This is the opportunity for us to convince the workers that their unions should undertake to train them in the use of modern arms and in the tactics of modern warfare. Military training under union control will be totally different from training in an army under the control of men hostile to everything that the working class stands for. Military training under Union control means democracy for the men. They will have their own committees to organize things in the interests of the men; they will control their officers; the stupid discipline of the regular army will be done away with; union activists will be trained. as officers and these will have the interests of the men at heart. The trade unions can mobilize the misses for an effective struggle against fascism; if they would only do so they can give the working youth an ideal and a goal to fight for. They have the task of preparing the working masses to struggle to the death against any and all forms of fascism, whether coming from within or from without.
 



Large headlines in hundreds of newspapers all over the country announced the indictment in Minnesota of leading members of the Socialist Workers Party and of the leaders of Motor Transport and Allied Workers Local 544-CIO for “seditious conspiracy” and for the violation of the Smith Act making it a crime to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence.
In one newspaper, the Daily Worker, there appeared a short note tucked away in an inconspicuous place to the effect that the government had obtained an indictment in Minneapolis against certain people who had something to do with the labor movement.
A week or so after the indictment there appeared a news item in the Minneapolis press to the effect that the leader of the Minneapolis Stalinists condemned the indictment, although criticizing the Trotskyist leaders. That was quite a step forward, and it appeared to some of us that the Minneapolis Stalinists were bound to receive a sharp reprimand from the Stalinist national office. The Stalinists in Minneapolis had given in somewhat to the well-nigh universal protest against the indictment in the ranks of progressive labor and liberals throughout the whole nation.
 
Stalinists Forced to Take a Position
We do not know how many conferences and discussions were held in the Kremlin headquarters on 13th St. in New York as to the policy that should be followed towards the attack of the government on the Trotskyists. After all, to keep silent about a matter that was agitating the minds of every thinking worker and of every progressive could not but arouse amazement even in the ranks of the Stalinists and might lead some rank-and-filers to give the kind of half-hearted support to the defendants that was given by the Minneapolis Stalinists. It was necessary to say something on the whole question. In the Daily Worker of August 16 – a month and a day after the indictment – Mr. Milton Howard was afforded the opportunity; to make public the line formulated by the Stalinist heads.
To answer any article written in the Daily Worker about Trotskyist activities or policies is exceedingly difficult, if not altogether impossible. For in reality there is never any basis for an argument. A basis for argument can exist only where the idea of an opponent is presented honestly and arguments against that idea are advanced.
But that is never done in the Daily Worker in any article written about the Socialist Workers Party.
Two general lines are followed in every one of such articles. Our ideas are completely falsified and hidden motives ascribed to us. An answer to such an article must confine itself therefore to pointing out what was really said and to scoff at the hidden motives ascribed to us.
 
The Method of Attack
For instance, an article appears in our press advocating defense of the Soviet Union through the independent action of the workers, and not by joining hands with the American government for the purpose of sending aid to the Soviet Union. The Daily Worker thereupon writes an editorial denouncing us for being against aid to the Soviet Union and ascribing the hidden motive to us of a desire to destroy the Soviet Union. There can be no basis for any argument where falsifications and slanders constitute the only attack on us. Howard’s article, however, in addition to the usual falsifications and slanders, sets down a certain policy which it is possible to analyze.
The article starts with the proposition that the Trotskyists are enemies of the people, tools of the most reactionary forces, conspirators and wreckers using the words “socialism” and “communism” to conceal our real purpose which is to aid the enemies of labor.
 
What Howard Won’t Explain
If that is so, Mr. Howard, how does it happen that the Minneapolis bosses have been fighting the Trotskyists tooth and nail ever since the Trotskyists helped make a union town out of Minneapolis? You say the “Trotskyists have penetrated workers’ organizations in order to wreck them”? But it is on record that the Trotskyists of Minneapolis have built powerful unions and that they were instrumental in organizing hundreds of thousands of workers all over the Northwest. Do you mean to say, Mr. Howard, that the Trotskyists are playing a game to amuse themselves by first building unions, then penetrating them for the purpose of destroying them? A few idiots in your party may believe that kind of dribble!
Will you kindly write an article explaining why Tobin, like the bosses of Minneapolis, is so anxious to smash the Trotskyists and the unions led by them? Perhaps you and your party are of the opinion that the Minneapolis bosses and Tobin also consider us enemies of the people and are determined to get rid of us because they, like you, are friends of the people? It would be very instructive to get your view on this point.
Or is it your thesis that the Minneapolis bosses and Tobin are also enemies of the people and that this fight between them on the one hand and the Trotskyists on the other is only a sham battle staged for the purpose of deceiving all of the people all of the time?
 
Resurrecting the Moscow Trials
Naturally Howard brings forward, as final and conclusive proof that the Trotskyists are enemies of the people, the findings in the Moscow trials. Now the judge in those trials did find us guilty of being enemies of the people, but that is hardly conclusive. As a matter of fact, by this time, no one – not even the Stalinists – take those trials seriously. Of course they mention them every time they write an article about the Trotskyists, but somehow or other there is a hollow sound about it. Certainly, outside of the Stalinist ranks, the Moscow trials are accepted as frame-ups even by those who have never read the report of the Dewey Commission. Life has proved them so utterly baseless that it is impossible to take them seriously.
Here is a group which has allegedly been uncovered as enemies of the people continuing their work as if no trials had ever been held. Can one imagine a spy in the service of the bosses being uncovered and continuing his profession as if nothing had happened? Such a creature immediately gives up his profession or attempts to transfer his activities to places where he is not known. But the Trotskyists continue. openly with their work and not even the rank-and-file Stalinists dare raise the cry that spies are in the midst of the workers.
 
Stalinists Want Indictment Changed
In Howard’s article there are a few words of condemnation of the indictment against the Trotskyists. In the face of the universal condemnation of the government for obtaining the indictment, the Stalinists could not afford to come out openly in support of the government.
But it must be clearly understood that they do not criticize the indictment as such; they, only criticize the government for indicting the Trotskyists as revolutionists. The Stalinist leaders want the government to obtain an indictment against the Trotskyists, but without the mention of their revolutionary activities. What the Stalinist leaders ask and demand is that the government change its indictment. Instead of accusing the Trotskyists of being revolutionists, the Stalinists demand that the government indict the Trotskyists as fifth columnists and also involve the Trotskyists with Nazis, Bundists, Christian Fronters, etc.
 
Stalinists Want a Moscow Trial
In simple language, this means that the Stalinists want the government to stage a Moscow trial in Minnesota. In the Moscow trials the Trotskyists were not charged with being what they actually are, loyal and devoted revolutionary Marxists, but with being saboteurs and enemies of the people. The trials were thus nothing but judicial frame-ups. The Trotskyists were also accused of being tied up with actual fascists in alleged plots to kill Stalin. That is exactly what the Stalinists want done in Minnesota. A frame-up and a false amalgam linking fascists with the Trotskyists.
The position of the Stalinist leaders makes it impossible for them to be as truthful as the Roosevelt government or even the Hitler government. Open reactionaries know what we are; they do not try to fool themselves or anybody else that we are anything but revolutionists It is for this that we are persecuted. It is for being revolutionists that our comrades in Germany have suffered so much at the hands of Hitler. It is for being revolutionists that we have been indicted. Naturally the element of frame-up is present even where the charge in the indictment is based primarily on the fact that we are revolutionists. But the Stalinist leaders want the indictment to be a complete frame-up while the reactionaries simply add frame-ups to the basic charge in the indictment.
 
CIO, All Liberals Support Defendants
The most progressive labor organization in the country has undertaken the defense of the sixteen 544 men who are defendants in the case. The CIO has furnished bail; resolutions have been passed by CIO locals protesting the indictments. The American Civil Liberties Union has given all-out aid to the defendants. The liberal weeklies, the Nation and the New Republic, have condemned the indictments as a violation of the rights of free speech and free press and as a perversion of the criminal cede for the purpose of helping Tobin keep his control over the Minneapolis truck drivers. Every liberal, every progressive, every intelligent worker knows exactly what the real reasons for the indictment are. They know the Trotskyists are the most active elements in the organization of the workers in the Northwest.
 
Our Record Is Clear
Can the Stalinist leaders convince anybody outside of their own ranks that the Trotskyists are fifth columnists and wreckers? Our record is too clear for such a frame-up to succeed. The government understands that; the bosses understand that; Tobin and his gangsters understand that. All of them openly accuse us of wanting to change this system. They of course want to frame us by attributing acts to us which we have never committed. But they try us on our Declaration of Principles and do not claim that our Declaration of Principles is only camouflage to fool the workers. They know better. We are in deadly earnest about our principles while the Stalinists have long ago sold theirs down the river.
If any worker does not yet know what we really stand for, let him follow the trial of the 29 and he will realize that we are indicted because we constitute the only real danger to the rule of the capitalists, their government and their labor tools. All the falsifications of the Stalinists cannot destroy that basic fact.
 




Why Have We Now Been Indicted?
Capitalist democracy works in a mysterious way its wonders to perform.
Take the case of the Minnesota indictment charging some of our party members and some trade union leaders and activists with conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence. What people were responsible for the indictment, and why were they obtained? To answer these questions means to get a glimpse into the behind-the-scenes workings of our democratic process.
We shall leave out of consideration the question of the violation of the rights of free press and free speech guaranteed to the inhabitants of this country by the Constitution of the United States. These rights are directly involved in the Minnesota indictment because it was obtained under Federal and not under State laws. The first ten amendments to the Constitution of the United States contain all the guarantees for free press, free assembly etc. And these amendments are a restriction on the Federal Government and not on the various State legislatures.
The prosecution may claim, however, that the question of the constitutionality of the statute under which we are indicted is not a question for the Attorney General’s office to decide. The Department of Justice is here to enforce the laws and let the Courts pass on the questions of this constitutionality. But any attempt to pass the buck in this fashion can hardly succeed in this case. The “seditious conspiracy” act, which is the basis of the first count in the indictment, is as old as the Civil War. Our party in its present form was organized more than three years ago, the Trotskyist movement more than twelve years ago. Why did not the Department invested with the great duty of enforcing the sacred statutes take action before? What was the reason for the long delay? There is a rumor that the FBI is a very efficient organization so that it could hardly be that the long delay is to be explained by the inefficiency of that governmental agency.
Even if we exclude the first count and limit ourselves to the second count of the indictment, based on the Smith Act which makes it a crime to advocate the violent overthrow of the government, the reputation of the Department of Justice for efficiency would hardly stand up. For the Smith Act was passed more than a year ago and it should not take long even for FBI agents to read the Declaration of Principles which our party adopted in January 1938 and suspended in 1940.
 

Daniel J. Tobin Set the Wheels Going
The wherefore of the indictment at this time would indeed be a puzzling problem were one to base himself on the idea that the government functions in a democratic manner observing and enforcing all the laws equally and impartially. However, put Daniel J. Tobin, President of the International Teamsters, upon the scene and the democratic process by which the indictment was obtained becomes exceedingly clear. Now Tobin is only one citizen. Like every other citizen he has only one vote on election day. If he suffers injury at the hands of some person or persons he has the right openly to file charges and present his evidence before the prosecutor in the first instance and before the court and jury in the second instance.
That Tobin has suffered injury at the hands of the leaders of Local 544-CIO is beyond any question of a doubt. They disregarded his desires; they flaunted his decisions; they disobeyed his commands. Instead of graciously giving up the posts to which they were elected and permitting Tobin to rule over the truck drivers as he wished and more particularly to pocket the per-capita from over five thousand union men, the 544 leaders decided to defend their democratic rights and the democratic rights of all the union men. It must be admitted that Tobin suffered grievous injury and if that were the charge in the indictment I must confess that the prisoners at the bar would be compelled to plead guilty.
But this is exactly where capitalist democracy steps in and makes it unnecessary for Tobin to come to court with his just grievances in an open and frank manner. Since Tobin understands (if he does not, his lawyers do) that the kind of injury which he suffered cannot be taken cognizance of by the majesty of the law, he must find some other way to utilize the law to punish his enemies and to get justice for himself.
So Tobin, who is eager to help fight for democracy in far-off Germany, runs to his friend Roosevelt, the leader of the fight for democracy in far-off Germany. The chief thereupon gives his orders to the Department of Justice and, unlike the leaders of 544 who believe in disobeying Tobin’s orders, the Department of Justice, also fighting for democracy for Hitler’s subjects, obeys Roosevelt’s orders and the result is – the indictment.
 

The Hypocrisy of Capitalist Democracy
Tobin’s name is not on the indictment: Roosevelt’s name is not n the indictment. Only the names of the prosecutors, who obey orders and thus differ from the leaders of Local 544, appear on the indictment. So we have a private citizen by the name of Daniel J. Tobin, who votes only once on election day, going to Roosevelt, who enforces all laws impartially, as should be the case in a land where democracy reigns supreme, and the result is an indictment against twenty-nine people who are not personal friends of Roosevelt and who cannot influence him in any way.
Thus does capitalist democracy work. The constitutions, the laws guarantee equality and justice. They reveal nothing of the democratic process as it actually functions behind the scenes. They reveal nothing of the secret conferences which the leaders of Congress have with the leaders of industry. Laws are passed ostensibly after a full discussion and by the members of the legislatures. Indictments are obtained ostensibly after an impartial analysis of all the evidence, Capitalist democracy covers itself up with sanctimonious formalities.
But it is better than fascism. Yes, we are compelled to admit that much. But it is not better than workers’ democracy and above all, under conditidns of capitalist decay, it cannot and will not last. They who do not fight for the establishment of workers’ democracy are only helping place a fascist noose around their necks.
 




We Must Not Cease Fighting Stalinism
Our party subordinates the struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy to the struggle against German imperialism. This is the general formulation by which we indicate our contention that the main task is to prevent Hitler from destroying the Soviet Union, from destroying the nationalized property and restoring the capitalist system.
The question that many are anxious to have answered is: in what way do we subordinate the struggle against Stalin? And there undoubtedly are many workers who dislike the methods used by Stalin but whose justifiable fear of a Hitler victory over the Soviet Union is so great that they become impatient with any criticism of Stalin at the present time. Their attitude is somewhat as follows: Forget about Stalin now; wait until Hitler is defeated and then you can continue the struggle against Stalin. In other words these workers would like us not merely to subordinate but to eliminate altogether the struggle against Stalinism.
To show how wrong such an attitude is, it is only necessary to picture the situation if the Stalinist bureaucracy were overthrown, at the present time by a workers’ revolution. Such an occurrence would lead to the immediate restoration of the Soviets and that would mean the mobilization of the efforts of tens of millions of workers, soldiers and peasants. At the present time the workers and peasants have no organizations through which they can exert their own efforts. Everything is handed down to them from above. The obstinate resistance of the Red Army shows that the Russian people understand the meaning of a Hitler victory and are determined to fight to the death. But their enthusiasm, their self-sacrifice and their initiative can be harnessed adequately only through democratically-elected Soviets where their representatives would have full freedom to formulate, discuss and criticize.
A victory of the workers against the Stalinist bureaucracy would release the tens of thousands of able and loyal revolutionists from the prisons and concentration camps of the GPU, It could not bring back to life the tens of thousands slain by the Kremlin fiend, but those who are alive could take their rightful place in army and in industry and constitute a tremendous aid in the struggle against Hitler.
The overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy would result, if it were not preceded by, the creation of a Bolshevik party that would guide the struggle against Hitler in the same way that the party of Lenin and Trotsky successfully led the struggle against the White Guard and imperialist forces in the Civil War. The struggle against Hitler would be carried on in a revolutionary manner, giving the workers of Germany and the workers of the whole world a revolutionary goal. Consistent revolutionary propaganda would inevitably result in the disintegration of Hitler’s armies. The slaves of Hitler would begin to feel assured that a defeat of Hitler would not mean a victory of British and American imperialism but a Socialist United States of Europe.
In a word a victory of the workers and peasants against the Stalinist bureaucracy would mean the revival of the spirit of 1917 and would assure victory against Hitler. In the last analysis, therefore, the struggle against Stalin must be continued as a method of defending the Soviet Union. He who wants to forget and eliminate that struggle actually weakens the Soviet Union.
 

We Are the Best Defenders of the USSR
Granted that the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy would be of tremendous aid in the victory of the Soviet Union, does not the struggle against Stalinism interfere with the struggle against Hitler? And surely any attempt to overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy would leave the door wide open for a Hitler victory. These are the arguments most frequently levelled against us. A proper explanation can easily dispel all doubts and make our position crystal clear.
In the first place it must be understood that the Trotskyists would under no circumstances attempt to overthrow Stalin without the support of a decisive majority of the soldiers, workers and peasants. So long as we do not have that majority, so long must our struggle against Stalin be limited to education and propaganda. And it must be remembered that in our propaganda we stress not only the crimes of Stalin but above all the necessity of defending the Soviet Union unconditionally. If given the opportunity, a Trotskyist would show the greatest courage-under attack by the capitalist enemy. We would unhesitatingly root out all defeatism in the Red Army and in the civil population. In action we would disprove the contention that our struggle against Stalin in any way weakens the Soviet Union.
And should our comrades in the Soviet Union, in the course of the war, gain the majority of workers and peasants, they would attempt to overthrow Stalin only if that attempt would not endanger the Soviet Union. It is in this way that our formula of subordinating the struggle against Stalin to the struggle against imperialism shows itself most clearly. Before attempting to overthrow Stalin, revolutionary Marxists would consider the situation at the front. Only revolutionary defeatists, that is, counter-revolutionaries in the Soviet Union, would attempt to overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy regardless of the effect such an attempt would have on the military front.
Our main line is defending the Soviet Union unconditionally. It is because of this general line that we subordinate the struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy to the struggle against the capitalist enemy. And it is because of this general line that we would, if we had the majority of workers and peasants behind us, attempt to overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy, provided such an attempt would not afford the capitalist enemy an opportunity for victory.
He who does not continue the struggle against Stalinism during the war is not doing his utmost to defend the Soviet Union. And he who does not defend the Soviet Union in spite of Stalin, is, whether he knows it or not, a counter-revolutionary.
 




Why Stalin Murdered Trotsky
One point concerning the connection between Stalin’s murder of Trotsky and the war situation has not been sufficiently stressed. It was easy to see that Stalin hoped to minimize the publicity the murder would receive by the attention which the press was devoting to the war. It was in all probability no accident that the murder occurred in the midst of the Battle of Britain when the whole world was reading news about Hitler’s desperate attempt to achieve air superiority over England. But I think the more important factor which made Stalin determined to get rid of Trotsky was his fear that the great leader of the Red Army would be alive at the time when the Soviet Union would be involved in the war.
Everything that Stalin did indicated his anxiety to avoid involvement in the war. But he understood well enough that Hitler could not be trusted. And he understood also that a war would set into motion forces that would shake his regime and that, with Trotsky alive, the hopes of millions of Soviet workers would be concentrated on Lenin’s closest collaborator. Millions of workers are alive in the Soviet Union who remember from their own experiences the role played by Trotsky in the October Revolution and the Civil War. All the filth, all the monstrous lies that Stalin had his henchmen write about the organizer of the Red Army could not and did not deceive the countless number of workers who lived in the stirring and heroic days when Lenin and Trotsky led the Soviet Union. It is doubtful that Stalin’s propaganda machine succeeded in deceiving even the generation which was old enough to understand what was going on at the time when Trotsky was exiled.
Stalin knew that during a war the thoughts of these millions of Soviet workers and peasants would turn to their leader of old. If by chance the Red Army were defeated, Stalin feared a tremendous mass movement demanding the return of the man who did so much to assure the victory of the Revolution. And if the Red Army were victorious, Stalin feared that the workers and peasants, flushed with victory, would no longer tolerate the arbitrary and oppressive rule of the bureaucracy. In either case, the figure and the personality of Trotsky would naturally become the center of a great mass movement.
A major conflict and a living Trotsky during such a conflict were the two great fears haunting Stalin. By cunning and perseverance he could and did succeed in having one of his GPU men thrust a pick-axe into the brain of Trotsky. He got rid of Trotsky but he could not get rid of war. At this time, when the Soviet Union is at war, it can be readily seen how anxious and determined Stalin was to do away with Trotsky and thus avoid the great danger of a mass movement centering around the demand for the return of Trotsky to help defend the Soviet Union.
 

Trotsky’s Death a Blow to the USSR
It did not matter to Stalin that by murdering Trotsky he struck a damaging blow at the Soviet Union. The Stalinist bureaucracy is interested in saving the Soviet Union only in such a way as to preserve the bureaucracy’s own existence.
It would be idle to deny that Stalin strengthened his own position through the murder of Trotsky. The working masses of the Soviet Union have lost a great leader around whom they could rally. But it would be just as foolish to conclude that, with the murder of Trotsky, Stalin has removed the danger of being overthrown by the Soviet masses. At best he can gain time by destroying the leaders of the revolutionary opposition.
Stalin cannot destroy the program of Trotsky, because that program springs out of the conditions that prevail within the Soviet Union and throughout the whole world. How well acquainted even the politically conscious Soviet workers are with the specific aspects of the Trotsky program is difficult to say. They have not been permitted to read a word of Trotsky’s writings. But it is possible and probable that through word of mouth some ot Trotsky’s ideas have found their way into the minds and hearts of the best and most conscious of the Soviet workers.
The important fact is that the Soviet workers are even now following the program of Trotsky – at least one part of it. Their magnificent resistance to the army of German imperialism is a clear indication that they have undertaken to defend the Soviet Union to the last drop of their blood. Nothing that Stalin did in the last eighteen years, no crime that he committed, has been great enough to make the Soviet workers defeatist. Even if they did not read the works of Trotsky, the advanced Soviet workers know that he was for the unconditional defense of the Soviet Union when he was exiled, and knowing Trotsky they must have concluded that he never changed his position. They know what the basis of Trotsky’s position is – the existence of nationalized property, the foundation of Socialism erected by the October Revolution.
 

The Soviet Workers Understand
The Soviet workers are far more astute politically than those sophisticates who try to prove that there is no difference between fascist Germany and the Soviet Union and that the Soviet Union is waging an imperialist war. On the basis of the terrible hardships that the Soviet working masses had to endure in the last decade; the tyranny and oppression they were subjected to by the arrogant Stalinist bureaucracy, there are “Marxists” who see no difference between the Soviet Union and fascist Germany. But they can have no explanation for the fierce resistance of the Soviet masses against the Nazi invasion. That resistance can be explained only on the basic assumption that the Soviet workers, without having read our program, still follow it because it represents the living reality understood by the workers.
And just as the Russian workers are following the aspect of the Trotskyist program in standing for the unconditional defense of the Soviet Union, so will conditions impel them eventually to follow all the other major aspects of the Trotskyist program. They will rid themselves of the Stalinist bureaucracy; they will re-establish complete Soviet democracy; they will tie their fate to the world revolution.
Stalin cannot kill the Trotskyist program for it Is a product of actual conditions. Ultimately that program will destroy Stalin, Hitler and all those who stand in the way of world socialism.
 

rt Goldman: In Defense of Socialism (Part 2)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Goldman: In Defense of Socialism

Albert Goldman
In Defense of Socialism
(Part 2)

Thursday, November 27, 1941
Afternoon Session
 
When Men Can Be Good
The Court: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman: Throughout history there have been men who dreamed of changing society. They saw the poverty, the oppression, the persecution and hatred that prevailed in the world and concluded that the only way by which these evils could be abolished was to have men accept the right kind of beliefs. The prophets of old, Christ, the philosophers of the Middle Ages thought they could change society by teaching men to be good. If only people actually practiced the Commandments!
Then came Karl Marx who presented the startling proposition that to change man, you must change the social system. It is impossible to have a society where love between human beings prevails, unless you have a society where the struggle for economic existence is done away with. Under the present social system, mean, petty and violent struggles prevail in all classes. Way up on top there are struggles for colonies and spheres of influence; then there are struggles in the form of bitter competition between business men; there are struggles between the small business men and the chain stores; there are struggles between workers. Everywhere in society struggle prevails.
There are some people who claim that the human being is essentially bad and no attempt to change his nature can succeed. But when one considers that in spite of the meanness and violence that prevail in society, there are millions of decent human beings, one must come to the conclusion that the human being is essentially good.
Marx concluded that before man can develop to a point where the relationship between one human being and another will be on a decent basis, society will have to be altered. Under the present social system all moral codes and all ethical concepts are accepted, by and large, only in words. People believe in religion, believe in the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man and yet they kill one another by the millions.
Marx formulated the following proposition: that the ideas, the philosophies, the religions and the morals of a certain epoch are determined fundamentally by the prevailing social system; change the social system and the ethical codes and philosophies will also change.
 
Decline of Capitalist System
There are certain diseases in youth which are latent and not until old age sets in does the individual become aware of their existence. The human body has powers of resistance which decrease with old age. Germs which have no ill effect in early age become very dangerous in later stages in life.
Thus it is with the capitalist system. During its youth the contradictions existing within it were easily overcome. In this country, or instance, there were vast stretches of land available for agriculture and settlement; factories could be and were built; railroads were developed. But as the land was occupied and more and more factories were built, it became more difficult for the capitalist system to function. The economic crises which were easily overcome in the early stages of the capitalist system of this country became more serious until in 1929 a crisis came that shook the very foundations of the country.
Throughout the world the capitalist system is in a stage of decline. Old age has set in and the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system have become acute. Unemployment, fascism, catastrophic wars – these are the diseases that afflict capitalist society in its days of decline. Are the defendants responsible for that? Not in the least!
This country is capable of producing tremendous quantities of goods to satisfy, beyond all imagination, the needs of the people. But the industries, under the present economic system, cannot function for peace, for life – they function only for death. The industries that were more than 50 per cent idle in peacetime, when men needed food, clothing and shelter, are now running full blast, producing planes, bombs and dreadnoughts.
And in this period of capitalist decline people are dissatisfied and fascism appears on the scene and takes advantage of their dissatisfaction. The fascists, claiming to create a new order, are actually throwing the world back toward barbarism. Everything that man has produced that is worthwhile is destroyed by this monster of fascism. The existence of this monster, however, is not to be attributed to Hitler or Mussolini – to ill-will the of one or two or a dozen men – it is to be attributed to the decline of the capitalist system. Capitalism has reached a point where mankind must take control of the productive forces and begin producing goods for the use of the people – and this means socialism – or else it will be hurled into the abyss of fascism and destruction. This is our belief and this is what we teach.
But how will this change from capitalism to socialism come about? Here we come to the heart of the case.
Do we advocate the idea that people should take up arms and destroy the government and thereby bring a change in the social system? By the destruction of the government is necessarily meant, according to Mr. Anderson, the destruction of the people who represent the government and the army and navy.
From the very beginning of the socialist movement there have been struggles around the question as to the best method of changing the social order. Marx fought vehemently against the anarchists, who declared that no government at all is necessary and that every form of government is hostile to the masses.
Then there was a controversy between Marx and a Frenchman by the name of Blanqui, who insisted that a social revolution required only a courageous, armed small group. Marx declared that the liberation of the people is the task of the people themselves and not the task of a few agitators, no matter how determined and courageous. The majority of the people must understand what is necessary and must be willing to struggle to achieve their liberation.
In the Communist Manifesto, written by Marx and his collaborator Engels, the fundamental ideas of socialism were first formulated. That book was introduced into evidence by the government against the defendants. In that book there is found the following statement:
“All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority in the interest of the immense majority.”
Marx therefore accepted two fundamental principles: one, the necessity of convincing the majority of the people to accept the ideas of socialism, and two, the necessity of establishing a government that will begin building the socialist society.
 
We Aim to Get a Majority
Mr. Anderson read an article of mine which I introduced into evidence just before closing the case for the defense. It was published in The Militant of March 29, 1941.
In order to prove that we did not believe in convincing a majority of the people, Mr. Anderson showed that sometimes I used the term “majority” without mentioning the people and at other times I used the term “majority of the working class.”
What do I mean when I use the phrase “the majority of the working class”? Read the section that I have already cited from the Communist Manifesto. Read in my pamphlet, What Is Socialism, that section where I state specifically that there are probably no more than three million people who can be considered capitalists in the United States. Read that section in my pamphlet which says that the working class in an industrially developed country like the United States constitutes a majority of the people. And then read that section where I say that the workers, even though they are in a majority, must have the help of the middle classes, especially of the farmers, in order to achieve victory, and you will see that I cannot mean what Mr. Anderson says I mean, that is, a majority of only one class, a minority of the people.
The industrial wage workers are the ones to take the lead in the struggle against the capitalist system. In the first place, they come more directly in conflict with the owners of industry – in the big steel mills, auto plants, mines, etc. In the second place, the industrial wage workers are used to working together – cooperation is the key word under socialism and the industrial wage workers in their factories learn to work cooperatively. They understand that it is necessary under conditions of modern industry to work cooperatively in order to build an automobile or a complicated machine.
The farmer, on the other hand, working on his own land, tends to be individualistic. It is necessary for the workers to get the support of the farmers. In my pamphlet I state that in a socialist society the farmers will finally come to realize the advisability of cooperative farming. The point that I want to emphasize is that whenever we use the expression “the majority” or “the majority of the people” or “the majority of the working class” we mean one and the same thing – the same thing that I read to you from the Communist Manifesto:
“All previous historical movements were movements of minorities or in the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority in the interest of the immense majority.”
I am certain that, if the government in this case were simply interested in bringing into court possible violators of a law, it would have moved for a dismissal of the case immediately upon learning that the Socialist Workers Party aims to get a majority of the people to accept its ideas. If counsel for the government did not know our position before, they should by now have wired Washington for permission to dismiss the case because the phrase majority of people settles all questions as far as our guilt of advocating the violent overthrow of the government is concerned.
I presume, ladies and gentlemen, that you do not think the defendants are insane. You may not agree with us; you may think that we are utopians, but I believe you consider us sane people. Only insane people, however, would be capable of actually preferring and desiring violence. If there is an individual who says that he wants a violent overthrow of the government, a violent transformation from the capitalist system to the socialist system, he belongs in the insane asylum.
And if, as is shown by our writings, we want a majority of the people to accept our ideas, why should we advocate a violent change from capitalism to socialism? What does advocate mean? To incite, to urge. We would then be convicted of saying: Even though we get a majority of the people behind us, we still want to overthrow the government by violence. The fact that we want a majority of the people to accept our ideas proves beyond all doubt that we want a peaceful transformation.
I want to repeat this fundamental proposition because it is all-important. If we want a majority of the people, as we do, to accept our ideas, then we must be in favor of a peaceful “destruction” of the government. Does peaceful destruction sound paradoxical? Not if you understand it correctly in the sense that it means the removal of certain persons ruling on the basis of certain principles, and replacing them by other persons obligating themselves to rule upon different principles. When government counsel failed to stress the fact that the Socialist Workers Party desires to have a majority of the people on its side, it could only he explained on the hypothesis that Washington in this case was out for a conviction regardless of the evidence.
The only interpretation that honest people can accept of the idea of violence as contained in our program is the following: We predict that even after a majority of the people is won over to the ideas of socialism and tries to establish socialism peacefully, the minority, organized by the capitalists, will resist with violence. Especially is that true now, because of the rise of fascism.
 
The Prosecution Distorts Our Ideas
One factor that you must take into consideration and always be on your guard against, is the possibility of distortion by excerpts. A person writes an article, ,a party formulates a program based on fundamental theories. Along comes a prosecutor and snatches an excerpt here and a sentence there. The possibility of distortion is very great.
“Think not that I am come to bring peace on earth. I come not to bring peace, but the sword. And the son shall be set against the father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law.”
Is not the one who wrote these two verses an advocate of violence and hatred? If Mr. Anderson did not know that the Prince of Peace uttered these words, he probably would seek to indict the author.
Every piece of great literature can be distorted. The Bible can be made into an obscene book simply by taking out certain excerpts. This is the method which the jury must guard against. Excerpts can be found from the writings of Karl Marx, from our program, from Trotsky, from Lenin, which would indicate that we want and we advocate a violent revolution, but that would be false, that would be a distortion, because taking the program as a whole, it is clear that we want to gain a majority of the people to our ideas, and from that it follows that we want to gain power peacefully.
Will there be struggle at the time the majority decides to establish socialism? I told you before that in this society struggle is an unalterable law. At times the struggle is on a political plane, at times it is on an economic plane. Workers join together, create a union, try to get a raise in wages or an improvement in conditions, and struggle follows.
And sometimes that struggle is accompanied by violence. That is true not only of a strike of truck drivers in Minneapolis. Read the history of the labor struggles in the United States, of great strikes in Colorado, in southern Illinois, in Ohio and elsewhere, and you will convince yourselves that violence is not something that occurs in strikes led by Trotskyists. In 1877, at a time when socialists were never heard of outside, perhaps, of New York City, there were great railroad strikes, and violence resulted. What caused the violence? The agitation of some people? No. The bitter struggle between exploited workers and greedy employers.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to say that in all probability the social revolution will be accompanied by violence. Do we therefore advocate violence? No. We want a peaceful transformation.
There have been civil wars in history. History does not know of a single case where a ruling group, controlling economic and political power, has peacefully surrendered that power to a majority. Perhaps we have entered a period when the ruling class will realize that it is useless to struggle and will surrender its power without violence. We hope so; we hope that the ruling class in this country, when confronted by a majority determined to establish a new social order, will see the advisability of giving in peacefully. But we do not want to create that illusion; and that is what we mean in our Declaration of Principles when we say it is an illusion that socialism can be introduced through parliamentary means. It simply means we believe that after we gain a majority of the people to our ideas, the ruling group will not surrender peacefully.
 
Our Rights Were Won by Struggle
Theoretically, the existence of political democracy offers a chance to achieve socialism in a peaceful manner. But even the democratic rights that we have now have not been gained without struggle.
Do you think that everyone had a right to vote in the early stages of the republic? No, there were property qualifications attached to the right to vote. A struggle began to abolish these qualifications. Mass agitations, mass demonstrations were utilized in that struggle. People were jailed in that struggle, but finally they won the passage of laws granting the right of suffrage to every person without any property qualifications. But go down into the South and you will find that the Negroes still do not have the right to vote.
Take the principle of compulsory free education. Do you think that was gained without tremendous agitation that lasted for years and decades? Read the history of our country and you will see differently. Nothing, nothing of value that mankind possesses has been achieved without sacrifice, without struggle.
The prosecutors point to our literature which speaks about mass demonstrations and mass agitation. We do not deny that we believe in the effectiveness of mass demonstrations. The prosecutors must have forgotten that in the history of this country many things have been won by mass demonstrations.
We are now in a period when the people should have real democracy, economic and political, and a struggle will be necessary in order to achieve that. It will be waged on the political field; it will be waged in strikes against employers; it will be waged in debates, mass demonstrations, in the courtrooms, and people will be jailed.
 
We Shall Try to Avoid Violence
On the basis of their analysis of history and social conditions, Marxists predict the future. Will we be right? No one knows. I hope, and I am certain that every one of my co-defendants does, that our prediction with reference to violence accompanying the social revolution will not be fulfilled.
We want to take over the means of production peacefully, but we predict that the minority will use violence to prevent the majority from achieving a peaceful transformation, and it is necessary to be ready for the violence of that minority.
We are not able to predict with great exactness. A social scientist cannot predict with the exactitude of a physical scientist. What we can say now, however, is that as the ideas of socialism gain ground, as more and more people become convinced that socialism is the only possible solution, the fascists will also gain strength. In Germany the fascists were financed by the big industrialists. The capitalists in this country will do the same. They will finance the fascists to destroy the labor movement. The only real possibility of avoiding violence is for the working masses and the farmers to organize so strongly that the minority of capitalists will not attempt the use of violence.
The fact that we support the formation of a labor party is an indication that we shall try our best to exhaust all possibilities for peaceful change. To Mr. Anderson our support of a labor party evidence of a plot. To him it means that we would like to see a labor party so that the dupes in that party will participate in elections while we, behind the scenes, plot to overthrow the government by violence. What utter nonsense!
Mr. Cannon said on the witness stand that, as serious political people, expecting the masses to accept our ideas, we cannot conceal those ideas. We cannot say or do one thing and expect that the masses will be able to read our minds and follow us in doing something else. According to Mr. Anderson, we organized a union defense guard in order to overthrow the government by force and violence. But he never proved, because he never could prove, that we ever told that to the members of the union defense guard. Presumably, then, we would call together the union defense guard one fine morning and reveal the startling secret to them that they are expected to overthrow the government by force and violence. Is it not absurd to think that we expect people to follow us in an attempt to overthrow the government when we have never told them that such was their duty?
Our task is to inform the masses of our ideas. We cannot possibly be conspirators, because we want to educate the majority of the people to accept our ideas. There is a section in our Declaration of Principles which says specifically that our task is to convince the masses that our ideas and our solution to the problems of mankind are correct and that it is impossible to use force against the masses. We can use only the power of persuasion and no other power.
Through a labor party we attempt to educate the masses to act independently on the political field and also to exhaust all possibilities of a peaceful change. We do not claim that the creation of a labor party will assure a peaceful change. We are against creating illusions because even if a labor party is created, the probability of the capitalists’ organizing a minority to prevent a peaceful change remains the same. And we are not afraid to tell the masses exactly that, and it is not against the law to say so. It is against the law to incite and urge people to overthrow the government by force and violence, but it is not against the law to predict that violence will be used by the minority to thwart the will of the majority. And this is the crux of the question, ladies and gentlemen.
On the basis of the evidence you can find only that, basing ourselves on an analysis of history, on an analysis of the social forces operating in present society, we declare that the probability is overwhelming that the social revolution will be accompanied by violence – the violence of the minority determined to guard its rights, its powers, its privileges.
I think – I am certain – the Court will instruct you that if, in considering all of the evidence in the case, you conclude the evidence may just as well be consistent with the innocence of the defendants as with the guilt of the defendants, you are under an obligation to accept the hypothesis of innocence. That is the law.
Let us assume that after listening to all of the evidence and all he arguments in this case, and after reading all of the exhibits, you say to yourselves that the evidence can be interpreted in two ways: one, that the defendants advocated the violent overthrow of the government, and the other that the defendants predict there will be violence. Then you must accept the latter hypothesis and find us not guilty.
 
Minority Responsible for Violence
Mr. Cannon pointed out under cross-examination by Mr. Schweinhaut some historical examples where the majority won the power peacefully, but where the ruling minority initiated violence and began a counter-revolution. One example is our own Civil War where, after Lincoln was elected by the people, the southern slaveholders began the revolt. The slaveholders refused to give up their privilege of owning chattel slaves and fought to extend slavery. Violence began, but it came from the South, from the minority, and it was not until the majority of the people residing in the North assembled all their forces that they were able to put down the slaveholders’ revolt.
Who was responsible for the violence? A minority of slaveholders determined to hold on to their property rights against the majority of the people.
I presume there were many people who, prior to the Civil War, predicted that violence would accompany the abolition of slavery. Were they responsible, then, for the Civil War? Is the Civil War of a clear example of a peaceful accession to power and the use of violence by a minority to overthrow the majority?
In Spain we have another example. The Loyalist government had the support of the vast majority of the people and came to power because of the support of the people. The fascists thereupon organized their minority, and with the aid of Germany and Italy, began a violent counter-revolution and succeeded in defeating the majority.
On the basis of these historic examples and many others, on the basis of the present-day struggles in industry, where the employers do not hesitate to use violence to prevent workers from organizing unions to improve their working conditions, we predict that the social revolution, which will have as its aim to take away the wealth and the power and the privileges of a small minority, will be resisted by that minority to the death.
The more we emphasize that possibility, the more the people understand that possibility and prepare for it, the less will be the violence. But if violence does come, will we be responsible? Is the weather-man responsible for predicting a hurricane? Is the physician responsible when he predicts death for the patient? Is the astronomer responsible when he predicts the coming of an eclipse? Are we, predicting a great social storm at the time of the social revolution, responsible for the violence that may ensue?
A great deal has been made by the prosecution of the fact that in our writings appears the statement that we intend to take advantage of a revolutionary situation. What is that revolutionary situation? The only government witness who attempted to explain it, Bartlett, went way beyond his depth. He may be a shrewd union business agent, but he is hardly capable of explaining the theoretical problems connected with socialism.
The prerequisites for a revolutionary situation have been summed up by Marxists to be the following: First and foremost is the decline of the social system when the forces of production can no longer function effectively; second, the inability of the ruling class to solve the problems it is confronted with; third, great suffering of the masses; fourth, the desire and determination of the masses to change the social system; fifth and final, existence of a party trained to understand the operation of social forces, able to predict the direction in which society moves, and determined not to permit a minority to thwart the will of the majority.
Mr. Cannon correctly explained to you that these conditions do not as yet exist in the United States. Much has been said here by the prosecution to the effect that the defendants believe that the war will create a revolutionary situation. Perhaps it will, ladies and gentlemen, but are we responsible for the war? And if the war does create a revolutionary situation, can we be held responsible for the revolutionary situation? Perhaps the prosecution – and by the prosecution I do not mean Mr. Schweinhaut or Mr. Anderson, but Washington – should busy itself with passing a law preventing the war from creating a revolutionary situation. Or might I suggest that in order to prevent the possibility of a revolutionary situation, the present administration refrain from going to war.
The Court: We will take our afternoon recess now.
 
(Afternoon Recess)
 
Advocacy of Violence – Or Prediction
The Court: You may proceed.
Mr. Goldman: The distinction between prediction and advocacy should by this time be perfectly clear. But that does not seem to be the case as far as government counsel are concerned. They introduced into evidence my pamphlet What Is Socialism and read an excerpt from it beginning with page 33. This is the pamphlet that I handed out to you at the beginning of the trial and if you have read it, you probably saw that it was written in very simple language because it consists of a series of lectures delivered to workers. It is under such conditions that the clearest exposition of our thought is necessary because when one speaks to workers he is compelled to reduce his ideas into the simplest terms. On page 33 I asked the following question: “What methods will the workers be compelled to use in order to destroy the political power of the capitalists and to establish their own power?” And I went on to say:
“In countries, such as Germany and Italy, where the fascists have destroyed every right that the workers ever had, it is perfectly clear that the workers will be compelled to use violence in order to get rid of their fascist oppressors. But how about the United States, England or France?” – the pamphlet was written in 1938 before the Vichy government took control – “In these countries the workers have the right to vote. Why is it not possible for them to elect a majority of socialists in Congress or in Parliament and establish socialism by law?”
“A peaceful change,” I wrote, “is an ideal most desirable. Everyone, especially the revolutionary socialists, will subscribe to that idea” – I say a peaceful change, I do not say a violent one.
“The question, however, is not whether it is desirable but whether it is possible. On the statute books of most of the states there are ‘criminal syndicalism’ laws” – and the Smith Law, upon which the second count of this indictment is based, is a criminal syndicalism law – “providing long prison sentences for anyone who advocates the overthrow of the government by violence. Such laws will be as effective as laws against the occurrence of earthquakes. For revolutions cannot be prevented by any law. Like convulsions in nature, they are the result of the evolution of forces beyond the power of man to stop.”
Then here comes the significant section, the section that should settle all doubts concerning the question –
“On the basis of history and of theory, we are justified in predicting that the capitalist class will not surrender power to the working class without a violent struggle. History knows no example of the peaceful surrender of an exploiting minority to an oppressed majority. The actual conduct of the capitalist class at the present time, the violence which it uses against the workers when they strike for an improvement in their conditions, confirm the historical lesson, and justify the prediction that they, who will lose their wealth and power, will utilize all forms of violence against the overwhelming majority.”
What possible interpretation can anyone who is free of prejudice place upon that paragraph other than that I predict, but I do not advocate the use of violence. I concluded:
“The form of government in the United States practically guarantees the ruling class its domination against the will of the majority of the people. To introduce socialism by law would require an amendment to the Constitution and for that, a two-thirds majority of both houses of Congress and a majority in three-fourths of the state legislatures are required. Thirteen small and backward states could prevent any amendment to the Constitution. Revolutionary socialists all favor a peaceful transformation of the present order to the socialist order” – we favor it, we want it, we desire it, then how, I ask, can we advocate the contrary – “but he is insane who thinks that millions of workers will consent to starve because a minority of exploiters will threaten to, and will actually use violence against them.”
I continue reading:
“If there is any one thing that will prevent the capitalists from using violence, it will be the strong organizations of the working class. The greater the strength of the working class organizations, the less violence will there be.”
If, after reading this section of my pamphlet and after reading my column published in The Militant of March 29, 1941, the prosecution still insists on pressing this case, it must be that Washington wants a conviction regardless of the evidence. Possibly the prosecution missed this section of my pamphlet and missed the column which I wrote, but they know about them now and have known about them for several weeks; and for the prosecution to continue this case can mean nothing else but a determination to get a conviction regardless of the evidence.
If you consider what motives have led the defendants into the socialist movement you can realize how absurd it is to accuse them of advocating violence. You have seen enough of the defendants and heard enough about their theories to convince you, I am certain, that it was not for personal gain that the defendants have become socialists. We are in a small minority and can therefore expect for a long time to come to meet only with hatred and scoffing, with persecution and prosecution. You can realize that we are in the socialist movement because we are devoted to its ideas and ideals.
If there is any one thing that impelled us to join the socialist movement, it is a hatred of the violence that exists in society – not only the physical violence but spiritual and moral violence – the violence which condemns children to starvation or semi-starvation because of the poverty of the parents, the violence which condemns children to go to work long before they have received an adequate education. Everywhere in society there is violence of one sort or another, culminating in the dreadful violence which sacrifices millions of human beings upon the altar of war. It is this violence which we hate that drives us into a movement which has as its ideal the creation of a world free from violence, where human beings will cooperate in the production of goods to satisfy their needs, where peace and security will prevail.
We are, of course, not pacifists. We do not believe with Gandhi that it is wrong for three hundred million people in India to use violence to drive out the British oppressors who claim to be fighting a war for democracy. As much as we hate the violence that exists in society, we see no alternative to the necessity of destroying the violence of the minority with the violence of the majority. But to accuse us of wanting and advocating violence is to accuse us of something that is revolting to our very nature.
Perhaps it would be fitting to close this section of my argument by quoting some people who are not in the ranks of the defendants and who can hardly be accused of being against the government.
“This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people who inhabit it. Whenever they shall grow weary of the existing government, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending it, or their revolutionary right to dismember or overthrow it.”
None other than Abraham Lincoln said this, in his first inaugural address.
“I hold a little revolution now and then as necessary in the political world as storms in the physical.”
The man who uttered this sentiment is not on trial. It was Thomas Jefferson.
 
Our Position on the War
It would stand to reason that, once having settled the central question of the case, whether or not we advocate or predict violence, there should not be much more to say. But you will excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, if I continue the argument on matters that in my opinion are subsidiary but which the prosecution has emphasized over and over again. There is always the danger that Mr. Anderson will claim that something is undenied and uncontradicted and perhaps it will be said, if I refrain from discussing other matters in the case, that I was afraid to do so.
The government follows a simple principle. It first assumes that the defendants are guilty of conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence and then it introduces evidence of our position and policies on various questions in order to prove that all of our activities are based on one motive and that is to further the conspiracy. If the defendants oppose the war, that shows that they are guilty of the central conspiracy; if they are active in the trade unions, that proves the same thing, and thus with all the activities of the defendants.
There are many people in this country who oppose our entry into the war, but since they are not members of the Socialist Workers Party they have the right to do so, but we who are members of the Socialist Workers Party have no such right.
The government of course did not have to introduce any evidence with reference to our opposition to the war; we would gladly have stipulated that we are guilty of that. As a matter of fact, the government could have shortened the case by at least two weeks if it had come to us and asked us to admit the facts on a great many questions which it laboriously attempted to prove. We could have stipulated that we oppose the war, that we visited Leon Trotsky and that we sent men to guard him, that we advocate the creation of workers’ defense guards, etc. These things are found in our writings. Ninety per cent of what the government tried to prove, we would have stipulated to and we could then have gone to the heart of the question as to whether or not we conspired to advocate the overthrow of the government by force. But since the government took all this trouble to prove things that we admit, it is necessary for me to explain those policies and analyze them.
The government accuses us of two things with reference to the war: one, that we oppose it, and two, that we intend to take advantage of a revolutionary situation which we expect the war to create.
While it is true that we hold wars to be inevitable under the capitalist system, it is also true that we would like to avoid them. War is the greatest destructive force in modern society. If this war should last for years, it may well be that all the resources of society will be exhausted and not even a social revolution could solve the problems of mankind. With the exhaustion of all the material and spiritual forces of society, the possibility of creating a new social system is very slim. We would then have to wait until the material and spiritual resources of mankind are resuscitated.
It is our duty to prevent war if possible and to shorten the war if war is declared in spite of our efforts. We shall try to convince the masses that in order to live and in order to permit their children and their children’s children to live, they are under an obligation to end the war and create a socialist order.
There is at present no law making it a crime to oppose the war. But I am safe in saying that our opposition to the war is one of the most important, if not the most important, factors in explaining this prosecution. The rules of evidence do not permit us, as I indicated before, to go into the motives for the prosecution; but I would say that the address of Mr. Anderson yesterday and the emphasis which the prosecution has placed throughout the course of the trial on the party’s position with reference to the war and with reference to our policy on military training, justifies the conclusion that to a large extent it is our opposition to the war that explains this prosecution.
To justify the introduction of our position on the war into evidence, the government contends that our opposition to the entry of the United States into the war, and our statement that we will continue to oppose the war even after the United States declares war, are evidence that we are conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence. A far-fetched and an unreasonable contention! There are pacifists, conscientious objectors and others opposed to the war who are not interested in establishing socialism or overthrowing the government. There are socialists of a type that support the war. Only we revolutionary socialists who oppose the war are prosecuted.
As I indicated, there is no law preventing us from opposing the war. Nor is there a law which prohibits people from saying that they will continue to oppose the war even after war is declared. Of course when war is declared, the Espionage Act will come into effect, making certain statements about the war unlawful, but thus far war has not been declared and I am certain that no one could be convicted simply for a statement that he intends to oppose the war even after it is declared.
 
We Oppose Imperialist Wars
Our reasons for our opposition to the war have been sufficiently clarified by the testimony of the defense and I need not go into detail. We consider the war on the part of England, of Germany, of France, of Italy, of Japan and of the United States as imperialist in character. We do not hesitate to admit that. We have written and said it thousands of times.
What do we mean by characterizing the war on the part of these countries as imperialist? ‘We mean that the ruling classes which are responsible for the war and which lead the masses into the war are fighting to protect or to acquire markets, colonies, sources of raw material and spheres of influence. Germany wants the colonies that England has, England came upon the scene first, grabbed off most of the rich colonies in the world, and now Germany is trying to get some of these colonies away from England. The United States has not very many colonies in the strict sense of the word, but it has billions of dollars invested in Latin America and in other parts of the world and it wants markets in China, in the Far East.
One of the government witnesses, Mr. Harris I believe, was a member of the Marine Corps and he testified that he was stationed in China some time ago and Mr. Anderson praised him to the sky for serving his country in China. We do not conceal our belief that the marines in China are not there to protect the interests of the people of the United States but the interests of the Standard Oil Company and other big companies who have investments in China. The capitalists of this country are not interested in the development of China; they are interested in China because it furnishes them a market for the sale of their goods and a field for the investment of their capital.
The same thing is true with reference to Latin America. Roosevelt, representing the interests of the American capitalists, is not interested in the welfare of the people of Latin America. The claim that the present administration is interested in fighting for democracy can be disproved by the fact that when Franco was fighting the Loyalist government in Spain, the present administration declared its neutrality. It was not interested in defending democracy so long as there was no threat to the economic interests of the American capitalist class.
When we state that this is an imperialist war, it follows that we cannot possibly support the administration in its war efforts. You may not agree with us – some of you undoubtedly think that we are wrong – but I hope that in considering the evidence in this case, your opinion as to the correctness or incorrectness of our attitude on the war will not sway in the least your decision.
Mr. Cannon explained in his testimony for the defense that opposition to the war means non-support in a political sense. If any member of our party were a member of Congress, he would not vote for a declaration of war, nor would he vote for the war budget. No matter how much we may antagonize any jury, we must say that because it is the truth.
Certain expressions found in some of the literature introduced by the government have been emphasized by the prosecution, especially the expression, “Turn imperialist war into civil war.” This expression is not found in our Declaration of Principles. I never used it either in my pamphlet or in any of the columns I wrote for The Militant. But it has been used, and by great socialists, and at times it has been repeated by some of our members. If you should take this expression into consideration, you must take it in connection with our general program which says that we must win over a majority of the people. The expression is correctly interpreted as follows: If, in the midst of the war or at the end of the war, a majority of the people, tired and weary and driven by the agony and suffering to which they will be subjected by the war, accept our ideas and decide to take power, then if the minority resists, the result will be that the imperialist war will be turned into a civil war. That is the only correct way to interpret that expression in the light of our Declaration of Principles which says that we must win a majority of the people over to our ideas.
We say now and we shall continue to say it as long as we are permitted, that war is a result of the conflict between imperialist nations.
The exhibits introduced by the government show that long before the war began we predicted that it would come. Were we then responsible for it when we predicted its coming? Who is responsible for the war? In the last analysis, not even Hitler, who fired the first shot, is responsible. As far as we are concerned, the responsibility for this war is primarily upon the system that creates the imperialist rivalries. On the basis of the present system, Leagues of Nations, Kellogg Peace Pacts and all the good intentions in the world cannot preserve peace.
Most of you are old enough to remember the statements that were made during the last war, that it was a war for democracy and it was a war to end wars. And the results of the last war are visible to everyone – fascism and now another war. Who was right? Socialists like Lenin who said that without socialist revolutions all over the world there will be more imperialist wars, or the people who proclaimed that the First World War was the last war? We can predict with absolute certainty the same thing that Lenin predicted in the First World War: if socialism does not come, more wars will follow.
 
Fascism Must Be Destroyed – How?
The vast majority of the people of this country are terribly afraid of Hitler and justifiably so. I don’t think the isolationists are correct when they say that we do not have to fear an invasion of this country by Hitler. It is not a question of invasion; it is a question of imperialist rivalries and Hitler is no doubt the greatest potential enemy of the ruling group in this country and above all he is the greatest potential enemy of the American masses. The destruction of Hitler – and I am using Hitler as a symbol of fascism – is a task which should be undertaken by everyone who values freedom and culture. No nation is sure of liberty so long as fascism exists anywhere in the world.
But the question is: What method should be used in exterminating the fascist danger? We contend that this war is not a war against Hitlerism. The British ruling class is not hostile to fascism. It can be taken as an elementary proposition that the British ruling class is not interested in preserving democracy.
The people of Great Britain and the people of this country are interested in democracy and want to fight for it, but in our opinion to fight under the leadership of the Churchill government or under the leadership of any other capitalist government is to fight not for democracy but for the financiers and industrialists.
Even assuming that Hitler should be defeated, fascism will not be destroyed because fascism is not a product of Hitler but it is a product of a decaying capitalist system. Dislocation of economy is bound to follow this war; millions of men will be thrown out of work, misery and suffering will be their lot and in such a situation fascism is bound to flourish. It is in such a situation that the fascist demagogues of Germany succeeded in gaining power. The German people, crushed and humiliated by the Versailles peace, not given a chance to work and live, were thrown into the arms of Hitler. Should capitalism continue to exist after this war, fascism is inevitable unless the masses of people take their fate into their own hands and create a socialist order.
Should war last a long time, the possibility of a peace between the rival imperialist nations is very great. The British ruling class and the American ruling class can easily come to terms with Hitler if they cannot defeat him, but not so the working masses; they must fight Hitler to the very death – especially the socialists who know the fate that awaits them if Hitler is victorious.
The prosecution’s statement that in a war between the United States and Germany the defendants will prefer a victory of Germany is made either because of complete ignorance of our position or because of a malicious intention to falsify our position. Mr. Anderson said that in his opening statement. At that time, he did not perhaps know our position with reference to this question. Let no one dare, however, to stand up before you now after the exhibits have been introduced and say that we want a Hitler victory.
 
Our Program to Defeat Fascism
We say that to defeat Hitlerism it is necessary for the masses to assume leadership in that struggle.
What is the fundamental reason for Hitler’s victories? Is it simply because he has been preparing for a longer time? How could he win his victories if a large section of the German people did not support him? To say that the German people, a great and cultured people, willingly accept the violent regime of Hitler is to insult the Germans. They are, however, given no alternative; it is either supporting Hitler or suffering a crushing defeat at the hands of the British imperialists and they fear that more than they fear a Hitler victory.
Hitler can come to the German people and say truthfully: The British ruling class has a monopoly on the wealth of this world; we ought to have our share of it. When he attacks Churchill and the British ruling class, he is speaking the truth – at least 90 per cent of the time; when he talks about his own intentions, he speaks nothing but lies. The same is true of Churchill who tells the truth only when he is attacking Hitler.
The situation would be entirely changed if in England the workers would establish their own socialist government and if in the United States a workers’ and farmers’ government would displace the present capitalist government.
Socialist governments in England and the United States would proclaim to the German people: “We have nothing against you; all we want is that you join us in creating a cooperative commonwealth throughout the whole world. We have no ambitions against your territory and we shall not do anything to deprive you of your liberty; revolt against Hitler and establish your own socialist government.” Hitler could not last one week after such an appeal. He would be destroyed by his own people.
This is our solution to the problem of Hitlerism. Unfortunately we are as yet too small a group really to influence the thought of the masses. It is not we who will create difficulties for the ruling class in this country; it is the war that will create those difficulties. Let us assume a war which will last five or even more years; the cost of living will be going up; over 50 per cent of our productive efforts will go for war purposes; the people in this country will be suffering as well as the people in England and in Germany and in Italy; and we hope that the day will come when all the peoples of the various countries will fraternize and put an end to the conflict which is now being fought to guard the interests of the ruling cliques.
It is nonsense to think that a small party like ours can, by its agitation, create dissatisfaction. ‘What creates dissatisfaction is the war and we are not responsible for that.
The class struggle goes on during the war whether we agitate for it or not. We have very little influence in the labor movement but the struggle goes on right now. With the cost of living going up, the workers are bound to strike for higher wages and he is indeed foolish who thinks that, when we are behind bars, strikes will cease. Neither will a revolutionary situation be prevented by putting us behind bars. It would be necessary to put the whole working class behind bars in order to assure the capitalists the kind of peace that they want. Hitler thinks that by his methods of force he can bring to an end the class struggle and this trial is an indication that the same methods will be used in this country. The specter of fascism haunts this trial – a mass trial that is characteristic of trials in Italy and in Germany.
I do not mean to say that fascism is here; we still have a chance to argue before a jury, but the very fact that a large number of people can be dragged into court because of their ideas and writings is an indication that the monster of fascism is coming ever closer to us.
“Revolutionary defeatism” is another expression that the prosecution points to as something terrible to contemplate. I expressly defined that phrase in the column that I referred to before, published in The Militant of March 29, 1941. It simply means that we continue to advocate the class struggle during the war. By that is meant that if the workers have any grievances, they should demand the settlement of those grievances and if no settlement is made, they should go on strike. Will that interfere with the military effort? The responsibility is not that of the workers but of the employers who refuse to settle the grievances.
 
What Political Opposition Means
In that same article I state that we want to carry on our agitation and gain a majority even during the war. But so long as we have no majority, there is nothing for us to do except to submit to the majority. “To submit to the majority,” ladies and gentlemen, that phrase is found several times in my column. Do the prosecutors expect us to change our ideas because there is a war? Do they want us to stop thinking? Yes, we want to convince workers and soldiers that our ideas are correct and until we convince the majority, we are willing to submit to the decisions of the majority. For any government to demand anything more than that means practically introducing fascism.
In that article I expressly state that our party opposes sabotage, opposes any individual or group action which would obstruct the conduct of the war. If the prosecutors were fair and had the power to dismiss this case, they would do so without hesitation the moment their attention was brought to this column. He who would contend, after reading that article, that we are in favor of a victory of Hitler or that we would practice sabotage, does not want to read correctly.
Of course, under Mr. Anderson’s theory, to teach socialism constitutes, in and of itself, sabotage. He stated that, but he does not claim that we would try to sabotage the army by doing something to the rifles or to the planes or cannons so that they could not be used properly. The prosecutors simply claim that, if the soldiers listen to our theories, they will not fight for the government. In other words, socialism is sabotage to the prosecutors regardless of the fact that we say over and over again that so long as we are not in a majority, we can do nothing but what we are told to do.
The Court: We will adjourn now.
 
Friday Morning Session
 

rt Goldman: In Defense of Socialism (Part 3)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Goldman: In Defense of Socialism

Albert Goldman
In Defense of Socialism
(Part 3)

Friday, November 28, 1941
Morning Session
 
The Court: You may proceed.
Mr. Goldman: Once more I beg your indulgence for taking so much of your time. Last night I went through my notes and I cut out enough to shorten my argument by about four hours. If, in your deliberations, someone asks why did not Goldman touch upon this matter and that matter, then the answer is that I had to refrain from discussing many questions because of lack of time.
Yesterday, in discussing the question of whether or not we advocate or predict violence, I forgot to mention the fact that in the majority of instances where violence is mentioned in the exhibits, it refers to defense against the fascists. This is an important point which I ask you to consider in your deliberations.
 
Our Military Policy
The indictment charges us with conspiring to create insurrection and disobedience in the armed forces of the United States. It is important to discuss our so-called military policy. The government depends upon that policy, I think, in its attempt to convince you that we are guilty of that section of the indictment.
When the question of compulsory military service was first taken up in Congress and a discussion upon it began in the country, our party felt it necessary to take a position on that question.
As you know, there are people in this country who are pacifists and conscientious objectors who, under no circumstances, would fight in the armed forces or even allow themselves to be drafted for military service. There are many socialists who take a similar stand.
We, on the other hand, considered the situation from its fundamental aspect, namely, that in this epoch when fascism has come upon the scene with its horrible violence, it is futile not to recognize the fact that all important questions will be settled by military means. Not only futile, but extremely dangerous! Of all groups in society, we are most vehemently opposed to war but so long as war exists in the world and so long as there are fascists ready to use violence against the working class, every worker has the duty of training to defend himself. Young people will have to go to war whether they like it or not and since that is the case, we are in favor of having our youth trained in the arts of war. Modern warfare requires great technical skill and he is foolish who does not understand that it is necessary to acquire that skill.
We cannot tell the young generation to oppose military training when we know that it will be dragged into war. And it is on the basis of this fundamental proposition that we say to the young men: Do not resist compulsory military training; go into the army and do your best to get the training necessary to defend yourselves against the enemy from without and – we also added – against the enemy from within. In a world where fascism and violence and war dominate the scene, it is necessary for you to accept military training in order to defend yourselves.
Naturally, we would like our members, wherever they are, in the factory or in a union or in the army, to propagate our ideas, but we understand that the army is not a place where one can speak as freely as outside of the army. We don’t like it but we are realistic enough to understand that in the army it is necessary to be cautious. Just as a trade unionist in an open shop must be careful in propagating his ideas for trade unionism, so must a soldier in the army be careful in propagating ideas frowned upon by the generals. In the army, of course, it is far more dangerous to propagate socialism than it is to propagate trade unionism in an open shop. The greatest open shop institution in this country is the United States Army.
Conditions in our army are not so bad now as they were fifty or a hundred years ago. There was a time when it was impossible for a human being who was not brutalized to remain in the army. That has been changed and not without a struggle.
At present we advocate the idea that soldiers in the army should be on terms of equality with the officers. We consider the private soldiers equal in every way, except from the point of view of technical training, to the officers and we insist that they be treated in the same way as officers are treated. We advocate legislation compelling the officers to treat privates with respect and to change the rules which permit officers in charge of a military tribunal to inflict inhuman punishment for some minor infraction of the Military Code.
The government has introduced evidence that we urge the soldiers to kick about their food. I do not know whether there have been complaints about food in the army. If the food is not good, then the soldiers, including members of our party who are drafted, should kick about the food. If the prosecution is interested in preventing such complaints about the food, then let it see to it that the soldiers are provided with good food. Are we in a situation where soldiers must eat rotten food without complaining? That seems to be the theory of the prosecution.
Here I want to point out to you the absurdity of the accusation levelled against us to the effect that we send our members into the army in order to kick about food and create insubordination. Do you think we could win any influence in that way, and after all, that is our main aim – to win people over to our ideas, and thus gain influence. How do you think Vincent Dunne and Farrell Dobbs and Miles Dunne and Carl Skoglund and all the other leaders of Local 544 succeeded in gaining influence over the truck drivers? Simply by kicking?
And certainly not by proclaiming themselves to be Trotskyists. You can readily assume that the 6,000 truck drivers do not follow their leadership because it is composed of Socialist Workers Party members. The vast majority of the truck drivers is composed of Republicans, Democrats and Farmer-Laborites. But these people also voted for Farrell Dobbs and Vincent and Miles Dunne as their union leaders. Why? Because they saw in them men who have served their interests. The truck drivers may not even like the fact that those defendants who are leaders of Local 544 are socialists; but still they vote for them because they see in the defendants men who guard the interests of the workers. Our party members in Local 5-11 did not win influence among the truck drivers because they taught socialism, but because they improved the conditions under which the truck drivers worked.
The same thing holds with reference to any of our members who may be in the army. They cannot gain influence by teaching the abstract doctrine of socialism, but by taking care of the soldiers’ interests. It is true that we take advantage of every opportunity to teach the ideas of socialism. But we feel the socialist ideas will take root, not at present, when the vast majority of the people is satisfied with its conditions, but in the future when the masses will be driven to accept new ideas because of their suffering and privations. Human beings are very slow to change their ideas. The human mind is surrounded by a crust of all the ideas it has absorbed from childhood, and not until events destroy that crust is it ready to accept new ideas. It is because we want to get the confidence of the workers and the soldiers that we defend their immediate interests, and do not merely teach them the abstract doctrine of socialism.
We have put forth the idea of military training under trade union control. As Mr. Cannon testified, a training camp was operated in Plattsburg, New York, for the purpose of training business men and professional men as officers, and the government furnished the necessary funds. Why not have training camps where trade unions could train their men both as soldiers and as officers?
In our opinion the great majority of generals and higher officers in the army are hostile to the laboring class. The higher officers are raised and trained in an environment which makes them hostile to the workers. They are not interested in democracy or in fighting for democracy. Have not the events in France confirmed our opinion in that respect? The American and British generals are not any different from the French generals. Who surrendered to Germany? Not the rank and file, but Petain and Weygand and the other generals in command of the French army. Who permitted the Germans to enter Norway? Not the rank and file soldiers, but the fascists in the upper ranks. We say plainly that we do not trust the generals and higher officers to fight for democracy.
Because of that we propose that the trade unions train their own officers – officers in whom the workers can have confidence and whom they can control. And you must remember, when you consider this point, that the trade unions are not under the control of the Socialist Workers Party, but under the control of men who are, from our viewpoint, very conservative, and even reactionary. Still, rather than have officers trained at West Point, we prefer to have them trained under trade union control because the trade unions are organizations of workers. Furthermore, you must remember that our program of military training under trade union control is a legislative program. We want Congress to pass legislation making such training possible by appropriating funds for that purpose.
Of course, as with all other activities and policies of the Socialist Workers Party, our idea of military training under trade union control is evidence, as far as the prosecution is concerned, of a conspiracy to overthrow the government by force. No matter what we do, it is taken by the government as evidence of this conspiracy. If we opposed military training, that would constitute evidence of a conspiracy; when we are for military training, that is brought in as evidence of a conspiracy!
 
Why We Want Workers’ Defense Guards
Another policy of ours which the government introduced as evidence of a conspiracy is our proposal of establishing workers’ defense guards. We have no hesitation to admit that we would like to see the workers create such defense guards. I shall even admit – and let the government make the most of it – that if workers’ defense guards should be created, they would defend the revolution of the majority against the violence of the minority. We shall do our utmost to create workers’ defense guards so that when the majority of the people take power, it will be able to put down any revolt by the minority.
The charge that is levelled against us, you must remember, is that we are conspiring to overthrow and to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. The government must first prove that charge beyond a reasonable doubt, and it cannot prove it by introducing evidence that we advise the establishment of workers’ defense guards or a union defense guard. If the jury agrees with me that we do not advocate the use of violence, but predict that the minority will use violence against the majority, then everything else is immaterial. It is perfectly proper for us to propose to workers the idea of creating defense guards to protect them against fascist violence, and mind you, we are not advocating a policy of creating defense guards of our own members. We want the workers to build these defense guards.
Unfortunately, they have not as yet followed our proposals. The fascist danger is not so evident to the workers as it is to us, and they have not acted in accordance with our proposals. This is a fine example of the idea that it is not agitation that can bring certain things into existence. If conditions are not ripe for it, then we can talk from now until doomsday and the workers will not follow our advice. There is not a single workers’ defense guard in the United States today.
Mr. Schweinhaut (Prosecutor): That statement, that there is not a single defense guard in the United States today, is not brought out by the evidence. The contrary has been established. As a matter of fact, in March of this year the Union Defense Guard was in existence in Minneapolis.
Mr. Goldman: I still contend on the basis of the evidence that there does not exist a single defense guard in the United States at the present time.
The Court: Well, the jury will remember what the evidence was on that particular question.
 
544 Defense Guard
I shall now deal with the question of the Union Defense Guard of Local 544. What relationship did the existence of this Union Defense Guard of the Minneapolis truck drivers have to our proposal for a workers’ defense guard? The idea of a workers’ defense guard, as has been explained to you, is not something new. It has not only been propagated by us, but we have actually, on certain occasions, created a defense guard to defend our meetings against Stalinist and fascist hoodlums. As a matter of fact, there have been defense guards ever since the socialist movement began, because there have always been elements who wanted to use violence against socialists.
And when a situation arose in Minneapolis which demanded the formation of some kind of defense organization to defend the right of union men to hold their meetings undisturbed and to protect the halls and property of the union, our members, trained in the idea of having defense guards, naturally thought of creating such a guard to protect the interests of Local 544.
Members of our party are superior to the average worker, if they are superior at all, because they have a certain theory as to the basis of their activities, and this theory enables them to predict and act upon their predictions. The average worker lives from day to day – he works, earns his living, is thrown out of his job, goes on relief, has children and tries to feed them. He is unable as yet to generalize the reasons for his difficulties. A member of the Socialist Workers Party thinks in general terms about the situation of the workers in society. He is trained to understand that his life is bound up with the life of his class.
As I said, we have a theory of society, and on the basis of that theory we are able to predict that certain people will act in a certain way. We know, for instance, that the fascists will at one time or another make an attempt to destroy the unions. When our members saw in the Minneapolis newspapers in 1938 reports that the Silver Shirts were organizing, they also understood that the Silver Shirts were not organizing to benefit the trade unions, but to destroy them. Our members immediately considered what to do to defend the union hall, the union property and the union meetings against the attacks of the Silver Shirts. Whereas the average worker does not think of the future, our members do.
Yesterday, in his argument, Mr. Anderson made a very peculiar remark. “What business,” he asked, “is it of theirs to bring the history of the Russian revolution into the United States?” I am sorry that Mr. Anderson is puzzled by that, but our party members are taught to study everything that happens in the world. What happens in Russia, in England, in Africa, is our business. We do not believe that the United States can be separated from the rest of the world. It is part of the world, and whatever happens in any section of the world affects us. We studied what the fascists did in Germany and in Italy, and because we studied the activities of the fascists there, we know what the activities of the American fascists will be here. And we teach the workers not to wait until the fascists succeed here, as they succeeded in Germany and Italy. We teach workers to organize their workers’ defense guards and prevent the fascists from doing here what they did in other countries.
Why did Local 544 and not any other union in Minneapolis organize a union defense guard? Everyone knows that Local 544 is the most important union in Minneapolis. It was considered the arch-enemy of the reactionary employers and of the fascists, and everyone with any common sense understood that when fascists were organizing in Minneapolis, they would attack 544 first of all. Our members understood that and that is why Local 544 took the initiative and organized the Union Defense Guard. But it must be remembered that they invited the members of other unions to participate in this defense guard.
 
The Undisputed Fact About the Guard
The government witnesses practically proved everything we wanted to prove to the jury on the question of the Union Defense Guard. The evidence on that question was the greatest dud that the government produced. I am only amazed that the prosecutors still insist on injecting the question of the Union Defense Guard into this case. Were they really fair-minded, they would openly state to the jury that the Union Defense Guard is not to be considered by the jury as evidence against the defendants. Their failure to do so is another indication to me that the prosecutors are unable to act independently in this case, and must follow orders of people higher up.
By the testimony of the government witnesses it has been proved that the Union Defense Guard was organized at the time the Silver Shirts became active in Minneapolis late in the summer of 1938. Our evidence that the Minneapolis newspapers carried news items describing the activities of the Silver Shirts has not and cannot be denied. All the government witnesses, with the exception of one, testified that at the Union Defense Guard meetings Vincent Dunne and other defendants explained the necessity of organizing the Guard against the possible attacks of the Silver Shirts.
The only one who testified that Vincent Dunne told 150 members of the Union Defense Guard that the purpose of the organization was to overthrow the government was Elmer Buckingham. If you remember that witness, you remember that he was slouching and constantly looking at the floor. He testified that he did not remember anything about the Silver Shirts, but that he remembered Vincent Dunne, in the presence of about 150 men, state that the purpose of the Defense Guard was to overthrow the government of the United States.
All I ask is that the jurors ask themselves one question: Is it credible that Vincent Dunne, an intelligent individual, if he actually organized the Union Defense Guard to overthrow the government, would state his purpose at an open meeting in the presence of 150 men? When one takes that factor into consideration and in addition remembers that no other government witness heard Vincent Dunne say anything of the kind, then it becomes clear how much credence can be placed in the testimony of Buckingham.
It is not denied by us that the Union Defense Guard had target practice. One government witness testified that target practice was decided upon as a form of entertainment. I do not even deny that there is a possibility that the members of the Guard wanted target practice with the idea in mind of training the members to shoot so that they could defend themselves against any armed attack. They had a perfect right to have target practice even if the intention was to learn how to shoot so that they could defend themselves against any armed attack.
 
Was the Guard Necessary?
Mr. Anderson asks why the leaders of Local 544 did not ask the government authorities for protection. Why was it necessary to organize the Guard? In the first place, even if a person notifies the authorities and asks for protection against a possible attack, he is not thereby prevented from preparing to defend himself. Local 544 could have notified the authorities and then proceeded to organize a union defense guard. There was no attempt to conceal the fact that a union defense guard was organized. The organization met openly. Many people in Minneapolis knew about the existence of the Guard. The Northwest Organizer, official organ of all the Minneapolis Teamsters unions, was full of news about it. And there can be no question but that the police knew about it.
Indeed the leaders of Local 544 did not have very great confidence in the authorities and did not rely upon them very greatly for protection against the Silver Shirts. It is evident to everyone that neither the city, nor the state, nor the federal government was favorably inclined to Local 544. Under such conditions the leaders of Local 544 would have been derelict in their duty had they not taken steps to organize a guard to protect the members and their union.
That the Guard was organized, not for the purpose of overthrowing the government but to defend the union against the Silver Shirts, is proved conclusively by the fact that it was organized when first the Silver Shirts came to Minneapolis, and that it ceased to exist as a functioning organization in the spring of 1939 when the Silver Shirts no longer held meetings in Minneapolis. After 1939 the Union Defense Guard was called together only for the purpose of policing picnics or Christmas parties. Only the prosecuting attorneys can draw from that fact the conclusion that the Union Defense Guard still exists as a functioning guard organization.
Undoubtedly the members of our party in Local 544 took the initiative in organizing the Union Defense Guard. They prepared for any eventuality; and the fact that the Silver Shirts did not attack does not prove Mr. Anderson’s point that the Union Defense Guard was not organized to defend the union against the Silver Shirts, but simply proves that “an ounce of preparation is worth a pound of cure.” As a result of the readiness of the members of Local 544 to defend themselves, the Silver Shirts did not dare launch any attack.
The Union Defense Guard, the one issue which the government announced with great fanfare before the trial as indicating that there was a real conspiracy to overthrow the government by force, has been completely shattered, and by the government’s own witnesses. That the government has not honestly and frankly admitted its mistake is an indication, as I said before, that in this case the government wants a conviction regardless of the evidence.
 
Lessons of Russian Revolution
The prosecution was very anxious to prove two things about the Russian revolution – one, that we consider it a great event and were consequently interested in it and, two, that we studied it in order to imitate here the tactics that were used by the Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky.
I simply want to emphasize the one fact that should by this time be clear, even to the prosecution. The Russian revolution was not the result of a conspiracy organized by a minority. It was the work of the immense majority of the workers and peasants supporting the Bolshevik Party led by Lenin and Trotsky.
Conclusive evidence of the fact that the vast majority of the people of Russia supported the Bolshevik Party is the successful struggle of the Red Army, organized by Leon Trotsky, against a powerful combination of forces consisting of Russian White Guards, the Czecho-Slovak army, Japanese, English and even American soldiers. Had the Bolshevik Party not been supported by 95 per cent of the Russian people, it could never have withstood such a powerful attack.
The second lesson to be drawn from the Russian revolution, as far as this case is concerned, is that it was a minority of capitalists and landlords who began the civil war in order to prevent the majority from trying to establish the foundations of a new social order.
For us, the Russian revolution is all-important because for the first time in history the masses of people actually took the productive wealth away from the capitalists and landlords. The foundations of socialism were created by the Russian revolution. Unfortunately, historic conditions, which I am unable to discuss because they are not germane to the case, permitted a bureaucratic clique under the leadership of Stalin to usurp power and to crush every form of democracy in the Soviet Union.
Mr. Anderson advises the defendants to go to Russia if we are so interested in that country. It should be known, even to Mr. Anderson, that Trotskyists have no chance at all to live in the Soviet Union; thousands of them have been executed. The best army and naval officers have been executed and this is why the Russian soldiers, in spite of the most heroic resistance, have sustained defeats at the hands of the Nazi army.
Mr. Schweinhaut: Is that evidence?
Mr. Goldman: No, that is not part of the evidence in this case. It may be disregarded by the jury. It is in evidence, however, that the Trotskyists in the Soviet Union struggled for democratic rights in that country just as we struggle for democratic rights here. Mr. Anderson should know that most of the defendants were born in this country and he above all should know that this country was built by so-called foreigners, by the Irish, the Swedes, the Russians, the Hungarians, the Italians, by the foreign workers who slaved in the mines, who built the railroads, who created the most powerful country in the world, now in the hands of the Sixty Families and their satellites. He should know that the Swedes and Norwegians were the ones who settled in Minnesota and helped build up this state. It is indeed a shame that people who were born here or who were raised here and who worked here should be told to get out of this country by the prosecution.
The defendants, of course, as I indicated yesterday, are internationalists. We make no distinctions between races and nationalities. Wherever we are, there we fight to the best of our abilities for liberty and democracy.
“History repeats itself” is a phrase that is frequently heard. But that is true to only a very limited extent. History actually never repeats itself. We do not know what the conditions will be under which the masses of this country decide to establish a socialist regime. We do know that they can never be exactly the same as existed in Russia in November 1917. Russia was largely an agricultural country with 80 per cent of the people illiterate, without any tradition of democracy. The farmers in the United States are not the same as the peasants of Russia. We have a right to hope that the higher standards of education in this country and the democratic traditions of the people will prevent the great tragedy that occurred in the Soviet Union subsequent to the revolution – I refer to the usurpation of power by the Stalinist clique that has crushed every form of democracy.
What did the prosecution succeed in doing by introducing our articles dealing with the Russian revolution? Has it succeeded in proving a conspiracy on our part to overthrow the government by force and violence? It has succeeded only in proving that we, like the Bolsheviks in Russia, aim to win a majority of the people of this country to our ideas. If that is a “conspiracy,” it will be a conspiracy of the vast majority of the people to change the present social order and to organize a government that will best protect their economic, political and social interests.
And should the minority attempt to use violence to thwart the will of the majority, then I hope that the masses will organize their workers’ defense guard, just as the Russian workers organized their Red Army and just as the workers of 544 organized their Defense Guard to put down the violence of a minority.
It may be of some interest to note that this indictment was written subsequent to June 22, 1941, the date when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union. Since then there has been a very close and friendly relationship between the present administration and Stalin’s government. It so happens that the former American ambassador to the Soviet Union, Mr. Davies, wrote an article recently in a popular magazine wherein he claims that the Trotskyists were fascists and that Stalin did well to have them executed. It is indeed peculiar that whereas Stalin accused the Trotskyists of being fascists, we here are accused of being revolutionists. Different governments have different ways of framing the Trotskyists.
 
Marx, Lenin and Trotsky
I did not know whether to laugh or to weep when Mr. Anderson, in his opening address, accused us of being Marxists. I was tempted to laugh because throughout this country in every institution of learning there are people teaching history, sociology, and even the physical sciences who consider themselves Marxists.
There are many people who claim to be Marxists. We may not agree that they are but at least they claim to be. And for Mr. Anderson to get up in a court of law in the United States and accuse people of being Marxists as if that were a crime is, to say the least, somewhat absurd.
But that accusation also had a very serious connotation. For it is in Germany and Italy that Marxism is considered a crime and where Marxists are exterminated.
I wonder if counsel for the government understood the full significance of their introduction into evidence of the Communist Manifesto. Their purpose in introducing the Communist Manifesto was, of course, to get the jury to convict the defendants. But that means practically banning a book which is being sold in every good bookstore in the United States, which is on the library shelves of every decent library, and which is studied in every university. For if we can be convicted for circulating the Communist Manifesto then, in effect, a ban is placed upon it. Hitler started the practice of burning books distasteful to him; and among the first books that he ordered burned were the books of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, including the Communist Manifesto. I do not mean, Mr. Schweinhaut actually wants the Communist Manifesto burned but, in effect, by introducing the book into evidence, he condemns it and warns the world not to read or circulate it.
We, of course, must plead guilty to the charge of being Marxists. We are Marxists because we believe that the economic structure of society is the determining factor in social development and that man is a product of his social environment. We are Marxists because we believe that the productive forces of society have reached a stage where it is possible to produce everything necessary to satisfy the reasonable needs of the people; because we believe that capitalist society has reached a point when the people must either progress with socialism or perish through fascist barbarism. In essence this is now the meaning of Marxism and to this charge we plead guilty.
Lenin as well as Marx was dragged into the case by the prosecution. And again we must admit that we consider Lenin as one of the great men of all times. His greatness lies in the fact that he was willing to stand alone with a few people supporting him in his opposition to the First World War when the vast majority of the socialists betrayed their principles and supported their own imperialist governments. Lenin in Switzerland and Trotsky in Vienna, in Paris and New York (he was expelled from Vienna and Paris during the war) both raised their voices against the First World War which they designated as imperialistic. Lenin predicted that the war would result in a revolutionary situation in Russia. His prediction came true and when that revolutionary situation actually came into existence, Lenin and Trotsky took advantage of it and led the masses in the revolution that destroyed capitalism in Russia.
The arch conspirator in this case, according to the government, is Leon Trotsky.
How absurd is the idea of designating Leon Trotsky as a conspirator! He has written three thick volumes on the history of the Russian revolution; he has written innumerable books and pamphlets explaining his ideas about society and current events. Critics have recognized his history of the Russian revolution as the greatest history penned by any man at any time. He is the type of man who, in addition to being a great theoretician and writer, could and did also organize and lead a great army.
We guarded his life because he meant so much to the movement that the defendants represent. Five or six secretaries gave their lives to guard him. We spent thousands of dollars in an effort to shield him from an attempt on his life that we were certain would some day be made by the Kremlin dictator. We do not deny that he was the one who guided our movement in its general aspects. Many of us visited him in Mexico many times. We asked for his advice and he gave it to us, not on minor questions such as the organization of a union defense guard in Local 544, but on major questions of world importance. He discussed with us the role that the United States is playing and will play in world affairs. His analysis of events and his predictions on the basis of that analysis will always remain as evidence of his remarkable intellect. To call him a conspirator is an insult to human intelligence.
 
Yes, We Are Internationalists
The prosecution charges us with being internationalists and, of course, we must plead guilty to that charge. For us internationalism is the very heart of socialism. We conceive of the world as an economic unit. No nation, no matter how wealthy or powerful, can separate itself from the rest of the world. We are not isolationists. We do not believe that it is possible to isolate this country from the rest of the world.
As I indicated to you before, socialism is a world system under which all nations and all peoples will cooperate to produce enough goods to satisfy the reasonable needs of every human being. Every country will produce that which it is best fitted to produce. If a country can produce good machinery then let it not busy itself with producing agricultural products. Let some other country best fitted for the production of agricultural products produce those products and exchange its products for the machines produced by another country. Peace will come to a world cooperating in this way, which will be made possible only by socialism, which will do away with imperialist cliques fighting for colonies and markets.
We reject the idea that one nation or one people is superior to any other nation or any other people. To us all human beings are equal. The prejudices that exist are a product of the social system and not inherent in human nature. The brotherhood of man will be made possible and real under a socialist society which will do away with economic conflicts.
Our party belonged to the Fourth International. But when the Voorhis Act was enacted making it illegal for any organization in this country to belong to an international organization, we obeyed the law and severed our connection with the Fourth International. We did not like the law; we were opposed to it, but as a minority there was nothing for us to do except to obey it and try to have it repealed.
 
The Party and the Trade Unions
I come now to the question which I consider third in importance. First is the question of whether or not we advocate the violent overthrow of the government; second in importance is the question of our attitude on the war; and third is the question of our activities in the trade unions. When we consider that question we come to the point that actually explains the reason for this prosecution.
 
(Morning Recess)
 
Mr. Goldman: More time, ladies and gentlemen, was spent on the trade union question in this case than on any other single question, including the central issue of the case as to whether or not there is a conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence. And I am not surprised at that. I expected it because the trade union question has far more to do with this case than the question of the overthrow by force and violence of the government of the United States.
Consider the chief witnesses for the government – who they are, what they are doing now, what role they played in Local 544 before the indictment – and the conclusion is inescapable that this trial is essentially a contest between two factions in the union, with the government being part of one faction. I dare anyone to attempt to disprove that statement. Of course counsel for the government cannot admit that and they must try their best to disprove it. They must repeat over and over again: This case involves only the question of whether or not the defendants violated certain sections of the law. But all in vain! No matter what the government says, it cannot escape from the facts.
Therefore, I hope that you forgive me if I deal with the question of trade unionism, as it is involved in this case, quite extensively.
What did the government try to prove by introducing the question of trade unionism? It tried to prove that the Socialist Workers Party aims to gain control of the unions and to utilize that control for the purpose of getting the masses organized into unions to take up arms against the government. That in essence is the government’s position.
Let us, then, analyze the evidence to see whether the government has succeeded in proving its contention. Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, made it clear that the evidence would prove that the Socialist Workers Party conspired to dictate to the unions and to utilize the unions as instruments for the purpose of furthering the central aim of the party, to wit: to overthrow the government by force and violence. No other purpose was attributed by the prosecution to the Socialist Workers Party as far as the trade union question is concerned.
And then the parade of government witnesses began and on the basis of the testimony of those witnesses it could be deduced that the aim of the Socialist Workers Party in working within the unions was altogether different from that which Mr. Anderson indicated it was. Dictate to the unions! How could the Socialist Workers Party dictate to the unions of this country? Even on the basis of the testimony of the government’s own witnesses, as elicited from them through cross-examination, it became clear that the Socialist Workers Party never could and never did try to dictate to the unions. And when you take into consideration the evidence of the defendants, then you can see that all that the Socialist Workers Party aimed at was to have its members work in the unions, do the best they could for the workers and the unions and thus gain influence with the workers.
To work in the interest of the unions and thereby get the confidence of the workers and be elected to offices in the union, is a right which I shall defend day in and day out. Every person living in the United States, every group in this country, has a right to do exactly that. And as for us, we intend to exercise that right. It is unquestionably true, ladies and gentlemen, that the Socialist Workers Party would like to have great influence in the trade union movement so that it could persuade the workers to follow socialist ideas. Unfortunate for us and much to be regretted by us, is the fact that our influence in the trade union movement is very limited.
Every political party desires to get control of the unions. The question is for what purpose and in what manner? Can it be denied that the Democratic Party would like to get and retain control of the trade union movement? Can that be denied of the Republican Party or any other party? Of course not. Every political party attempts in various ways to get support in the trade union movement and as far as the Republican and Democratic Parties are concerned, they succeed in getting control of that movement through tying themselves up with the bureaucrats who lead that movement.
 
Our Faith in the Workers
The trade union movement is the most powerful institution in this country. Why? Because it includes in its ranks vast numbers of industrial workers and railroad workers and is thus able to continue or to stop production and by stopping production, to throw the country into a terrific turmoil. If the trade union movement had leadership with social vision, it could easily solve the problems of this country but unfortunately the leadership is in the hands of narrow and bigoted men.
Our party supports the trade union movement against the employing class, even though certain sections of the unions are led by the type of men whom we designate as reactionary. We have so much faith in the essential correctness of the trade union movement – so much faith that the workers ultimately will throw the racketeers and bureaucrats off their backs – that we support the trade union organizations. As was said several times by government witnesses who did not understand the significance of their testimony, we are always in favor of the workers as a class, against the employers as a class. To us, the workers who create the wealth of society are always right against the employers who get the benefit of that work. That is why we support the workers against the employers even though the workers at times are led by people in whom we have no confidence whatever. It has been sufficiently brought out in the evidence that we do not have any confidence in Tobin, yet we would unhesitatingly support the Teamsters International, under the leadership of Tobin, against the employers.
The trade union movement at the present time, led by men like Tobin, who are interested only in their personal welfare, irritates many people. It irritates the small business men, the farmers and even many workers with the senseless jurisdictional struggles and clique fights constantly going on. As I said before, the leadership of the trade union movement lacks social vision and the task that we have set ourselves is to try to educate the members of the unions so that they will insist on having as their leaders men who understand the problems of society and who understand the power and the responsibility of the trade union movement in solving those problems.
Do we then attempt to control the trade union movement? If by that is meant that we send our members into the trade unions with instructions to work in the interest of the members of the trade unions and to gain the confidence of every worker and to be elected to office, then we must admit that we try to control it. But only in that sense and in no other sense. The history of Local 544 conclusively proves our contention that our work in the trade union movement is of that nature.
We are interested in bringing immediate benefits to the workers. Does it appear to be contradictory that socialists work to bring immediate benefits to the workers and at the same time look forward to a revolutionary situation when the masses will be dissatisfied with the dreadful conditions confronting them? Why is it that we try to improve the conditions of the workers? Remember that our object is to win the confidence of the masses and to do so we must work for an immediate improvement in their conditions. We must show them that their poverty and suffering are not brought about by anything they do, but by the existence of the capitalist system, by the greed of the capitalist class. We must show the workers that what we are interested in is improving their conditions.
But we also tell them that no matter how much we try to improve their immediate conditions, the social system under which they live makes it impossible in the long run to achieve any real improvement. Whether the workers like it or not, they will ultimately find themselves in a situation under the present social order when there will be no solution except to change that social order.
 
Our Record in Local 544
Under the strict rules of evidence it was impossible for us to prove how much the defendants have done to improve the conditions under which the workers labor. But enough has been permitted into evidence to show beyond the peradventure of a doubt that the activities of the Dunne brothers, of Farrell Dobbs, of Cart Skoglund and of every other defendant who is a member of Local 544, aided the truck drivers in getting improved conditions. Can there be the slightest doubt of that? Who built Local 544? The defendants played by far the most important role in organizing the truck drivers. The evidence is overwhelming that in their activities the defendants were motivated by the fundamental aim of improving the conditions of the truck drivers and other workers and, what is more, they did succeed in improving the conditions of the workers in Minneapolis. You do not have to take our testimony for that, but the testimony of the witnesses for the government.
The defendants won the confidence of the truck drivers because we represented their interests. The truck drivers, who know nothing about socialism and surely nothing about Trotskyism, know the Dunnes, know Dobbs, know Skoglund and all the other defendants as people who are absolutely honest and sincere in their work. They know them personally and they understood that the defendants were working for the interests of the truck drivers.
Witness after witness for the government testified that they had been in opposition to the defendants, that they ran candidates against them in the elections of Local 544, but no one dared even to suggest that the defendants were not rightfully elected. The overwhelming testimony on the part of the government witnesses was to the effect that the defendants controlled Local 544 not by force, not by compulsion, but by virtue of winning the confidence of the men and of being elected to office in the most constitutional and democratic manner, with the rights of free speech and free criticism allowed to all opponents.
The membership of the truck drivers rose from 200 in 1934 to 6.500. Why do you think the truck drivers flocked into the union? Was it because the defendants were socialists or Trotskyists, or was it because the vast majority of them understood that they gained something practical by being in the union?
There were, of course, people like the government witnesses, who were not satisfied with Local 544 and its leadership. As I told you, modern society is constituted on the principle of “dog eat dog.” There are many who try to benefit themselves at the expense of others and that is true of some people in the trade union movement. There is, in fact, no escaping from that principle anywhere under the present social system.
Two government witnesses came from Omaha. They turned out to be honest witnesses. These witnesses – Tommy Smith and Malcolm Love – testified that they joined the party not because they understood the principles of the party but because they knew Dobbs and they knew the Dunnes and, said Tommy Smith, because the leaders of Local 544 were “labor-minded”; they were “the only ones who helped other unions organize the unorganized.” Dobbs went from one city to another helping his fellow workers and Tommy Smith said:
“I joined not because I knew anything about socialism but I knew the leaders of Local 544; I knew how honest they are and I figured that what is good for them is good for me.”
Even the hostile government witnesses had to admit that the Socialist Workers Party members were always willing to help the unions. Stultz from Omaha was a hostile witness but, not being as shrewd as Bartlett, he admitted the truth. He testified that defendant Alfred Russell wrote letters for Local 554 in Omaha, that Russell helped negotiate with employers and that Russell and other members of the party edited a union paper to present the case of the workers to the public.
 
Party Members Help Workers
The workers in the union could not write and could not edit a paper because they did not have the benefits of a formal education. It is not their fault. It is the fault of a system that condemns youngsters to go to work at the age of 13 and 14; it is the fault of a system that prevents youngsters from attending high school and college. The employers had no difficulty in finding people who could write for them – they had money to hire such people – but the workers didn’t have any money and so they had to depend upon members of the Socialist Workers Party, members who were willing to work for little or nothing in order to serve the interests of the workers. We admit that our members in helping workers always have in mind to convince the workers that the ideas of socialism are correct, but it is untrue that they go into the unions only with that purpose. They constantly have the welfare of the workers at heart.
Mr. Anderson naively asked the following question: “What business had the Socialist Workers Party to organize the Federal Workers Section? Should not the government be trusted with taking care of relief clients?” And by the government, I presume, Mr. Anderson means the people who have charge of WPA and the relief set-up. No, Mr. Anderson, it is obvious that the 2,000 members of the Federal Workers Section did not have sufficient confidence in the government officials. Out of these 2,000 members, there were probably no more than half a dozen or so members of the Socialist Workers Party. The fact that 2,000 men and women considered it necessary to become members of the Federal Workers Section proves conclusively that they thought the organization to be of great benefit to them. These men and women recognized that to protect their interests, it is necessary to organize and exert pressure upon government officials who otherwise would neglect their duties.
It has been the universal experience of all people that the government gives aid only to those people who are organized. The farmers organize, and if they don’t – they should. The same is true of the small business men. The workers organize and the unemployed have a right and a duty to organize.
 
The Defendants and Union Democracy
How did the members of our party who were in the leadership of Local 54 exercise control of the union? What is the policy of the Socialist Workers Party with reference to the method of controlling unions? You will find that policy explained in the Declaration of Principles and in the pamphlet on trade unionism written by Farrell Dobbs. Complete inner democracy in the trade unions is stressed both in the Declaration and in Dobbs’ pamphlet.
Unfortunately there is very little democracy in the trade union movement. There is practically none where men like Tobin rule. But wherever the Socialist Workers Party members are elected to office, they see to it that the members of the union have full democratic rights.
We have a firm and undying conviction, ladies and gentlemen, that without the understanding cooperation of the masses of the people, there can be no progress; there can be no real progress if people do blindly what they are told to do, no matter how good the intentions of the leaders may be. There can be no real progress under the rule of dictators no matter how benevolent they may be. There can be progress only if the masses understand what they are doing, understand their rights and exercise those rights – only if the masses take control of their own fate and destiny – and this can be done only through education and the democratic process.
Some of you, when questioned by the Judge before being accepted as jurors, said that you had heard and read something about the Soviet Union and thought that it was a communistic or socialistic state. By this time I think you understand that, as socialism is conceived by the defendants, its existence is impossible without freedom, without liberty, without democracy. There can be no socialism without freedom of the press, freedom of discussion, without the voluntary cooperation of the masses.
By the testimony of the government’s witnesses it was shown that in Local 544, under the leadership of some of the defendants, there was complete democracy, complete honesty and the local was completely free of gangsterism and racketeerism except insofar as some of the government witnesses tried to get away with certain racketeering practices.
Oh yes, we were in favor of strikes. Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, evidently with the intention of startling the jury, accused the defendants of never being satisfied, of constantly agitating for higher wages and more strikes, never wanting to arbitrate or to negotiate. But what has the evidence shown? The defendants, of course, have called strikes; but only after receiving authority from the members of the union, only after all attempts to negotiate with the employers had ended in failure. As far as Local 544 is concerned, the evidence shows that since 1936 there has not been a single major strike – the truck drivers were organized and the employers understood that they had to negotiate with Local 544.
Mr. Anderson also promised to show you that the defendants never believed in arbitration. But Mr. Dobbs, while he was on the witness stand, explained to you that while we prefer direct negotiations between unions and employers and while, as a general rule, we do not think arbitration is the best method of settling disputes, still we accept arbitration under certain circumstances. There is no question of principle involved.
When Mr. Dobbs said that he does not believe that there are impartial arbitrators, he explained that in a society divided into classes the fundamental issues dividing those classes cannot be arbitrated. There is no possibility of finding an impartial arbitrator on these fundamental issues. But that does not mean that we would exclude arbitration under all circumstances. The fact is that both in Local 541 and in the 11-state Over-the-Road Area Committee, when Mr. Farrell Dobbs was secretary, there were many cases of arbitration.
The evidence proves conclusively that the defendants practiced real trade union democracy to such an extent that the vast majority of the truck drivers followed the defendants and would now prefer them if they had a chance to indicate their preference by a democratic election.
 
Listing the Government Witnesses
In contrast to the trade union policy of the defendants, I shall now show you what was the trade union policy of the government witnesses. As indicated before, this case is nothing but a struggle between two factions in the union with the government siding with the faction consisting largely of the witnesses against the defendants. I will read you the names of the chief government witnesses and on the basis of their own testimony I think you must agree with me that they constitute the opposition to the leadership of the defendants in Local 544:

James Bartlett – now organizer for 544-AFL.
Eugene Williams – now organizer for 544-AFL.
George O’Brien – now organizer for 544-AFL.
Roy Wieneke – now organizer for 544-AFL.
Tom McCue – now organizer for 544-AFL.
Edward Blixt – now organizer for 544-AFL.
Sidney Brennan – now Secretary-Treasurer of 544-AFL.

Those are the main witnesses. Then we come to witnesses of secondary rank: What is their relationship to the power that controls 544-AFL? They are:

Walter K. Stultz – he and his wife are receiving pay from the Tobin Receiver of 554 in Omaha.
Helen Hanifan – bookkeeper in 544-AFL.
Harriet Karlen – stenographer of 544-AFL.

The following witnesses testified that they were formerly on the Tobin Receiver’s payroll:

Glen Smith – formerly organizer for the Receiver of 544-AFL, member of a squad. What kind of a squad, I think the jury understands. He was the man who beat up Jake Cooper and was proud of it. He did not deny there were 12 others with him at that time.
Henry Harris – bodyguard for Bartlett.
Jack Novack – member of what he claims to be a negotiating squad. That was the boy who obviously would be unable to negotiate anything with anybody.

The following government witnesses are the members of the Committee of 99, organized on behalf of Tobin to oppose the leadership of the defendants in 544:

Karl Bath
Robert Bove

Mr. Schweinhaut (Prosecutor): Bove was not a member of the Committee of 99.
Mr. Meyer (Defense Counsel): Look on page 1182 of the record, Mr. Schweinhaut.
Mr. Schweinhaut: I stand corrected.
Mr. Goldman: I continue the list:

Elmer Buckingham
E.G. Holstein
John Majersky
Joe Williams

All one has to do to become convinced that this trial is nothing but a continuation of the factional struggle in 544, is to read the names of the witnesses.
 
James Bartlett, Chief Witness
We must proceed now to analyze the testimony of some of the witnesses for the prosecution but I shall confine myself primarily, ladies and gentlemen, to only one witness. I confine myself largely to the witness who, in the words of Mr. Anderson, “continuously rose in stature during the trial until he reached way beyond the limit of the ceiling.” Maybe I didn’t understand Mr. Anderson correctly. Maybe he was only sarcastic.
There obviously are times in a man’s life when he changes his opinions on important questions. I would be the last man in the world to attack anyone who, after spending a certain number of years in the socialist movement, finally reaches the conclusion that the movement is based on a wrong philosophy.
If James Bartlett were that type of man, I would, of course, regret his leaving the movement. But I would not attack him. If he were that type of man, he would never testify against us. He could not possibly be an honest man and testify as he did.
From his testimony Bartlett can be designated as a careerist – a man only interested in carving out a career for himself. He goes from one party to another, always with the idea in the back of his mind of assuring for himself a comfortable living.
Why does he claim he left the Socialist Workers Party? Because he found out that we were advocating force and violence. On the face of it, that is unbelievable.
Bartlett is a smart man – he is not an intelligent man – but he is a smart fellow, there is no question about it. Under certain circumstances he would make a good business agent – better perhaps than most business agents. He can read. He testified that he wrote articles for the Daily Worker. He admitted that he read the Communist Manifesto before he joined the Communist Party. He admitted that he read State and Revolution by Lenin before he joined the Communist Party. When I asked him whether he knew that these two books advocated an armed overthrow of the government, he answered in the affirmative; that is, he knew that before he joined the Communist Party. He also admitted that he read a great deal of literature after he joined the Communist Party. He said he joined the Communist Party in 1932 and left it in the middle of 1933; and during this year and a half he read the literature of the party, he made speeches and wrote articles for the Daily Worker.
And then he states that he left the Communist Party because he found out that it advocated the violent overthrow of the government. So, after reading the Communist Manifesto and State and Revolution, the two documents which, in his opinion, advocated the violent overthrow of the government, it took him another year and a half to find out that the Communist Party advocated that doctrine!
Then in 1936 he comes to Mr. Vincent Dunne, and according to Bartlett’s testimony, Mr. Dunne asks him to join the Socialist Workers Party. At that point I very quietly asked him: “Did Mr. Dunne tell you or give you to understand that the Trotskyists claimed to be the real Marxists as against the Stalinists?” Bartlett’s answer was yes. Consider Mr. Bartlett’s testimony! He says he left the Communist Party because he found out that it advocated the violent overthrow of the government. He comes to our party and knows, before joining our party, that we claim to be the real Marxists and he also testified that he read books by Marx and Lenin which, in his opinion, advocated the overthrow of the government by force and violence. It must follow, then, from Bartlett’s testimony that he should have known before he joined our party that we also advocated the violent overthrow of the government. But according to his testimony, it took him three years to find that out. He found that out early in 1940 when he left our party. He joined our party in 1936 or 1937; so it took Mr. Bartlett all these years to find that out.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, the dumb government witnesses who followed Bartlett – Novack, Harris and others whose names I don’t remember – testified that at every party meeting they attended there was a discussion in which the violent overthrow of the government was advocated. Violet Williams testified that she attended many meetings, heard many lectures, did not remember the subject of the lectures or the contents of the lectures, but she remembered in general that we advocated the violent overthrow of the government. So we have people like Novack and Harris and Violet Williams – not very smart – and they find out that we advocate the violent overthrow of the government after attending two or three meetings.
Bartlett – the smart fellow who read the Communist Manifesto and State and Revolution before he joined the Communist Party in 1932, who, while in the Communist Party read all of the Communist Party literature and spoke for that party and wrote in the Daily Worker, who read many pamphlets while he was in our party – took three years before he found out that we advocate the violent overthrow of the government.
Mr. Anderson, for you to stand up now and say that you believe every word that Bartlett testified to would convict you of something more than sarcasm.
Let us go on. When, on cross-examination, I introduced certain statements made by Mr. Bartlett, I think that Mr. Schweinhaut and Mr. Anderson were overjoyed. It seemed that I had made a terrible blunder. I introduced the statement that Bartlett made when he joined the Socialist Workers Party; also the statement that he made when he campaigned in his own union against an opposition; and also the letter that he had written to the Star-Journal. The gentlemen of the prosecution did not catch the significance of those statements that I introduced. I did not care what Bartlett said about himself in those statements. But what I was interested in was one assertion that he didn’t make in any of these statements.
Bartlett claims, ladies and gentlemen, that he left the Communist Party because it advocated force and violence. Now, wouldn’t it be natural to expect that if that were the truth, he would say so in the statement giving the reasons why he left the Communist Party? The only reason that he mentions now for his leaving the Communist Party, he never mentioned in the statement in which he explained why he left the Communist Party. Is there any sense in that?
When Bartlett issued the statement against some of our members who were running in opposition to him in the warehouse union elections, he had already left the Socialist Workers Party. And according to his testimony here he left the party because he found out that it advocated force and violence. Where, in the statement he wrote in 1940, is there any assertion of that kind? It isn’t in that statement!
In the early part of this year Bartlett wrote a letter to the Star-Journal, a letter that I introduced in evidence. In it he claims that he left the Communist Party in the summer of 1934. But on the witness stand he testified that he left in 1933. It is obvious that he was lying on the witness stand, lying because he wanted to justify his further statement that during the 1934 strike he told Dunne he was out of the Communist Party. A liar, no matter how clever or how intelligent, finds it impossible to remember all the lies that he utters.
Why did he not, in the letter that he wrote to the Star-Journal, give as his reason for leaving the Socialist Workers Party that it advocated the violent overthrow of the government? There is not a single mention of that. He never mentioned his alleged real reason for leaving the party in any of the statements that he made before this trial. In the parade of perjury represented by the government witnesses, Bartlett “rose to the ceiling” and way above it.
Mr. Anderson did not know that yesterday or the day before yesterday he, himself, convicted Bartlett of perjury. I shall show you how. Mr. Anderson was examining Mr. Dobbs. He had in his hand either the ABC of Marxism or What Is Trotskyism and he gleefully asked Mr. Dobbs: “Well, this was written in 1941, wasn’t it?” Mr. Dobbs answered: “That is right.”
When did Bartlett last visit the party headquarters? I asked him: “Was it March, was it February, was it April?” And finally he said that “It could not have been later than April 1940.”
Then I had to maneuver carefully – because Bartlett is a smart fellow – to get him to admit that he bought What Is Trotskyism and the ABC of Marxism in the party headquarters. He stated definitely that he bought them in the headquarters.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, if the last time that Bartlett was at the headquarters was in April 1940 and if the pamphlets – as is proved by their internal context – were written after Trotsky’s death, were published in February or March 1941, how could Bartlett get those two books in the headquarters? Try to solve that riddle, Mr. Anderson.
Is there any question but that Bartlett is a perjurer? Would any witness for the defense guilty of such perjury be permitted to be free at the present time? There would be an indictment out against him, but Bartlett is a government witness and the government wants to prove its case regardless of the evidence and Bartlett, the greatest perjurer and the greatest liar that ever sat in the federal court, is permitted to go free.
 
Friday Afternoon Session
 

rt Goldman: In Defense of Socialism (Part 1)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Goldman: In Defense of Socialism

Albert Goldman
In Defense of Socialism
(Part 1)

Thursday, November 27, 1941
Morning Session
 
The Court: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman: May it please your Honor, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
I think that the prediction made in my opening statement, that this would be a case remarkable in many respects, has been confirmed.
In this courtroom there were presented before a jury, ideas, social, political and economic – that have never, to my knowledge, been presented in any Federal Court prior to this case.
Never before, in the history of a Federal Court, has a jury been confronted with the necessity of listening to the social, political and economic ideas and ideals of defendants, formulated in hundreds of articles and pamphlets, for the purpose of determining whether or not the defendants are guilty as charged in an indictment.
 
A Trial of Heretics
Often, as I sat through this trial, listening to Mr. Anderson reading excerpts, and especially yesterday as I heard Mr. Anderson deliver his argument, my thoughts drifted far afield. What are we in trial for, I asked myself. Certain men wrote books many years go, and we are on trial because these men had ideas and wrote about them. We are on trial because a man by the name of Marx spent most of his lifetime in the library of the British Museum, digging into statistics, statistics concerned with economics and with politics. We are on trial because this man, after reading the mass of statistics, wrote several books in which, taking those statistics as the basis, and analyzing them, he formulated general laws—laws that he thought, and laws that we think, operate in the social system.
We are on trial because a man by the name of Engels and a man by the name of Lenin and a man by the name of Trotsky wrote books, books that have been read by tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of people in this country, and certainly throughout the world.
As I thought about this matter, my mind wandered back into the Middle Ages, and I saw before me inquisitors, prosecutors – their names were not Mr. Anderson, I suppose, but Mr. Anderson could very well have been there – with a heretic standing before them, and these inquisitors were stern and merciless. Lifting up a finger of accusation, the prosecutor said, “He does not believe our doctrine. He does not believe what we have taught for many generations. I accuse him of heresy.” And the examination of the heretic began, and perhaps ended by the heretic’s recanting, as was the case with the great scientist Galileo, for many feared the punishment of slow torture and painful death.
I do not say, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that this case is exactly like the cases brought before the inquisition in the Middle Ages. After all, we face only 16 years of imprisonment, while the heretic in the Middle Ages faced torture and death; but essentially the situations are the same. The defendants here are charged with being guilty of heresy. They are guilty because they do not accept the ideas that prevail in society at the present time – Mr. Anderson’s ideas. They are guilty because they advocate new ideas which – to use Mr. Anderson’s phrase – are capable even of corrupting a saint, should a saint happen to read the literature published by the defendants.
My mind went even further back, into the days of Greece, when an ugly little man, full of wisdom in his head and of gentleness in his heart – Socrates – was accused of corrupting the youth by his ideas and was compelled to take a cup of hemlock.
I think that in essence this trial follows the tradition of the trials of heretics throughout the ages, the trials of people who advocate new ideas, and it is because of this factor, ladies and gentlemen, that I ask you to be doubly and triply careful. When the Court examined you prior to accepting you as jurors, you stated, and I believe with absolute sincerity, that you could and would give us an impartial trial. I have perfect faith that your intentions were and are of the best, ladies and gentlemen. but prejudice is not a garment that can be put on and taken off at will.
 
Danger of Prejudice
We are here dealing with ideas that are capable of arousing tremendous passion, as you witnessed yesterday when Mr. Anderson spoke; capable also of arousing tremendous zeal in their favor, ideas that actually did arouse millions of men to rise against what they deemed to be injustice; ideas which millions of men thought to be capable of liberating mankind from the ills that confront it. Yes, these ideas can arouse not only zeal and fanaticism, but also tremendous hatred, and they do arouse hatred, because to some people, such as Mr. Anderson, they appear to threaten the very foundations of everything held sacred. I remember that Mr. Anderson, in his opening statement, said that the defendants were conspiring to destroy “organized society.” Obviously, what Mr. Anderson designates as organized society, the defendants deem to be completely unorganized, completely chaotic, capable only of destruction and death.
In the indictment the defendants are charged with conspiring to accumulate and, in fact, the indictment charges that the defendants did accumulate, weapons and explosives. No evidence whatever, of course, was brought to prove that charge in the indictment, unless one considers that the ideas which the defendants have are dynamite. Tyrants of all ages feared the explosive nature of ideas, because ideas are capable of shattering the crust that surrounds the mind of man and of presenting the possibility of a new road, a new life, a new social existence. Ideas, therefore, constitute an explosive far more powerful than TNT, and it is the only explosive that we deal with, the only explosive that the government is capable of proving that we have accumulated.
And I say, ladies and gentlemen, that a human being, no matter how conscientious he may be, no matter how hard he may try to be impartial, must guard himself against prejudices, because prejudices most frequently lie deep in the subconscious mind of a person, and their existence is unknown, even to the person himself.
All of us are obviously born without any prejudices whatever. Have you ever seen a child of one or two or three years of age who knew anything about racial or religious hatreds? I have never seen one, and I know you have never seen one. But as the child becomes an adult, as he absorbs the poisons that exist in modern society, he becomes prejudiced. Every important judgment that a human being makes is determined by the ideas and by the prejudices that he has acquired in his early youth – in school, in church, at home.
The human being cannot get away from his environment. He is chained to it by chains that are not breakable, and most frequently he is chained to the prejudices created by the environment. In a case like this, it is therefore essential to ask yourselves at every step, “Am I permitting my judgment to be colored by my dislike of the ideas of the defendants?” There perhaps is no human being on earth who can get rid of his prejudices completely, but once he is conscious of the fact that he has prejudices, then he can be on guard against them, and being on guard against them, he is more likely, when confronted by new and strange and therefore hateful ideas, to arrive at a fair decision.
It is, of course, impossible for me to give an exhaustive explanation of all the ideas involved in this trial. Thousands of books have been written about them. Perhaps I should have brought some 500 of them into court and asked the judge to permit me to read and discuss all these books; and at the end of a year or two, the jurors could feel themselves more able to pass on the merits of the ideas which we accept.
But I am not here to try to convince you of the justice of our ideas. I am not here to try to show you that those ideas are the only ideas that will solve the problems of mankind. I believe so. My friends, the other defendants, believe so. I am here, however, primarily to explain those ideas sufficiently well so that the issues in this case will become clear to you.
 
The Indictment
We are charged with conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence. We are also charged with conspiracy to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. In order to show you that there is no basis whatever for these two charges, I cannot avoid discussing certain fundamental concepts of ours, concepts brought in by the evidence for the prosecution.
I know that some of you, many of you, have businesses to attend to, and every day is an additional burden. I feel, however, that I have a certain moral right to speak at length because I did not take such a long time to present the case for the defendants; but still I know that it is very difficult for men and women, away from home for four and a half weeks, deprived of their liberty to a certain extent, to sit and listen to an exposition of ideas.
Mind you, there are 23 defendants in this case. In an ordinary criminal case, an hour’s final argument for the defendant, threatened with deprivation of his liberty for many years, would certainly not be too much. Don’t be scared, ladies and gentlemen, I am not multiplying one hour by 23 defendants. I do not intend to take so much time.
Over 150 exhibits, possibly, have been introduced by the prosecution. I have a right, and perhaps I have the duty, to take every exhibit and comment on it. I shall not do so, not only because it would take too long a time, but because, as I shall explain later, the exhibits will not be of any great aid to the jury in arriving at its verdict.
Above all, it is the importance of the case that justifies lengthy argument. Everyone knows that it is an important case. No matter what your verdict will be, it will go down in history. This will go down in history as one of the greatest trials, not only in the Federal Court of this country, but in the courts of any country.
 
The Issues in This Case Are Crystal Clear
Permit me first to explain the indictment. In the first count, the charge is that the defendants conspired to overthrow the government by force, and to oppose its authority by force. I do not remember any evidence introduced on that second clause. So that, as to the first count, the jury should concentrate its attention on the question of whether or not we conspired to overthrow the government by force.
The second count has five sections to it. There is a section charging us with conspiring to create insubordination in the armed forces. There is a section charging us with conspiring to distribute written and printed matter that urges insubordination. There is a section charging us with conspiracy to advocate, advise and teach the duty, necessity, desirability and propriety of destroying the government of the United States by force and violence. There is a fourth section charging us with conspiracy to publish and distribute literature advocating the overthrow of the government of the United States by force and violence. And there is a fifth section charging us with conspiracy to organize societies and groups to advocate the overthrow of the government of the United States by force and violence.
But I think all of us will agree, including counsel for the prosecution, that we can confine our attention to three major charges: in the first count, the charge of conspiring to overthrow, and in the second count, the charges of conspiring to advocate the overthrow and to create insubordination in the armed forces.
Immediately upon reading the indictment, the question arises: What is the difference between conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence and conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence; or what is the difference between those two, and conspiracy to create insubordination?
Let me try, in a few words, to give you my idea of the difference.
It is possible to conspire to advocate to overthrow the government by force and violence without conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence.
Let me give you an example: One of the persons conspiring to advocate the overthrow of the government may say: “When shall we accomplish our conspiracy?” And someone may answer him, “That is something for the future. In the first place we must advocate, and when we get ready, we’ll actually start thinking about overthrowing. That may be in five or ten or fifteen years. For the present we have the task only of advocating.” It is, of course, possible to conspire to do both – to advocate and to overthrow – but you can see that it is possible to separate the two.
On the other hand, two or more persons can conspire to overthrow the government without conspiring to advocate the overthrow. That is hardly probable but quite possible.
Conspiring to create insubordination in the armed forces is obviously different from the other two conspiracies. We can assume certain persons disliking the General Staff of the army and wanting to create insubordination in order to get rid of that General Staff. These persons might not at all be interested in overthrowing the government by force and violence.
The difference between the first count and the second count should be kept clearly in mind for it is possible for you to find the defendants guilty of one and not of the other.
 
Is Our Party a Conspiracy?
At all stages in your deliberations you must ask yourselves the following questions: What charges has the government made against the defendants? What evidence has the government promised in the opening statement of Mr. Anderson to prove those charges? What evidence has it actually produced?
In the first place, it is necessary for you to consider whether or not the defendants are actually guilty of any conspiracy. As Mr. Anderson told you yesterday, if you find that there was no conspiracy, then there is nothing further for you to do. You vote “not guilty,” and you are through.
As the prosecution produced its witnesses and introduced its exhibits, two theories appeared to be in the minds of the prosecutors: one, that the Socialist Workers Party is in itself a conspiracy; and two, that the conspiracy was something outside of the party, and the party was only a means for the accomplishment of the conspiracy. According to Mr. Anderson’s opening statement, the very purpose of the party, the very plan of the party, the very program of the party and the very activities of the party constitute a violation of the statutes. It would seem, therefore, that the Socialist Workers Party is in itself a conspiracy. That seems to me to be a monstrous proposition. I presume that there are Democrats now in power who think that the Republican party is a conspiracy to take power away from the Democrats. To say that the Socialist Workers Party is in and of itself a conspiracy would mean the beginning of the process of destroying every opposition to those who are in office.
On the other hand, there is the possibility that the government has the theory that the defendants conspired independently of the Socialist Workers Party, that they came to some understanding in some way or other, independently of the party, to create a party for the purpose of advocating to overthrow, or of overthrowing by force and violence, the government of the United States. Is there any credible evidence of such a conspiracy?
It will be necessary for you to choose which theory of the prosecution to proceed on.
Now obviously the term “conspiracy” is altogether inapplicable to this case. I am now thinking of the term, not in the technical, legal sense, but in its generally accepted meaning. A conspiracy is considered to be something secretive, hatched in the darkness of night, with the conspirators fearful lest it should become public. Mr. Anderson tried hard to create that conspiratorial atmosphere in this case. He introduced a floor plan of the party’s headquarters. How could it possibly help you to arrive at a conclusion as to whether or not we conspired to overthrow the government by force and violence? But in the mind of Mr. Anderson a conspiracy demands a floor plan, maybe some secret chambers, perhaps some secret buttons. How could it be a conspiracy without a floor plan, without a Sherlock Holmes coming in to study the floor plan?
The prosecution produced evidence that the meetings of the party were held on Thursday nights, and that a membership card was demanded for admission. I presume some of you may belong to organizations that meet on Thursday nights and where only members are allowed to attend. There must be at least 10,000 organizations that permit only members to attend their meetings. Had Mr. Anderson requested it, we would have told him without any hesitation that our membership meetings took place on Thursday nights and that only members were allowed. But had Mr. Anderson done that, it would have destroyed the conspiratorial atmosphere that he has tried to create.
In furtherance of Mr. Anderson’s contention that there was a conspiracy, he introduced evidence that our members were known by numbers. It came out during the evidence, however, that the numbers were not given to the members, but were marked on each card. I don’t know how many organizations have membership cards with numbers, but there must be plenty of them. But Mr. Anderson wanted to make a conspiracy out of this case, and so he had to transfer the numbers from the cards to the members.
Now then, we come to the final evidence of a real conspiracy! The members were told to destroy the cards. Doesn’t that show, asks Mr. Anderson seriously, that these people are conspirators? We admit that the members were told to destroy their cards. This occurred in the Minneapolis branch and did not occur in any other branch throughout the country. The leaders of the Minneapolis branch rightly wanted to protect the rank and file from the kind of persecution that the defendants in this case are subjected to. I admit that Vincent Dunne and Oscar Coover and other leaders of the branch thought seriously of the problem of protecting the rank and file members – not themselves, because they did not conceal their membership. Vincent Dunne testified and told you that he was a member.
There was no attempt by any of the leaders of the party to conceal his membership in the party. Their names were on the editorial staff, or they were openly advertised as speakers for the party. There was, however, a serious attempt to protect the rank and file from being victimized. Does not this case prove that this procedure was correct? We would have been derelict in our duty had we not attempted to prevent victimization of the rank and file members of the party.
The government, by instituting this prosecution, has more than justified this precautionary measure taken by the leaders of the Minneapolis branch. Let the government say that membership in the party is not illegal; let it not indict people who are innocent; and the membership cards will then not be destroyed. But so long as there is the slightest chance that a member of ours will be victimized, so long shall I and other responsible members of the party attempt to protect the rank and file of our party.
Did James P. Cannon or Vincent Dunne or Farrell Dobbs or Grace Carlson deny membership in the party? They want everybody to know that they are members of the party, because they want everybody to accept the principles of the party, but they want also to protect the rank and file members of the party.
In his opening statement, Mr. Anderson claimed that there was no provision in the party’s constitution for the withdrawal of a member. My, how terrible this sounds! Once a member, always a member, and one dare not withdraw from membership. But from the testimony of the government’s own witnesses you could see that people joined the party and left the party on a purely voluntary basis. Why all this rigmarole about no provision for withdrawal of membership? Because Mr. Anderson wants to create the atmosphere of a conspiracy – a conspiracy that never existed and never will exist.
Every prosecution witness, and Mr. Anderson himself, showed you that instead of being conspirators, we are men and women anxious to proclaim our ideas from the housetops, men and women devoted to our ideas, and extremely interested in getting other people to come to our meetings and to discuss at those meetings. What kind of conspiracy is it when we publish a weekly newspaper and a monthly magazine, when we ask people to come to our meetings, to listen to us and to join our party? Our conspiracy is indeed peculiar; it is a conspiracy that attempts to get the vast majority of the people of the United States to become members of it. We want to convince the majority of the people that they should become as guilty as we are. Open headquarters, open mass meetings, open distribution of literature! Is this characteristic of a conspiracy?
Political propagandists, yes, but don’t dare to call us conspirators. Tell the truth. Mr. Anderson, and say that you want us in jail because our ideas are distasteful to you. Tell the truth and say that you want to still our voices, close our headquarters, prevent us from distributing our literature. Don’t call us criminal conspirators!
Did we attempt to conceal the organization of the party at the founding conference in December 1937? We would gladly have seen the news of it published in every paper. We published five or ten thousand copies of the party’s Declaration of Principles. Alas, that we could not publish five million. We got out a weekly paper, a monthly magazine; we issued innumerable pamphlets and participated in political campaigns. You may call it conspiracy in legal phraseology, but please remember that it is a conspiracy only in that sense.
You may, however, be convinced that we are guilty of a conspiracy in a technical, in a legal sense, and it is therefore necessary for me to go on and deal with the object of this alleged conspiracy. You can find that there is a conspiracy, and yet you can easily conclude that we are not guilty if you see that the object of the conspiracy is nothing that is illegal.
 
Documents Versus Verbal Testimony
Here we must stop a moment to consider the types of evidence introduced by the prosecution. One type is documentary evidence, consisting of articles, excerpts from articles, pamphlets, excerpts from pamphlets, resolutions and excerpts from resolutions; you can read them, study them, analyze them.
Then there is the second type, consisting of statements alleged to have been made by the defendants and testified to by witnesses for the prosecution.
You must keep the distinction between these two types of evidence clearly before you, because it is an exceedingly important distinction, and a great deal depends upon it.
One generalization that almost all people will agree to is that memory is a very treacherous thing. It is the almost universal experience of all lawyers and of all judges that you can hardly ever get ten people who see the same event to testify to exactly the same thing. It is almost a universal rule that, if all ten witnesses tell the same story, they have undoubtedly been coached. If ten witnesses, testifying about a certain speech alleged to have been made a year or two before the testimony, repeat certain statements of the speech in the same way, then it is almost a sure sign that they are falsifying.
It would be horrible to think that a jury would actually find defendants guilty on the basis of evidence of certain statements alleged by witnesses to have been made by the defendants a year or two or three before the trial.
Ladies and gentlemen, do you need any more proof of that than the fact that the attorneys for the government and the attorneys for the defense disagreed as to what was said an hour after a certain statement was made by a witness? Several times we squabbled about what a witness was supposed to have said the day before. Did I mean to say, when I disagreed with Mr. Anderson, that he was a liar, or did Mr. Anderson mean to say that I was a liar? Not at all. One of us simply did not remember what was said. We always had to go to the record.
But when Mr. Anderson states that he bases his case primarily on the testimony of witnesses who testified to hearing some of the defendants make certain statements a year or two or three years ago, then I am justified in concluding that Mr. Anderson is not dealing fairly with the defendants. Consider the tremendous and terrible possibilities of such a situation. An enemy of yours goes to Mr. Anderson and says: I heard him say he wants to overthrow the government by force and violence. And Mr. Anderson thereupon hauls you before a jury. All that you can say is that you did not make the statement, and the jury may or may not believe you. Can you not see the terrible possibilities in such a case?
I shall show you later that the testimony of the government witnesses is absolutely worthless. It is not only worthless, but most of it consists of downright perjury. But leave that out of consideration. The point that I want to make is that even if you were convinced that the government’s witnesses meant to be honest, you should not pay any attention to their testimony of verbal statements alleged to have been made years ago.
 
The Court: We will have our morning recess at this time.
 
(Morning Recess)
 
The Court: You may proceed, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman: So that, as between documentary evidence and statements alleged to have been made by the defendants and testified to by the government witnesses, it is my opinion that fairness and justice demand that you should exclude the verbal statements.
 
Which Documents Are Important?
The next question is: Which of the documents that have been introduced should be considered most important?
Counsel for prosecution will undoubtedly say all documents are important and of equal weight but, ladies and gentlemen, here you must take your experiences of life into consideration and base your judgment on those experiences. A mass of about 150 exhibits has been introduced. Articles written by the defendants, pamphlets written by the defendants, articles and pamphlets written by people who are not among the defendants and whom you do not know have been admitted under the rules of evidence as construed by the Court. Then there is the Declaration of Principles and there are many official resolutions – all are in evidence.
You have excerpts from pamphlets that were written three or four years ago by persons whom you do not know, have never seen and who are not in the ranks of the defendants. You have articles written in the Socialist Appeal and in The Militant, in the New International and the Fourth International, written by people who are not among the defendants.
The question immediately presents itself: Should you give equal weight to all these documents? Should you, for instance, give as much weight to an official declaration of the party as to an article written by someone who is not among the defendants? It would be absurd not to make a distinction between an official resolution of the party, representing the thought of the most responsible party leaders, and a casual article written by someone whom you do not know and who obviously is not a leader of the party. If he were, he would be here amongst the defendants. Only four of us were brought here from New York to cover up the fact that this case is essentially a prosecution against the leadership of Local 544-CIO, to cover up the real motives of the prosecution.
Then there are other documents in evidence – such as resolutions of the Fourth International. Mr. Cannon testified that we accept them insofar as they are applicable to this country and you should take that testimony into consideration.
It is clear that we didn’t keep a staff of lawyers scrutinizing carefully every article that was published in our press with the idea of keeping out anything and everything that might conceivably be used by some federal prosecutor.
Young men, new in the movement, may have formulated certain ideas in a careless manner and not in exact agreement with our Declaration of Principles and the prosecution wants to hold the defendants responsible for that, wants to put the defendants in jail because some party members whom you do not know wrote something that might be given a certain interpretation hostile to us. Of course, all these articles are in evidence and from a strictly legal viewpoint you must consider them. But I ask you, ladies and gentlemen, is my request that you should give greater weight to documentary evidence which can be considered as official documents, than to articles written by unknown people, anything but fair and just?
I say therefore that as far as the documents introduced in evidence are concerned, you should give greatest weight of all to the Declaration of Principles and the official resolutions of the party. Next in importance come articles written by responsible leaders of the party.
The prosecution has used and will use certain pamphlets for the purpose of trying to get you to bring in a verdict of guilty. Especially is the prosecution interested in having you concentrate your attention on the pamphlet, Are We for War, by Draper and the mimeographed pamphlet, What Is Trotskyism, by Weber. But I want to point out to you that they were not official declarations of the party. The Draper pamphlet was not even published by the party. The pamphlet, “What Is Trotskyism,” was mimeographed – not printed – and it is obvious that this pamphlet was not for popular distribution.
I would be justified in asking you to judge me alone by my own writings and not to condemn the other defendants on the basis of my writings. If there is any rule of law which has been emphasized in Anglo-Saxon tradition, it is that a person must be held responsible for his own acts and not for the acts of others.
It is true that in a conspiracy case the rules of evidence are relaxed and testimony is permitted which is not permitted in other cases but even in a conspiracy case, as fair-minded individuals, you should try to uphold that tradition of Anglo-Saxon law.
I am willing to be judged by my own writings and by the official declarations of the party and by the writings of other responsible leaders, insofar as I agree with them. I do not think that others should be judged by my writings. I am not stating that as a legal proposition applicable in a conspiracy case; I am stating it as a proposition of fairness and justice and not always does the law coincide with fairness and justice. I can see Mr. Anderson trembling at that statement but no one with experience in the law courts can deny that it is the truth.
It would be the greatest travesty of justice if you were to convict people here in Minneapolis on the basis of articles written by persons who are not even defendants and who obviously do not play a leading role in the party.
We didn’t sit day in and day out and try to figure out what Mr. Anderson and Mr. Schweinhaut were going to choose from pamphlets, from The Militant or the Fourth International and present as evidence before the jury. We permitted many people to express their own ideas in their own ways. And everyone who knows anything about editing a paper understands that in the rush of getting copy and sending it to the printer it is impossible to check everything that is written.
Take into consideration all of the documents, but, in all fairness to the defendants, give first place to the official documents – to the Declaration of Principles and official resolutions – and second place to the articles and pamphlets written by the responsible leaders.
The attorneys for the government have read excerpts – an excerpt here and an excerpt there. I could have read excerpts also. How far would it have aided you in coming to your decision? What 1 shall try to give you and in my opinion what you should try to get is as complete a picture as possible of our full program, not an excerpt here or an excerpt there. I shall attempt to give you, by taking the Declaration of Principles, Cannon’s speeches and my articles and pamphlets and the article of Farrell Dobbs on trade unionism, an analysis of our program. That is all I can do and all I shall try to do. I cannot stop to discuss every excerpt. If an excerpt is read to you by the prosecution, all I can say is: Take it into consideration but remember that it is part of a program. You cannot judge us by an excerpt. You must judge us by the whole program.
I shall skip over lightly and briefly those items in the program which are not very material and immediately proceed to the heart of the questions that have been raised by the prosecution.
 
The Socialist Society
In the first place it is necessary to get an idea of the fundamental object of the conspiracy charged against the defendants. What is the aim of this great conspiracy? If there is any conspiracy at all, its fundamental object is to get a majority of the people of this country to establish socialism. That is the sum and substance of the conspiracy. If you are interested in finding out the general outlines of what we consider to be a socialist society, you can do so by reading our Declaration of Principles and my pamphlet, “What Is Socialism.”
The fundamental feature of a socialist society is that all the means of production – the railroads, the mines, the factories – are owned by the people and the goods that are produced, are produced for use. Under the present system, which we call capitalist, the means of production are owned by private persons or corporations and, although some owners may be very good and charitable gentlemen, they operate their industries not because people need the goods that they produce but because they want to make a profit.
Under socialism the people will decide how many pairs of shoes, how many garments, how many hats, how much coal, how many houses are needed to satisfy the needs of the people and proceed to manufacture them. The productive wealth of society – not goods for consumption such as a coat, or a shirt, or a radio or an automobile – but the productive wealth of society – machinery, factories, mines – will be owned in common by the people, and goods will be produced for the use of the people.
There are no classes under socialism – that is, there is no class that owns the wealth and no class that is exploited. Today a worker has only his labor power and he sells that to someone who owns machinery and he gets a wage in return and the man who owns the machinery makes a profit out of the labor power. That is what socialists term exploitation of labor.
Individuals under socialism will, of course, have different capacities. But no one will be permitted to own any productive wealth and thus exploit labor.
In the final stage of socialism, which some theoreticians designate as communism, the productive forces of society will be so greatly developed and the education of the people will be such as to enable society to follow the principle: From each according to his ability; to each according to his need.
If any one of you raises the objection that human nature makes that impossible, I simply ask you to go to that section of my pamphlet, What Is Socialism, which deals with the problem of human nature. Under socialism people will be educated not to think of profit but of service to society. Great scientists even now do not work in their laboratories because they expect to make millions of dollars; they work because they are interested in science.
It will of course be necessary to educate a new generation and it may take time, but given new social conditions it is absolutely certain that it can be done. Given a society that produces enough to satisfy the needs of all human beings, the struggle for the means of life will be abolished. If 12 people have 5,000 apples among them and in addition know that they can get as many more apples as they can possibly eat, there can be no quarrel amongst them for apples. A society that produces enough to satisfy the reasonable needs of people will do away with all the brutal struggles characterizing present-day society.
 
The Workers’ and Farmers’ Government
To establish a new social order it will be necessary in the first place to create a new government which we call by the name of workers’ and farmers’ government. You can see that I am only touching on essentials. I haven’t the time to do any more. What will be the duty of that government? To take over the means of production now owned by capitalists and begin operating them for the benefit of the people; and also to begin the education of a new generation to transform the human being from what he is under capitalism into what he will be under socialism.
The workers’ and farmers’ government is technically called a dictatorship of the proletariat. When that phrase is uttered by Mr. Anderson or Mr. Schweinhaut it sounds terrible. The defendants are in favor of dictatorship! Of course it is nothing but a technical term indicating simply that the government representing the workers and farmers will take the productive wealth away from those who own it today, from the Sixty Families and their satellites. To that extent it will be a dictatorship. A dictatorship of the vast majority over the very small minority.
Will this “dictatorship of the proletariat” be a democracy or a dictatorship in the usually accepted term? Read page 8 of exhibit 1 – our Declaration of Principles – and you can see that the term “dictatorship” as commonly used is not applicable to the dictatorship of the proletariat. That section reads as follows:
“While the workers’ state will necessarily reserve to itself the indispensable right to take all requisite measures to deal with violence and armed attacks against the revolutionary regime, it will at the same time assure adequate civil rights to opposition individuals, groups, and political parties and will guarantee the opportunity for the expression of opposition through the allotment of press, radio and assembly facilities in accordance with the real strength among the people of the opposition groups or parties.”
That goes far beyond the democracy that exists at present. A workers’ and farmers’ government will not only permit free speech and free press and free assembly in the abstract but will see to it that a minority will have the means to exercise that free Democracy to a certain extent exists under the present regime. consider the essence of the question: If workers have the constitutional right to publish a paper but lack the funds with which to do so, then their right is an abstract one. On the other hand, the right of an individual who has sufficient money to publish a chain of papers is a real one.
The rights under capitalist society granted by the government representing capitalist interests are, by and large, abstract rights. A famous French writer, Anatole France, expressed this idea as follows: “Under capitalism rich and poor are equal. They both have the right to starve in the streets.” The difference is that only the poor man exercises that right to starve.
When the term dictatorship of the proletariat is mentioned, you must not think of it as a dictatorship of Hitler or Stalin. Trotsky began a struggle against Stalin because of the very fact that Stalin transformed the dictatorship of the proletariat into a personal or a clique dictatorship. Under the dictatorship of the proletariat there will be far, far greater democracy than has ever existed on the face of the earth.
 
Our Attitude Toward Governments
We come now to the heart of the question, the question of whether or not we are guilty of conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence. As the evidence shows, the main object of our so-called conspiracy is to establish a socialist society. How do we intend to do that? That is the main question at issue.
As I shall attempt to show you, all other questions—such as our attitude on war, on trade unionism, our military policy – are subsidiary. The question of guilt or innocence must be determined on the main issue and not on the subsidiary issues. But it is impossible to decide the main issue without considering certain fundamental concepts of socialism.
In the first place, let us get clear what is meant by the term government. Let us not be awed by an abstraction. Men and women elected or appointed to office and having prerogatives constitute this thing we call government. These men and women are not any more gifted than you or I. They have certain authority. Sometimes they abuse that authority – very frequently they do so. Place a man in a position of power and the chances are that he will take advantage of his position and exercise his authority at any and all opportunities. Some people in authority remain courteous; others are corrupted by it.
The phrase, destruction or overthrow of the government, raises in most minds a terrible picture of the use of weapons and violence. But you can see that to abolish or destroy or overthrow a government can mean and usually does mean, replacing certain individuals, organized in a certain way, basing themselves on certain concepts, replacing them with other individuals, organized in a different way and basing themselves on different concepts.
“Whenever any form of government becomes destructive to these ends the people have a right to alter or abolish it and institute a new government in a form most likely to effect their safety and happiness.” The writers of the Declaration of Independence who formulated the horrible idea that the people have a right to abolish a form of government are not amongst the defendants. The words “overthrow, abolish, destroy” do not necessarily connote violence. They simply mean that the people using those words want to change the government so that it will be based on entirely new principles.
We use the term “capitalist government” – a terrible phrase to some people. Does it mean that all those who are elected to Congress or to any executive or judicial office are themselves financiers and capitalists? No, it simply means that the government which we call capitalist bases itself upon the rights of private property in the means of production and does everything in its power to protect those rights. Essentially, a capitalist government is a government which has as its main function the protection of the existing property relationships.
There are different types of capitalist government – some conservative, some liberal. As you know, Roosevelt and some people in his government have been called communists. That, of course, is absurd but it proves that if one does not like a person or does not agree with his policies, it is a good idea to call him a communist. Though some people call the Roosevelt administration communist, we designate it by the term capitalist. It is a capitalist government by virtue of the fact that private property in the means of production exists and the government protects the rights of private property in the means of production.
You must remember that what we are interested in primarily, as is shown by the evidence, is not to change the government, but the social system upon which the government is based. We call the present social system capitalist because men are permitted to own productive wealth and to hire and exploit wage labor.
We want a socialist society where all the productive wealth is owned in common and there is no exploitation. What type of government do we want? That is a question of secondary importance. If, for instance, socialism could be introduced under the present form of government – with the two Houses of Congress, the Executive, the Judiciary – we would have no objection.
In our Declaration of Principles you will find proposals for occupational representation. Instead of having representatives from certain territories, we think it is best for the workers and farmers to elect their representatives directly from factories and from the farms. We believe in the principle of occupational representation because we think that anyone elected by his fellow-workers or fellow-physicians or fellow-scientists, is far more likely to represent the real interests of his group. There will be no representation of lawyers under socialism because lawyers are a plague that will no longer exist in a socialist society.
Under a workers’ and farmers’ government there will be one house of congress instead of two. Our present form of government operates on the principle of checks and balances. The Senate checks the House of Representatives, the President checks both Houses of Congress and then the Judiciary has a check on both the Executive and the Legislative branches. This, in our opinion, is far from democratic and was instituted primarily to prevent the masses of people from exercising their will in the matter of legislation.
Originally the senators were elected, not by a direct vote of the people but by the legislators of the different states, thus enabling the wealthier citizens to get into the Senate of the United States. Later on, by an amendment to the Constitution, the senators had to be elected by the people. We, on the other hand, want a complete revolution in the form of government. We want a government organized in such a way that it can best serve the interests of the producers. I know that the term “revolution” sends shivers down the back of Mr. Anderson and he hopes that the same shivers will run down the backs of the jurors. But remember that the term “revolution” does not necessarily imply violence.
I think the Court will define that term for you – a definition as is found in Webster’s dictionary. It simply means a radical change and social revolution means a radical change in society. Do we not speak of a revolution in science, a revolution in transportation? We even speak of a revolution in women’s dresses.
 
Marxist Conception of Society
We want a social revolution; that is undeniable. By that we mean that our aim is to transfer the economic and political power from the class we call capitalists to the workers and farmers. When that happens, a social revolution will have occurred.
The French revolution, as Mr. Cannon correctly testified, was a social revolution because the merchant and capitalist class displaced the feudal class. The power to rule society was transferred from the landowning feudal nobility to the merchants and industrialists.
There may be political revolutions that are not social revolutions. The revolutions that occur frequently in Latin America are political revolutions because they do not change the social system.
A social revolution may or may not be accompanied by violence and no one knows exactly how it will occur in the future.
Marxists are of the opinion that society operates on the basis of certain laws. It is important for you to understand that basic idea. I do not ask you to agree with our concept of society, but I do ask you to understand what our concept is. For if you realize that we believe that certain laws operate in society, independent of our will and of your will and of Mr. Anderson’s will, you will see that it would be impossible for us to conspire to overthrow the government by force and violence. The responsibility for a revolution lies not upon us but upon the very nature of the social system in which we live.
Some of you might have heard or seen in print the phrase, “economic determinism.” It is not the theory of socialism, but it does give you an idea that socialists consider the economic factor the determining factor in the development of society.
The primary concern of human beings has always been to feed, clothe and shelter themselves. As human beings lived together, certain necessities drove them to invent certain machines and with the invention of these machines production increased and with the increase in production changes occurred in the economic and social system.
Struggles arose between groups and the victors made slaves out of the vanquished. A system of slavery arose and the forces of production continued to develop.
More machines were invented; the forces of production increased; society developed further and ever further and class struggles arose; slaves revolted against masters; the social system based on slavery could no longer function effectively and that social system was displaced by a new system.
What is known as feudalism came into existence. He who owned land had the right to exploit the man who worked on the land and this man who worked on the land was called a serf. In comparison with the chattel slave, he was a free man but nevertheless he could not leave the land.
The discovery of America gave a tremendous impetus to the development of industry; new markets came into being; new machinery was invented; the forces of production grew and with it a new and powerful class arose – the merchant class of the Middle Ages – and it is this merchant class that constituted the beginning of modern capitalist class. We call that class the “bourgeoisie” and this class began a struggle against the feudal nobility and finally conquered and became the dominant class in society.
Thus you see that, in our opinion, a class struggle has existed since time immemorial. The chattel slaves struggled against the masters, the plebeians struggled against the patricians, the serf against the feudal nobility; and today we have the fundamental struggle between the capitalists who own the wealth and the wage workers who create the wealth. And is this struggle a result of man’s will or desire? No, it is a struggle that is due fundamentally to the development of economic forces. A social system is born, develops, decays and is displaced by a new social system – all this by virtue of laws at operate independently of the will of human beings.
A new social system gives birth to new ideas, to new moral concepts. Under the feudal system in the Middle Ages, for instance, the church prohibited the lending of money on interest. To lend money on interest was considered usury. But with the development of the merchant class and the capitalist system, the lending of money became an absolute necessity and obviously people would not lend money unless they could make a profit out of it. The rule of the church against usury was abolished and interest up to a certain point was permitted.
Man’s ideas, man’s morals, man’s philosophies are determined fundamentally by the economic structure of society and not vice versa. The history of man is determined not by his will nor by his consciousness nor by what he thinks is right or wrong but by inexorable economic forces operating on the basis of certain laws.
This idea was first introduced by Karl Marx, and the defendants, considering themselves Marxists, accept that idea, and accepting that idea you can see that the factors which they consider primary in the creating of a social revolution are economic factors. All that we can possibly do is to indicate that the economic forces of society are moving in a certain direction and that the masses of the people must also move in that direction.
Society cannot be changed by the mere desire of a small group to change it. It must, in the first instance, be ripe for a change and in the second instance the masses of men must understand the necessity for a change.
We have now reached a point in the development of society where mankind must take control of social forces and determine the operation of those social forces. Up to now, man has been subjected to social forces that he did not understand and could not cope with. What man must do now is to become master of his own destiny. If man does not do so, then fascism, barbarism, the destruction of all liberties and of all culture will inevitably follow.
Look at our social system and you can see for yourselves how the class struggle operates. The tenant farmer struggles against the landlord, the sharecropper against the southern plantation owner, the worker against the employer, farmers and workers together against Wall Street. Why is our society subjected to these struggles? Because each social group wants a larger share of the income that society produces.
Of all the struggles existing in modern society, the one between the industrial wage worker and those who own the industries is the bitterest and most virulent. It is the fundamental struggle of our epoch.
That is not our responsibility, ladies and gentlemen. In comparison to the number of wage workers, our party constitutes a small group; the class struggle goes on without us.
Unfortunately we have not as yet achieved an influence which can permit us to play a decisive role in that struggle. Mr. Anderson is anxious to prevent us from achieving that influence and that is why he asks you for a verdict of guilty. But I can assure Mr. Anderson that the class struggle will go on even if we should be in jail. The coal miners are on strike now. We have nothing to do with it. We had something to do with Local 544 in Minneapolis and that is why we are defendants in this courtroom. But the struggle between the teamsters and the Minneapolis employers is only a tiny section of the class struggle that goes on constantly throughout the United States. That struggle goes on whether Mr. Anderson and Mr. Schweinhaut like it or don’t like it.
The struggle between the worker on the one hand, anxious to get a higher wage, and the employer on the other hand, anxious to make more profit, is a struggle that will go on regardless of the desire or the intention of any man. There are some employers who are willing to give higher wages but they are prevented by the law of competition under capitalism. By and large the employers are anxious to make more and more profits and, because of that, the class struggle must necessarily continue.
The Court: We will have our noon recess at this time.
 
Thursday Afternoon Session
 

rt Goldman: In Defense of Socialism (Part 4)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Goldman: In Defense of Socialism

Albert Goldman
In Defense of Socialism
(Part 4)

Friday, November 28, 1941
Afternoon Session
 
Perjury of Government Witnesses
The Court: You may proceed.
Mr. Goldman: Ladies and gentlemen, by this time you know enough about our theory to understand that it is difficult for me to speak with bitterness against any individual. By and large we hold that social conditions are responsible for the character of an individual and it is almost impossible for me as a Marxist to be bitter towards a government witness regardless of the depths of perjury which he reaches. That does not, of course, prevent me from pointing out the false testimony which the government witnesses gave.
Most of the important government witnesses – whose names I enumerated and who are directly or indirectly connected with the Tobin administration of Local 544-AFL – are helpless people who were motivated by a desire to get jobs in the local and they could do so only if the defendants were pushed out of their positions.
Those of the government witnesses who were former members of our party could testify to nothing about our program, with the exception, of course, that they testified that we advocated the armed overthrow of the government. I mentioned before that these people never remembered the subject or contents of a single pamphlet or party discussion, but always remembered that the defendants advocated the violent overthrow of the government. Mr. Eugene Williams, for instance, on direct examination remembered that Farrell Dobbs spoke at the first meeting he attended and naturally he also remembered that Farrell Dobbs advocated the armed overthrow of the government. On cross-examination he forgot that it was Farrell Dobbs and said that it was Felix Morrow, but still he remembered that, no matter who it was, the speaker advocated the armed overthrow of the government. And that’s all he remembered.
Another significant point. A great many of the witnesses claimed that Vincent Ray Dunne who, as the outstanding leader of Local 544-CIO, is more or less of a chief devil in this picture, discussed with them the question of what our party wanted to do after the passing of the Selective Service Act. They testified that they had conversations with Dunne about this matter long after they were out of the party, even after they had fought in the union against our party members.
It looked peculiar, did it not, that Dunne who, you will all agree, is a highly intelligent person, should talk to people who were no longer members of the party and who were enemies of the party, about such delicate questions as inciting insurrection in the army. I think the jury must have seen the absurdity of that testimony.
Another piece of testimony that shows how much perjury the government witnesses really committed was their story that the executive board of the union paid Emil Hansen’s weekly salary at the time he was acting as a guard for Leon Trotsky. This evidence, of course, could not possibly help the jury arrive at a decision as to whether or not the Socialist Workers Party conspired to overthrow the government by force and violence, but I presume the prosecution used it for some effect on the jury. But somebody had forgotten to coach Miss Hanifan, the bookkeeper of Local 544-AFL, and when I asked her: “Did you issue checks for Mr. Hansen when he was in Mexico?” she answered, “No.” This admission came from a government witness and now I suppose the government will be forced to contend that Mr. Hansen was paid out of the cash box.
In and by itself a minor point like this is not worth much but when you take all the little and big falsehoods testified to by the government witnesses, you have before you a case based on witnesses whose testimony indicated one thing, and one thing only – they were not afraid of a possible prosecution for perjury.
Yesterday I argued that even if you considered the witnesses for the government as absolutely honest, you should disregard their testimony concerning statements allegedly made by the defendants two or three years ago because you have far more reliable, documentary evidence on which to base your decision. But you are not confronted with honest witnesses. On the contrary, you are confronted by witnesses who are now officially connected with Local 544-AFL – some of them paid organizers, most of them having taken the positions of the men who are now in the prisoners’ dock – who were opposed to and fought the leadership of the defendants in 544 and whose testimony is shot through with falsehoods and perjury. There is nothing else for you to do but to give no credence whatever to this testimony.
Mr. Anderson made much of the fact that most of the testimony of these witnesses stood uncontradicted and undenied. This is a common trick used by lawyers. If a witness for one side makes 500 statements and the witness for the other side denies only 450 of them, then the other 50 undenied, prove the case. Suppose I had put all the defendants on the stand and all the defendants had denied all the statements which the government witnesses claimed they had made; wherein would that be of any help to you?
In this case, ladies and gentlemen, we are confronted with this situation: Either our program and our documents advocate the armed overthrow of the government by force and violence, in which case we are guilty; or else they do not advocate such a doctrine, in which case we are not guilty. The individual oral statements alleged to have been made by defendants a year or two or three years ago should play no role. I do not try cases simply by denying statements attributed to defendants. I prefer to get to the very heart of the issue.
The charge in this case is conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence. Was there or was there not such a conspiracy? The government has introduced more than 150 exhibits consisting of articles, pamphlets and official declarations. Let the jurors determine their decision by those and not by isolated statements alleged to have been uttered by some of the defendants two or three years ago.
 
Real Motives of Witnesses
The government witnesses organized a Committee of 99 to fight socialism in Local 544. That is what they claim. Someone once said: “Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel” and if ever this phrase applied, it applies to the government witnesses. These perjurers wrapped themselves in the American flag, not because they cared a tinker’s damn about patriotism, but because in this way they think they can succeed in gaining a victory over the defendants. Their real motive was not to fight socialism but to get a few more dollars and get positions to which they could not be elected.
With great difficulty I succeeded in presenting the true motives of the government witnesses. It was the situation in the Minneapolis Brewery that gave the jury a clue as to their real motives. I do not intend to examine the evidence on that point in detail. You remember what the situation was there, the struggle between the executive board of the local composed largely of the defendants on the one hand, and government witnesses Holstein, Eugene Williams, Al Williams and Buckingham, on the other hand. You realized from the testimony of the government witnesses themselves that these people were participating in a racket. The government witness, Blixt, who worked in the market, was in a similar racket. When I asked him whether, contrary to the orders of the executive board, he stopped farmers’ trucks from coming into the market, he tried to excuse himself by saying that he stopped only the “wildcat” operators.
It was a great racket for these witnesses until the executive board of Local 544 stepped in and compelled them to give up this racket of charging small distributors, who wanted a load from the Minneapolis Brewery, a minimum of four hours’ pay regardless of the time that it actually took to load the truck – whether it was 15 minutes or 20 minutes. You noticed that it was after the executive board compelled these witnesses to give up the racket that the Committee of 99 was organized to oppose the leadership of the union.
And this Committee of 99 could not convince the membership of 544, so the Committee invited the FBI to participate in its meetings. The FBI, in fact, became part of the Committee of 99. This testimony comes from the government’s own witness and is uncontradicted.
Do not misunderstand me, ladies and gentlemen. I do not claim that the Committee of 99 was powerful enough to initiate and set into motion this prosecution – not Bartlett, not Tommy Williams, not these witnesses, oh no, men higher up, men who appointed a Receiver to take the defendants out of their jobs – these are the people who had the power to initiate and set into motion
Mr. Schweinhaut: That is absolutely not true, if your Honor please.
The Court: I don’t think that is appropriate argument, Mr. Goldman; I don’t think it is appropriate argument in the face of the state of this record, and I don’t think you should pursue it.
Mr. Goldman: The Committee of 99 could not convince the members of Local 544 through argument. Is that in the record? Witness after witness testified that they had a chance to run opposition candidates. That is in the record. Members of the Committee of 99 testified here one after another to this effect.
 
The Defendants Built the Union
“Under whose leadership was Local 544 organized?” I asked some of the government witnesses. They had to admit that the union was built by the Dunnes, Dobbs, Carl Skoglund, Harry DeBoer and everyone else who is a defendant and connected with Local 544. From a membership of 200, the defendants raised the local to 6,000. Do you think any of the government witnesses was capable of creating this powerful union that exerted tremendous influence throughout the northwest area? Who built the Over-the-Road Committee? Farrell Dobbs. And these government witnesses, members of the Committee of 99, some of them unfortunate half-wits, are now in the offices that the defendants had prior to Tobin’s appointment of the Receiver.
“Were you elected to office?” I asked Sidney Brennan, who testified that he is now Secretary-Treasurer of 544-AFL. “No,” he answered.
“Who appointed you?” “Neal,” was the answer.
“You mean the Receiver for Tobin?” “Yes,” was the answer.
Some of the government witnesses were at one time members of the Socialist Workers Party. What made these people join the party?
In commenting on the testimony of defendants Rainbolt and Orgon, Mr. Anderson said that had these defendants testified that they joined the party in order to get jobs, then he would have more consideration for them. Mr. Anderson doesn’t see the significance of his remarks. He seems to think that the government witnesses who testified that they joined the party to get jobs have thereby cleansed themselves of any possible sin they committed by joining the party, while Mr. Rainbolt and Mr. Orgon are still criminals. The conclusion is: If people join the party because of idealistic reasons, because they are convinced that the party represents a cause worth fighting and dying for, then they belong in jail; but if they join the party in order to get a job, they should be released.
The defendants Rainbolt and Orgon did not know all the principles of the party when they joined. They joined because they knew the Dunnes; they knew Farrell Dobbs and Carl Skoglund and knew how honest these men were. Had there been, by the way, the slightest question of the honesty of the defendants in the leadership of 544, it would have surely been brought out in the evidence. No one dares impute any dishonest motives to any of the defendants.
Mr. Schweinhaut: Now, just a moment. I wish your Honor would instruct the jury that we could not have proved in evidence here that these men were dishonest except by criminal records, if any.
The Court: That is true. The jury will so heed that statement. Until a man proves his own character in evidence, it can’t be impeached or criticized by the government.
Mr. Goldman: It is in evidence that the union executive board did not permit racketeering. It is in evidence that all these government witnesses who testified that they joined the party in order to get jobs in the union, didn’t get jobs; that all the government witnesses who testified that they joined the party to hold their jobs, didn’t hold their jobs. The government witnesses finally succeeded in getting jobs in the union, only when the defendants, who built the union by their blood and their sacrifices in the course of many strike struggles, were pushed out and are now threatened with deprivation of their liberties. Take the testimony of all the members of the Committee of 99 and everything that I say will be borne out.
The government witnesses told the truth when they testified that they joined the Socialist Workers Party in order to get jobs. They probably thought that the Socialist Workers Party was like the Republican or Democratic Parties. They saw the defendants in charge of a union and they thought they could get jobs by joining the party of which the defendants were members. Quickly, however, they were disillusioned. They didn’t get any jobs because men like the defendants don’t put people into jobs in a union unless these people are capable.
 
Real Motives of Prosecution
The Committee of 99 covered up its real motives in the fight against the leadership of 544 by claiming to fight socialism. The prosecution likewise conceals its real motives.
Since January 1938 when the party was organized, we have been issuing a weekly paper, a monthly magazine and many pamphlets. I am sure that the all-powerful Federal Bureau of Investigation must have been aware of these facts known to many thousands of people. It was not, however, until July 15, 1941 that the Federal Government indicted the conspirators.
On June 9, 1941 the members of 544 decided to disaffiliate from the AFL and join the CIO. A little over a month after that, the indictment in this case was voted. The nearness of the two dates is a mere coincidence, the government claims, but it is certainly a very peculiar coincidence.
And why, pray, was the prosecution started in Minneapolis? The party headquarters is in New York. But the indictment was voted in Minneapolis and the government brought four of us from New York in order to cover up its real motives.
Was this case started in Minneapolis because a union defense guard was organized in Minneapolis? The fact is that in New York the party organized a workers’ defense guard which actually fought with the fascists and Bundists on the streets. The conclusion is inevitable: the indictment was brought in Minneapolis where the activities of the leadership of Local 544 incurred the enmity of powerful persons with influence in Washington, especially the enmity of one person whose name I am not permitted to mention.
Grace Carlson was a candidate for senator in the fall of 1940. She spoke on the same platform with candidates from other parties. She spoke over the radio. Everyone heard her and not a single complaint was registered. Could it be presumed that the FBI and the whole government were asleep? No, that is not the explanation. The indictment came after the decision of Local 544 to secede from the AFL Teamsters International.
Mr. Schweinhaut: Are you willing to have me tell you why it was brought up, Mr. Goldman? [1]
Mr. Goldman: Sure, try to explain it. You cannot convince reasonable people, who know that for three and a half years the party carried on its activities openly and with its headquarters in New York, that there is any other explanation for bringing the prosecution in Minneapolis and at this time, except as a result of the fight in Local 544.
 
How the Courts Function
One piece of evidence I must mention because it was introduced by the government only for the purpose of prejudicing the jury. It was my article on the federal courts. Perhaps the government will contend that because I do not think the courts have as their purpose the protection of working-class interests, I am therefore to be considered as one who would want to overthrow the government by force and violence.
I said in that article that under the present system the courts could not possibly give as fair a trial to a poor man as to a wealthy man. I didn’t blame the situation on the individual judge; I placed the blame upon the system. A judge may be as fair as any human being can possibly be and yet when he fines a wealthy man $200 and a poor man $200, there can in reality be no equality between the two fines. It is not a question of the intention of a judge but of the operation of a system. I think that in the article introduced in evidence I gave an example of a case where certain oil companies indicted under the Anti-Trust Laws were fined $5,000 and certain workers participating in a strike fined $500. It was not difficult for an oil company to pay $5,000 but imagine how difficult it was for a worker to raise $500. The injustice lies in the social system which the courts mirror.
We proclaim that men are born equal but can it be said that the child born in a wealthy family, with all advantages assured him, is equal to the child born in poverty, deprived of the possibility of getting proper food and a decent education?
 
The Rank-and-File Defendants
I do not intend to consider in detail the evidence against the individual defendants. You already know that I have not conducted the case on the basis that some defendants may be more guilty than others. Still, as a lawyer not only for myself but for all the defendants, I wish to point out that the evidence against some of the defendants could not possibly justify a verdict of guilty, even if you should consider that the party is guilty of conspiring to overthrow or to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. The government is obligated to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that each one of the defendants not only joined the so-called conspiracy but knew the nature and object of the conspiracy. As far as I am concerned, as far as Jim Cannon and Farrell Dobbs and others who rightly can be considered leaders of the party are concerned, we stand on the proposition that there could not possibly have been any conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence or to advocate the overthrow of the government by force and violence. We stand on the proposition that our program, if rightly interpreted and correctly construed, does not and cannot mean that we are guilty of this kind of a conspiracy.
But who knows? Perhaps all that I say about our program will not avail us and I must therefore try to save from the clutches of the government those people who cannot be considered leaders of the party, who joined, not because they read the literature of our party, but because from bitter experience they learned the truth of our fundamental principles, namely that in this world there is a class that produces the wealth of society and a class that gets all the benefit of that wealth. These members are not acquainted with all the theories of Marx but they are, as we call them, class-conscious. The government has not proved, beyond a reasonable doubt, that every defendant knew and understood the nature of our program or the nature of the so-called conspiracy.
The fact that the government witnesses testified about certain defendants – that they said this or that about armed revolution – does not prove that those defendants knew the program. You must consider all the evidence from this angle: Did the government prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendants were members of the conspiracy and knew the object and nature of the conspiracy?
The second count in the indictment is based on a statute which was passed June 28, 1940. Did the government succeed in proving that all of the defendants were members of the conspiracy subsequent to that date?
This, of course, is a minor matter, but after all, if you believe the preposterous contention of the government that we advocated the overthrow of the government by force and violence, then you must make the government prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that all the defendants were members of the party subsequent to June 28, 1940. And the government must also prove that all the defendants had knowledge of the nature and object of the conspiracy. The government undoubtedly proved that the leaders knew what the party stood for, but in a legal sense they did not prove that all the defendants knew and understood the principles of the party.
 
Government Denies Rights to SWP Members
If you accept the theory of the government with reference to the activities of the defendants, then you have this peculiar situation, that a person who becomes a member of the Socialist Workers Party has no right to do anything at all which every other citizen has a right to do.
A person living in the United States has a right to join a union and to participate in the activities of the union. A member of the Socialist Workers Party cannot join a union and participate in its activities because if he does, it will be used against him as evidence that he was a member of a conspiracy to overthrow the government.
Other people have a right to oppose the country’s entry into the war now raging in Europe, but if a member of the Socialist Workers Party opposes the war, he is immediately subject to the charge of conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence.
The government has introduced evidence covering a great many activities of the defendants. What follows from this? A member of the Socialist Workers Party cannot be active in a trade union; he cannot oppose the war; he cannot propose the creation of a workers’ defense guard to defend unions against fascist bands; he cannot possibly go hunting because he would have to purchase a rifle and that would be evidence of conspiracy.
Reporters, journalists, politicians, authors could go to Mexico for the purpose of seeing Trotsky, but not a member of the Socialist Workers Party because his visit to Trotsky would be introduced into evidence against him.
A member of the Socialist Workers Party cannot advise people to read Marx or Engels or Lenin. Professors at the universities can do so but not members of the Socialist Workers Party. A member of the Socialist Workers Party cannot go to a New Year’s affair, organized by the Socialist Workers Party. Everyone else can attend such affairs but not members of the Socialist Workers Party, for that constitutes evidence against members.
A member of the Socialist Workers Party went to Mexico and attended a bull fight, and it is introduced here as evidence against him. Perhaps because he may have learned the art of handling a sword and that would be evidence of a conspiracy to overthrow the government by force and violence.
A member of the Socialist Workers Party has therefore only one right and that is to sit in jail and I presume even in jail he could be charged with a conspiracy to destroy the jail and the government. When Mr. Anderson, in his argument, made a statement that the Socialist Workers Party could do nothing that is right, he practically said what I am contending at present: that a member of our party has no rights except to be in jail.
 
Concrete Proof of Our Prediction
I must for a moment, ladies and gentlemen, go back to the question of whether we advocate the violent overthrow of the government, or simply predict that the social revolution will be accompanied by violence exercised by the minority. I want to give you an example taken from the evidence, proving that our prediction will undoubtedly be fulfilled and also proving that they who want to put us in jail because of our ideas are the very ones who use violence.
You heard Sidney Brennan testify that he is Secretary-Treasurer of Local 544. He admitted that he was not elected to that office, that he was appointed by Neal, Tobin’s Receiver. He admitted that the defendants were elected to office in Local 544 in the elections of January of this year. There was a fair election, a secret ballot and no one contested that election.
Who, ladies and gentlemen, practiced democracy in 544? Who used the ballot in order to get power in 544? The defendants.
Who are now in office in 544, ladies and gentlemen? The defendants who were elected? No, Sid Brennan, Bartlett and the other witnesses who could never get elected to office but who were appointed by Tobin’s Receiver.
Who practiced violence, ladies and gentlemen? Tobin’s goon squads. Who took defendants Roy Orgon and Jake Cooper off their jobs and beat up Jake Cooper? The minority who couldn’t and didn’t get elected to office in 544 organized their forces and exercised violence against the defendants who were elected to office and against the rank and file who elected the defendants to office.
And we make the same prediction with reference to the change of the social order. The defendants will get a majority to accept their ideas and the minority, determined to retain their power and their privileges, will be the ones to use violence.
In the case of Local 544 there was no possibility of answering violence with violence. Against the state government, against the federal government, against the goon squads, the defendants were helpless. We had to submit, but if there is anything that proves our contention that violence will come from a minority, it is this very example of what occurred in Local 544.
Why didn’t the government give the truck drivers of 514 a little democracy? Why didn’t the government suppress the violence of the minority? Why didn’t the government see to it that the truck drivers obtained the right of having the union of their choice? Hypocrisy and nothing else characterizes the case for the government! Frame-up and nothing else! The government is part of the Committee of 99 and belongs to the faction led by one whom I am not permitted to mention.
That, ladies and gentlemen, is the heart and the essence of this case.
The Court: I think, Mr. Goldman, that we will have a short recess.
 
(Afternoon Recess)
 
We Fight for a New World
Mr. Goldman: Ladies and gentlemen, you see before you defendants who are here in this courtroom because they are dissatisfied. Dissatisfied not with their personal fortunes, but with the social system, with the evils that exist under the present social order.
I presume that by and large the defendants could, if they wanted to, solve their own problems in a very satisfactory manner. And perhaps we ought to be in jail because, instead, we have spent our lives defending what we think to be ideas that can solve the problems of mankind. As for myself, who knows, maybe I could be a district attorney, perhaps even a judge. Perhaps Jim Cannon would be far better off personally if he thought and acted the way most people think and act. But all of us represent that type of person who does not think very much about his personal fortunes but thinks of mankind, of society in general.
The agony, the death of millions of human beings in senseless wars are not abstractions to us. We feel them keenly and we react to them and we try to create a world where destruction and war and poverty and disease will not be the lot of man.
We have studied and our studies have led us to certain conclusions and we have banded together to propagate those conclusions. We proclaim to the world that it is possible to build a new social order guaranteeing every human being a decent livelihood and a chance to develop his individuality, free from economic worries, free from the dangers of war. We say that we have reached an epoch where mankind must go forward to socialism or else back to barbarism.
With great effort and amidst tremendous suffering, man has traveled throughout the centuries in the direction of a better world. Men have laid down their lives by the millions so that future generations might cross over their bodies to achieve a world of greater freedom and more happiness. And throughout all history there have been men and women a little ahead of the procession telling the masses to proceed in a certain direction and to struggle for a larger share of the things that they create. And these men who have led the procession have had to pay for it – the prophets, Christ, Marx, Lenin, Trotsky – these are the men who fought for a new world and against them have always been arrayed the powers that be, the priests and Pharisees.
When Pilate said, “I found no fault in this man,” the priests became more furious and said, “He stirreth up the people throughout all Judea.”
“He stirreth up the people” – almost the exact words that Mr. Anderson used against us when he said we stir up the people. And we cannot deny that we tried to stir up the people. We try to bring them a message of hope that a new world is possible and can easily be created if only they take their fight into their own hands, a new world where war and destruction will be unknown. But as I have indicated to you, all our stirrings, all our messages, will be in vain unless we are correct in our general analysis, unless we are correct in our theory that the social system has reached a point of decline where no road other than the road to socialism will lead mankind into a peaceful world. All our pamphlets, all our papers, all our speeches will be for naught unless we are correct in our fundamental theory, and if we are correct in our fundamental theory, all the efforts of the prosecution to silence our voice will not avail.
The prosecutors, and those that give them orders, do not understand that to thwart our agitation it is only necessary for them to solve the problems of mankind. Do they think that by silencing the voices of a few agitators they can satisfy the people who will suffer the agonies of war and of the hunger that will come with economic dislocation after the war?
Mr. Anderson, in his opening speech, referred to the attempts of the defendants to destroy organized society. Imagine calling a society “organized” that permits millions of human beings to be slaughtered, that permits poverty in the midst of plenty, that permits the spiritual and physical violence that exists throughout the universe! Chaos and destruction and death are not characteristics of an “organized” society.
The strength of our ideas lies in the very fact that we are living in a thoroughly unorganized society. The strength of our ideas lies in the fact that our general predictions, based upon the laws operating in society, must inevitably come true. At the beginning of the First World War we said that it would not solve any of the problems confronting the peoples. Who can deny that we were right? And now we say to the people of this country, “This war which your leaders claim is a war for democracy against fascism will not solve any of your problems because if the capitalist system is permitted to endure, the inevitable result will be fascism and more wars.”
We base our activities upon a theory that has withstood the test of time and events. In the midst of a catastrophic war that will necessarily envelop the whole world, in the midst of the roar of cannons and the shrieking of shells, amidst the sobs and the wailing of mothers, amidst tears and blood, we still have hopes that the people will come to accept the ideas of socialism. The darkness that surrounds us can be dissipated only by the sun of socialism.
 
What Your Verdict Will Mean
No matter what your verdict is, it will be a historic one. Should it be guilty, then it will be an aid to reaction. It will, to that extent, aid the powers that are interested in preventing a change in the social order. It will not bring to a stop the struggle that is going on in society because, as I have indicated to you many times before, that struggle is a result of social conditions and not of our agitation.
A verdict of not guilty will mean that to that extent you are unwilling to lend your aid to the forces of reaction, that you are determined to live up to the Bill of Rights guaranteeing every minority in this country the right to free speech and free press.
We do not ask you to agree with our ideas. We have not asked you to do so once throughout this trial. We ask you only to understand these ideas and therefore to understand that we are not guilty of the charges leveled against us by the government. By a verdict of not guilty you will not only guard the constitutional rights of all minorities but you will help transform this chaotic world in a peaceful way.
The more democracy we have, the greater the chances are for a peaceful transformation. Do away with democracy, and violence will surely accompany the social revolution. What more can I ask of you than by your verdict to guard the Bill of Rights and thus help prevent the plague which is threatening to destroy civilization, the plague of fascism.
Permit me to say once more and in conclusion: Our ideas, a product of existing conditions, are indestructible. They will ultimately conquer the minds and the hearts of the masses who will struggle for their realization because there is no road to peace and plenty other than the road of socialism.
 
Note
1. Assistant Attorney-General Schweinhaut, who followed Goldman in the final argument, never tried to explain it.
 



Dear Comrade:
My negligence in failing to reply to your interesting letter is inexcusable. I can only plead that soon after I received it I was compelled to leave Chicago and not until comrade Burnham called my attention to the copy you sent to The New International did I remind myself that I had left your letter unanswered.
I shall deal first with the comment you make on the proposition stated in my pamphlet What is Socialism? to the effect that the use of force against farmers and other middle-class elements to compel them to adopt socialist methods is excluded. You think that, because the Russian Left Opposition criticized Stalin and Bukharin for turning their faces to the wealthier peasants, the conclusion can be drawn that we are not sincere in our protestations of peaceful intentions towards middle-class elements.
The questions of the attitude of the Russian Left Opposition to the peasants in the years 1923-1927 and of the use of force by the workers’ state to compel middle-class elements to adopt socialist methods are entirely distinct. Necessarily the workers in power will have to face the tremendously serious and difficult problem of obtaining food from the farmers. If the workers will be fortunate enough to have at their disposal industrial products with which to pay the farmers the problem will be easily solved. But if, because of lack of industrial development or because of the ruin caused by a prolonged civil war, the workers, temporarily at least, will be unable to give the farmers an adequate return for food products, then serious difficulties must ensue.
The workers’ state will then be faced with the practical question of how much pressure it is expedient to use against the farmers in order to obtain food for the urban population. Naturally in a backward country the problem will be a thousand times more difficult to solve than in an advanced country, so difficult indeed as to be insoluble without the extension of the revolution to industrially developed countries.
What the Left Opposition insisted on was the impossibility of permitting the peasants to grow rich and the workers at the same time to go without food. To permit such a state of affairs to continue for a long time is to grant the peasantry ever greater control of the destinies of the workers’ state and ultimately to assure the victory of the counter-revolution. It is not a question of using force to compel the peasants to adopt socialist methods but the use of the state power to prevent the peasants from choking the workers’ state.
When the Left Opposition opposed the forced collectivization methods of Stalin it did so on the ground that force should not be used to compel the peasants to adopt collectivization. They and other middle class sections should be convinced by example that they will be a thousand times better off if they use socialist methods than if they continue to own and operate their little plot of ground or their small business.

I shall not take up all the questions that you raise with reference to my article on Martov. One or two are really so insignificant that to deal with them would be a waste of time. Such is the point, for instance, that you make about my use of the word “occur” in the sentence where I expressed regret that the proletarian revolution first occurred in an economically backward country. Had I used the term “was made” I am afraid that you or some one else would have accused me of ignoring objective factors. I used the term “occur” in its broadest sense and did not intend to intimate that a revolution just happens without the intervention of the consciousness and will of human beings.
With reference to your accusation that I have misinterpreted Martov I can only say that after reading your letter I re-read Martov’s pamphlet and my article and I still cling to the inferences that I drew from the pamphlet. Please remember that I drew inferences and did not say that he said certain things. I still think that from his failure to discuss the policies of the Bolshevik party in relation to the specific conditions prevailing in Russia in the years 1919-1923 and for certain expressions in his pamphlet I am justified in concluding that Martov is “evidently of the opinion that, once having taken over state power, the Soviets are destined to function as instruments for the dictatorship of a minority”.
Let me repeat my central thought on the whole question of democracy and socialism. Socialism without democracy is inconceivable. Democracy is to be taken absolutely for granted when socialism has been achieved. The truest and widest democracy is also necessary during the transition period. But just as the Sabbath is not made for man but man for the Sabbath, so are democracy and democratic forms to be looked upon during the transition period as a means for achieving socialism. Just as good Christians and orthodox Jews violate the Sabbath under the pressure of circumstances so will democratic forms have to be violated by those who are sincerely devoted to the ideals of socialism and consequently understand the necessity for democracy. In other words, a Marxist cannot make a fetish of democracy. The degree of democracy, its limitations and extensions will be determined by conditions existing during and subsequent to the revolution. That is why I reject any arguments against the Bolsheviks when such arguments leave out of consideration the specific conditions of the Russian Revolution.
As I indicated in my article I am not at all ready to justify every single act of the Bolsheviks. It may be that they acted too arbitrarily in specific instances but he leaves the ground of Marxism who would demand that during a civil war in a predominantly peasant country all the forms of democracy should be strictly adhered to even for those who claim to be working-class opponents.
Suppose, you ask, workers’ democracy and public ownership clash? By that you mean to imply that a condition can arise where a majority of the workers, after having made the revolution, turn against it and hence against those who led the revolution. I can’t conceive of such a situation except when, due to tremendous suffering, the majority becomes weary and loses heart. Under such conditions it would become the duty of the vanguard to exert greater efforts to turn the tide in favor of the revolution and to lift the spirits of the apathetic majority. Those who have had any experience in strikes understand that at certain moments the majority becomes disheartened and the militant minority is able to change that mood by exerting superhuman efforts. Do you think that, rather than follow this method, we should immediately take a vote and give up the revolution? There is no question here of using force against the majority. That is excluded even from the point of view of effectiveness. What we are discussing now is a method of turning the tide going against the revolutionary forces.
I must admit that I do not see how every problem can be settled beforehand by a resolution to cling to all the formalities of democracy regardless of conditions. One would be compelled to go around with a ballot box and be prepared to take a vote on all questions that may conceivably arise. If the vanguard has confidence in its program and in its integrity, if it has the closest connections with the masses, if it follows correct policies and is ready at all times to change its incorrect policies, if the masses are permitted freedom to express their views, if, in other words, there exists a Marxian leadership, there can be no conflict between the masses and the vanguard. And if unfavorable conditions create such a conflict then the revolution is doomed.
He is hopeless who, after the Spanish events, does not realize the correct relationship between majority, democracy and leadership. The vast majority of the workers of Catalonia were under the influence of the anarchists who could have led the workers to a glorious struggle for power. Perhaps they would not have succeeded, but a thousand times rather die fighting for the power of the working class than for the miserable democracy of the bourgeoisie. The miserable role played by the anarchist leaders should once and for all quiet those who babble about being opposed to all forms of dictatorship.
If a revolutionary Marxian party had existed in Spain and led the workers to power would it have hesitated to suppress the Stalinists, the right-wing socialists, the petty-bourgeois liberals had they continued to insist on fighting for the support of English and French imperialism? And would it not have welcomed the cooperation of all groups who were willing to fight for a socialist republic?
We will aim for the purest kind of democracy but the class struggle will at times prevent the attainment of such a heavenly state. Given favorable economic conditions plus a favorable world situation plus correct leadership of a revolutionary Marxian party, then a successful revolution, the highest type of democracy and ultimately socialism are assured. Take away any one of these factors for a long period of time and we cannot hope to attain any one of the three objectives. And unfortunately there is no way of guaranteeing the simultaneous existence of all factors necessary to give us a perfect revolution.
You certainly emphasize Martov’s alleged prophetic superiority. He did not have to pass through the Stalinist experience to know that the proletarian revolution would not bring the results fought for by the Bolsheviks! Martov based his woeful predictions of degeneration on the theory that you evidently accept, namely, that Russia was not ready for a socialist revolution and the attempt of the Bolsheviks to accelerate the tempo permitted by the degree of economic development could not but lead to a dictatorship of a minority. The corollary of that theory is that the proletariat should have permitted the liberal bourgeoisie to guide the destinies of the Russian people.
A great deal has been written on this point and I do not propose to repeat any of the Marxian arguments against this Menshevik position. However, I want to ask you one question. If the Bolsheviks could give no guarantee against the degeneration of the revolution, could Martov and all the Mensheviks furnish us with a guarantee for the continued existence of bourgeois democracy until conditions ripened so that a socialist revolution could be made without any danger of such a degeneration ? Don’t you realize that the Russian masses were in actuality compelled to choose between going on to the proletarian revolution or submitting to the worst kind of reaction, that bourgeois democracy as a possible choice was practically excluded? It was not a choice between Kerensky or Lenin but between Lenin or Kornilov. Subsequent events in Western Europe are a crushing refutation of the theory that the proletariat could afford to wait before making its own revolution. The Mensheviks and Stalinists of today are trying to fight fascism by urging the masses to struggle for bourgeois democracy instead of for socialism. And if they succeed in deceiving the masses in the future as they have succeeded up to now, the masses will get ... fascism.
Ah, you say, did not Lenin and Trotsky make the mistake of thinking that the revolution in the more developed countries of Western Europe would come to the aid of the Russian Revolution ? Yes, they did make that mistake.
Let us therefore put it very plainly. The Bolsheviks made the historic gamble on a successful world revolution. They lost because the social democrats were too strong and had the masses too much under their control. The result: Stalinism. The Mensheviks of Germany and Italy gambled on the continued existence of bourgeois democracy. The result: fascism. Taking every factor into consideration we are more than justified in concluding that had the Bolsheviks not done what they did, the Russian masses would now be under the heel of fascism instead of Stalinism. You see no difference? Very well! But had the social democrats led the workers of Germany and Italy to the seizure of power it is as certain as anything can be that we would have had neither fascism nor Stalinism. With the actual choices confronting them the Bolsheviks would have been justified in taking even greater chances than they did.
It is very easy to play the role of a prophet of doom. Such prophets make the doom more certain and are thereby in a position to claim justification by history.
Under the best of circumstances the revolutionary party will be taking historic chances whenever it will decide to call upon the proletariat to make an attempt to achieve its freedom. And we must take those chances for, if we don’t, the workers will get the whips and scorpions of the fascists.
Stalinism has been a tremendous set-back to the revolution but fascism is still worse. Looked at from any angle, considered from the worst possible aspect there is no choice for a revolutionary Marxist but to place the seal of approval upon the audacious attempt of the Bolsheviks to start the world revolution. Perhaps we shall be more careful about the formal aspects of democracy but essentially we must follow in their footsteps.



 


Fraternally yours,
Albert GOLDMAN




t Goldman: What Do the Amendments to the Wagner Act Mean for the American Working Class? (May 1939)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
What Do the Amendments to the Wagner Act
Mean for the American Working Class?
(May 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 32, 12 May 1939, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Whatever benefits the workers can still derive from the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act) would be done away with by the amendments proposed by the National Association of Manufacturers through Senator Burke of Nebraska and partially by the amendments offered by the A.F.L. bureaucrats through Senator Walsh of Massachusetts.
The original effectiveness of the Wagner Act has been destroyed to a great extent by three decisions of the United States Supreme Court. In the Fansteel case it was declared that workers who participate in any sit-down strike or in any way violate any law are to lose the privileges they have under the Wagner Act. In another case the same court decided that if a union is found to have broken a contract with an employer it loses its right under the Act, and in still another case the honorable justices decreed that findings of fact by the National Labor Board are subject to be reviewed by the courts.
These three decisions reduced the effectiveness of the Act by more than seventy-five percent. The amendments proposed by the A.F.L. would limit the Act still further, while those proposed by the employers would make of it a very dangerous weapon against the working class.
* * *
In its original form, without the modifications introduced by the decisions of the Supreme Court, the Wagner Act had sufficient merit to justify its being supported by all sections of the labor movement.
Basically it was the upswing in the business cycle that facilitated a strong organizing movement in the years of 1936 and 1937. The great organization campaign that brought hundreds of thousands of workers into the auto union came as a result of the militant sit-down strikes and not because of reliance on the Wagner Act. When the reaction to the business upswing came in the latter part of 1937 the Wagner Act could not and did not prevent a tremendous drop in union, membership, especially in those unions that were organized after its enactment.
But even as a factor of secondary importance the Wagner Act proved beneficial and Labor should not only prevent amendments that would further destroy its effectiveness but should press for amendments that would enable Labor to use it more effectively for its own interests.
 
Bosses Would Transform Law into Opposite
Ever since the Wagner Act went into effect, the employers have been whining about its inequality because, forsooth, it only prohibits unfair labor practices by the employers and not by the employees. Senator Burke has introduced an amendment which would ban “unfair labor practices” by the workers. This amendment is the most important one for the employers and should it pass it would not only destroy whatever good there is in the Wagner Act but it would actually transform it into a very dangerous weapon in the hands of the bosses. Everything that is usually done by a union organizer in order to bring the workers into the union would constitute an unfair labor practice and would be prohibited under severe penalties. The employers also want the
right to petition the Labor Board for elections: Such a provision would give them a chance to have an election before the union has succeeded in organizing a majority of the workers and thus assure, for a year at least, the continuance of non-union conditions.
The A.F.L. bureaucrats have joined hands with the bosses in asking for such an amendment.
Another amendment the employers want would take away practically all important functions from the Labor Board and turn them over to the Federal courts. It would be dangerous for the workers to rely upon any particular individuals who happen to constitute the Labor Board. Not only is it likely that liberals will wilt under pressure, but it is certain that a turn in the wheel of politics will bring reactionaries of the worst kind into the Board. Generally speaking, however, the Federal courts are far more certain to give all the breaks to the protection of property rights. Labor has a greater chance to influence members of the Labor Board than judges of the Federal Courts. The bosses, well aware of that, are anxious to have their cases tried by their trusted servants rather than take a chance on newcomers.
* * *
A.F.L. Amendments Serve Bosses
The amendments offered by the A.F.L. leadership are intended to serve the narrow interests of that leadership and this necessarily means that they will also serve the interests of the employers. One amendment has as its purpose to guard the craft form of organization. Another amendment is intended to give the employers greater “freedom of speech.” By that is meant that the employers, in case of any conflict between the A.F.L. and C.I.O., should have the right to influence the workers in favor of the A.F.L. A third amendment has as its aim to prevent the Board from invalidating contracts entered into between the A.F.L. and employers.
It is a notorious fact that some A.F.L. bureaucrats have succeeded in getting employers to sign a contract with them when there was danger of an effective organization campaign by the C.I.O. Under such circumstances the A.F.L. is nothing but a company union and in several instances the C.I.O. has been successful in getting the Labor Board to invalidate such contracts. The A.F.L. top leaders want to restrict the right of the Board to declare such contracts null and void. That such an amendment will ultimately be used against the A.F.L. by the bosses is something that the A.F.L. leadership is too thick-headed to realize.
The charge that John L. Lewis made to the effect that the A.F.L. leaders consulted the employers before proposing their amendments can almost be accepted without evidence because the amendments would in fact benefit the employers.
* * *
Not Enough to Stand Pat
The strategy of the C.I.O. officials, in combating the campaign for amending the Wagner Act, has been to insist that the Act needs no amending. But the fact remains that the Act does require amending.
It requires amending in order to enable it to serve the purpose originally intended for it. It requires amending in order to destroy the modifications introduced by the Supreme Court in the Fansteel and other decisions. The Supreme Court has cut the Act’s effectiveness and now it is necessary to have that effectiveness restored and strengthened. And that can be done only by amending the Act.
To be against the amendments offered by the employers and the A.F.L. officials is correct but it is not enough.
An amendment is necessary which would state clearly and unambiguously that no alleged or actual violation of any State or Federal Law or any city ordinance by any worker should deprive such worker of the privileges conferred upon him by the Wagner Act. The amendment should go further and state that nothing that the union does which is claimed to be in violation of any contract or law should cause it to lose its rights under the Act.
Such an amendment would at least restore to the Wagner Act the effectiveness it was supposed to have originally. As a matter of fact, even if the C.I.O. bureaucrats wanted nothing more than to have the Act remain as is, good strategy should have dictated the necessity of proposing its own amendments.
Only militant action will succeed in organizing the unorganized. The workers must nevertheless insist on the passage of an act which will recognize their absolute right to organize without interference by bosses or courts.
 

t Goldman: General Johnson Cooks Up New Scheme to Avoid Popular Referendum on War (April 1939)




Goldman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Albert Goldman
General Johnson Cooks Up New Scheme
to Avoid Popular Referendum on War
(April 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 21, 4 April 1939, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

It was left for General Hugh S. Johnson to concoct the slickest scheme thus far proposed to sidetrack the widespread desire for an amendment to the constitution to give the people of this country the right to vote on war. The General’s proposal is to have Congress retain the right to declare war and grant the people the right to vote on the question whether or not there should be any conscription for overseas fighting.
Ever since last year’s Congressional session, when Representative Ludlow introduced the resolution which would give those who do the fighting and suffering a chance to decide whether they want war declared or not, the “responsible” politicians of the ruling class have been seeking for a way to bury the whole idea.
Not that these “responsible” politicians actually believe that such a thing as a vote by the people would actually succeed in preventing war; they merely refuse to take any chances of having their war plans interfered with in the slightest degree. They know very well that Roosevelt, as Commander-in-chief, can start a war without any formal declaration and they also understand that with the powerful means of propaganda at their disposal they are quite likely to succeed in confusing the masses and get a favorable vote by hook or crook.
Nevertheless, if a proposition to declare war would actually be submitted to a vote of the people, there would be an opportunity for tremendous agitation against the war and that would considerably weaken the war mongers.
 
The Original Ludlow Amendment
The original resolution introduced by Ludlow provided for a referendum on war “except in the event of an invasion of the United States or its territorial possessions.” The Roosevelt Administration would not even permit a general discussion of it. Mobilizing all its forces in Congress against the resolution, with the aid of prominent Republicans, Roosevelt succeeded in defeating a motion to discuss the Ludlow Amendment by the narrow margin of 209 to 188.
The size of the vote in favor against Roosevelt indicated the tremendous support the idea of a referendum has among the masses of the people. According to surveys made at the time by the American Institute of Public Opinion (the Gallup poll) 70 percent of the voters favored the Ludlow amendment.
The campaign of the war mongers – the Communists were the most articulate and vociferous – against the amendment, scared its Congressional proponents into modifying it so that under the latest form of the proposed amendment the question of war would be submitted to a popular referendum “except in case of attack by armed forces, actual or immediately threatened, upon the United States or its territorial possessions or by any non-American nation against any country in the Western Hemisphere.” The phrase “immediately threatened” is vague enough to furnish Congress with a loophole to escape the necessity of a referendum whenever it would see fit. And to protect the investments of American capitalists in Latin America or Canada, Congress need have no authorization whatever from the people in order to declare war.
The watered-down form of the new resolution is certainly a retreat on the part of Ludlow and other Congressmen who support it. Unfortunately there is not a single Congressman who is militant enough to introduce the proper kind of an amendment which would permit the people to vote on the question of war in all cases without any exception.
 
Johnson Cuts the Meat Out of It
But poor as the new amendment is, General Johnson’s proposal would completely emasculate the whole idea. It would deprive the masses of the right to vote on the major question, that is, on whether to declare war, and would permit a vote of the people only on the question of conscripting men to fight overseas.
General Johnson correctly surmises that what the people want least of all is to be drafted to fight in Europe or Asia, and he figures that they will be satisfied if they are given the right to vote on that particular issue, leaving the really important decision of declaring war exclusively to Congress.
The adoption of Johnson’s idea would permit a declaration of war by Congress without any referendum, would permit the sending of the navy to fight in foreign waters to protect American investments, would permit the sending of the regular army and all volunteers into service in any part of the world.
The Gallup poll recently announced that a poll resulted in a 61 percent favorable vote for Johnson’s proposal. That does not mean that those who voted for it preferred it to the Ludlow amendment. It was not presented in the poll as a counter proposal to that amendment, but as an independent proposition. The 3-2 vote therefore is an index to the anti-war sentiment of the masses. It is necessary to recognize, however, that the efforts of Johnson and others to confuse the masses may succeed in turning attention away from the Ludlow amendment to Johnson’s phoney scheme.
 
What the Amendment Can and Can’t Do
We are not fooling ourselves or the workers into believing that any kind of an amendment to the constitution will prevent imperialist wars so long as capitalism exists. Without creating any illusions whatever, class-conscious workers should take the lead in mobilizing the workers behind the Ludlow amendment, demanding that the congressmen proposing the amendment delete from it the exceptions which would give the right to Congress to declare war without first submitting the question to a popular referendum.
To a certain degree, it must be recognized, Roosevelt and his war-mongering supporters have succeeded in winning a section of the population away from an anti-war position. Whereas in 1937 in the Gallup poll the Ludlow amendment received a 70 percent favorable vote, in the most recent surveys the number favoring the plan dropped to 57 percent. The class-conscious workers must redouble their efforts to convince the masses that the war which Roosevelt is preparing to wage is a war exclusively for the interests of the capitalist class.
Supporting the Ludlow Amendment with necessary explanation and criticism affords us a real opportunity to expose Roosevelt, the Stalinists and all other advocates of a war to save capitalist profits.
 



THE first congress of the Parti Socialiste Ouvrier et Paysan (Workers and Peasants Socialist Party, commonly known as the PSOP) held in Paris on May 28–29, met under circumstances which should have caused the leadership of the party to examine carefully the course that it has followed since it broke with the Socialist party a little over a year ago. At the time when it was first constituted, the PSOP claimed a membership of 20,000 and at the present moment even the leadership does not claim that there are more than 7,000 members of the party, while more realistic estimates place the membership at about 5,000.
What is the cause of this terrific drop in membership and is there anything that can be done to have the old members return and gain new ones in addition? Most of the leaders had two explanations for the woeful situation in the party: the retreat of the French working class and the activities of the Trotskyists.
It is certainly true that the general discouragement and apathy now prevailing in the ranks of the French workers are important factors contributing to the loss of a large portion of the PSOP membership. The members of a working-class party, even of a revolutionary Marxian party, cannot be immunized against the moods that grip the working masses and such a party must necessarily suffer in a period of retreat. It would be folly, however, to attribute the loss of such a large proportion of the membership merely to the depressed state of mind of the working class. A large part of the blame can be placed on the important leaders who, by their failure to give the party members a clear revolutionary perspective based on a revolutionary Marxian program, failed to evoke the enthusiasm and devotion which are so essential to keep working-class members in a period of retreat.
At the top, there was hesitation, wavering and indecision. During the September crisis ending in the Munich pact, the PSOP, in place of a revolutionary agitation against war, adopted a pacifist attitude. The work in the trade unions has been exceedingly weak and on the international front Pivert and his collaborators insist on joining hands with the heroes of the defunct London Bureau.
The rank and file, given no revolutionary orientation and naturally affected by the general weakness of the labor movement, dropped out of the party in great numbers.
An attempt was made by some of the right-wing leaders to attribute the loss of membership to the activities of the Fourth Internationalists (Trotskyists) who entered the PSOP last January. That fell flat for the obvious reason that the drop in membership began long before the entry of the Trotskyists who, if anything, brought new members into the party. Many non-Trotskyists and even anti-Trotskyists offered proof, in concrete cases, that the disappearance of certain branches were not at all due to the activities of the Fourth Internationalists.
The inordinate amount of time devoted by the right wing to attacking the Trotskyists gave the congress an anti-Trotskyist coloration. Almost every issue was seized upon by the bitter anti-Trotskyists to attack the concepts and activities of that wing of the party. The general report of Marceau Pivert, although moderate in tone, still contained many veiled and not-so-veiled hostile allusions to the Trotskyists as well as some vague threats. It is clear that the right wing, unwilling to explain the real causes of the loss in membership, used the Trotskyist issue to turn the attention of the delegates away from the essential issues. A resolution was actually introduced which would have placed the PSOP on record as being against Trotskyism but the resolution never came up for a vote.
The general report of Pivert was adopted by a vote of 120 to 38 who voted for the motion of comrade Rous, the leading Fourth Internationalist. In his motion Rous pointed out that the report contained no real explanation for the drop in membership and contained nothing positive to offer the party at the present moment. It can be seen from an analysis of the votes on other important issues that many who voted for Pivert’s report did so not because they favored his policies but for sentimental reasons of attachment to their leadership.
Strange as it may seem to American Marxists, the most bitter and most extensive debate took place on the question of Freemasonry. Many of the leading figures in the PSOP are Masons who include in their membership almost all of the big bourgeois liberal politicians. The rank and file is hostile to Freemasonry but unwilling to make a splitting issue of the question. The motion of Guérin, prominent “native” left winger, declaring that membership in the Freemasons is incompatible with membership in the party actually received a plurality (76 votes) but two other motions holding the contrary received 62 and 50 votes respectively and the Guérin motion was therefore defeated.
Next to the question of Freemasonry the different resolutions on war aroused the most animated discussion. Originally the right wing introduced a resolution against revolutionary defeatism in so many words. The resolution introduced by Rous, Guérin and Weitz, another prominent “native” left winger, came out flatly for revolutionary defeatism. There was a third resolution which was, or rather claimed to be, for revolutionary defeatism in practise but against the use of the term. The Guérin-Weitz-Rous resolution obtained 69 votes against 120 for a combined resolution of the other two positions.
On the International question Pivert’s motion to adhere to the “International Marxist Center”, (the London Bureau reorganized) was carried by 121 against 41, with the proviso that the Marxist Center should invite the Fourth International to its conference in September. The motion of Weitz against joining the Marxist Center but for a new conference including the Fourth International was given critical support by the Trotskyists and received 41 votes.
As can be seen from the foregoing the bloc of the “native” left wingers, represented by Guérin and Weitz, and the Trotskyists who entered the PSOP, controlled approximately 30% of the delegates when it came to voting on the various important questions. When one takes into account that about 14 Trotskyist delegates were not seated because the PSOP leaders accepted the rule existing in the Socialist party that one has to be in the party three years before being permitted to be a delegate, it can be truthfully asserted that within the ranks there is a much greater left-wing sentiment than is shown by the votes at the congress.
With the liquidation of the Parti Ouvrière Internationaliste (the French party belonging to the Fourth International) and the entry of a new group of revolutionary Marxists into the PSOP there is great hope that a block of the various left-wing elements will succeed in turning the party on a revolutionary path and building it into an effective revolutionary instrument.



 


FAUCHOIS
PARIS, June 1939




